
Understanding Emotions

The therapist begins this module by providing psychoeducation
about the nature of emotions and how they
become disordered. It is important to highlight the
functional, adaptive nature of emotions at the onset of
this discussion for two reasons: (1) so the patient can
understand why he/she would not simply want to eliminate
emotions and (2) to explore the potentially important
information provided by adaptive emotions. This
second point is illustrated by the introduction of EDBs
(behaviors that occur in response to emotions), so that
the patient can see how emotion motivates specific responses
to internal or external events or situations.

Next, the three-component model of emotional experiences
is described as a framework for examining
emotions by dividing them into components (cognitions,
behaviors, and physiological sensations), thereby
making them more manageable. The therapist uses an
example relevant to the patient’s experience to demonstrate
the contribution of each component to his/


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

her emotional experience. The therapist guides the
patient in identifying each component in this example
and presents the model as the structural basis for treatment.
Each component is addressed separately over
the course of treatment as contributing to the overall
emotion and interacting with the other components.
For homework in this section of the module, the patient
is asked to complete a three-component model
example in which he/she is asked to break down an
emotion from the week into the three-component
model presented in session, by recording the thoughts,
behaviors, and physiological sensations specific to that
example.

tHeraPist: As we talked about, emotions at their core,
even ones like anxiety, fear, anger, or sadness, are
actually good things because they help us to function,
and help us to navigate the world around us.
The thing is, though, we also have reactions to our
emotions. An emotion can trigger all sorts of associated
thoughts, memories, physical sensations, and
behaviors, oftentimes learned over a lifetime. The
problem is, when we experience all of that at once,
it can feel overwhelming, and we can get caught up
in our emotional responses, and all of sudden these
emotions feel like something we can’t cope with, that
we have to get away from. Suddenly, the anxiety you
feel about your new job isn’t functioning as a helpful
way to motivate you to prepare for the future,
which is, at its core, the adaptive function of anxiety.
Instead, the anxiety is something paralyzing, something
that is waking you in the night and making you
feel “frozen.”

JosePH: Right, and I just want it to go away.

tHeraPist: Right. Instead of feeling helpful and useful,
the emotion feels intolerable. So what we need
to do is break down these emotional experiences
into their component parts to help make them less
overwhelming, and to help us identify how an emotion
like anxiety goes from something adaptive and
useful to something feared and avoided. As I mentioned,
emotional experiences are made up of three
main parts: thoughts, feelings, and behaviors. What
we need to do is get you better at recognizing each
of these parts, to make you a better observer of your
emotional experiences. Then, throughout treatment,
we’ll take a closer look at each of these components
individually, to see how specific thoughts, feelings

or physical sensations, and behaviors might be influencing
your overall experience and causing the
experience to go from something helpful and useful
to something uncomfortable and unwanted.

Recognizing and Tracking Emotional Responses

An important step to gaining greater understanding of
emotional experiences involves more closely monitoring
when, where, and why the emotions are occurring.
This is done through illustration of the ARC of emotions.
In this illustration, it is critical that the therapist
clearly work through an example with the patient, focusing
on several important points. First, emotions are
always triggered by some event or situation (internal or
external), even though it may be difficult to identify that
trigger initially. However, with repeated practice and
awareness, it can get easier to identify specific triggers,
and those are known as antecedents (“A” in ARC of
emotions). Antecedents can occur immediately before
the emotion is experienced (e.g., going into an elevator
triggers a panic attack), or they may have occurred days
or even longer before the emotion is experienced (e.g.,
an argument with a friend earlier in the week triggering
an outburst at a loved one later on). Often, there are
multiple antecedents, and may be both immediate and
distal. The “R” of ARC of emotions is all responses to
emotional experiences, including the thoughts, physiological
sensations, and behaviors noted in the threecomponent
model. Finally the consequences, or “C” of
ARC of emotions, signify the short-term and/or longterm
results of emotional responding. Consequences
are often negative, but it is important that the therapist
point out potential positive consequences of emotional
responding (e.g., reduction in anxiety after escaping
a difficult situation), as this process of negative reinforcement
is usually maintaining the cycle of emotions.

Expanding on this discussion, the therapist now introduces
the concept of learned behaviors, essentially
focusing on how the patient has learned responses to
emotions that are usually an attempt to manage or control
the emotions, but often end up leading the patient
to feeling worse. Habitually responding to emotions
prevents any new learning from taking place (i.e., that
a situation is not as dangerous as it appears during the
experience of a panic attack) and disables the patient
from developing a way of coping. This process is what
makes adaptive emotions and emotional responses maladaptive.



Emotional Disorders

Module 3: Emotion Awareness Training—
Learning to Observe Experiences

The goal of this module is to introduce the patient to the
concept of emotion awareness and begin developing a
regular practice of this skill. The therapist must convey
that the emotion awareness skill is different than
the patient’s current sense of his/her emotions. This
skill allows the patient to see emotions from an objective
and nonjudgmental perspective in order to better
identify and alter maladaptive thoughts and behaviors.
During this introduction, the therapist reviews the
difference between primary emotions, which are the
“first” emotional responses to a situation and memory
(usually directly related to the situation or memory itself)
and secondary reactions, which are reactions to
primary emotions that tend to be judgment-laden and
not based on the present-moment context. Secondary
reactions are problematic because they can prevent receipt
of corrective information about the current situation.
Additionally, secondary reactions are typically
evaluative and critical in nature, which further distances
the patient from the potentially helpful or corrective
information provided by the current situation or
primary emotions, and tend to intensify or prolong the
emotional experience. Using personal examples from
the patient’s own experience to describe both primary
emotions and secondary reactions can be very helpful
in this discussion.

When reviewing present-focused awareness, it is important
that the therapist remind the patient of several
important points. First, this type of practice may feel
awkward or uncomfortable at first. The goal is not to
be “perfect” at the exercise; rather, the patient should
focus on becoming an objective observer of emotional
experience, and start developing the ability to pay attention
mindfully and in the moment. Second, informal,
present-focused awareness practice is also important.
The therapist can help the patient find a “cue”
(e.g., the breath) to shift focus to the present moment,
particularly in times of distress. The goal of this more
informal practice is repeatedly to pair the patient’s chosen
cue with a shift in attention and awareness to the
present moment, by focusing on a sight, sound, or other
sensation, so that engaging this cue will eventually be
automatically paired with present-moment awareness.
It is important that the therapist note that the breath (or
other cue) should not be used as distraction—it should
only be used as a cue to remind the patient to be mind


ful of the present moment. Eventually, once the patient
has successfully conditioned this cue to help refocus on
the present moment, the patient can learn to follow this
with a brief “three-point check” of thoughts, physical
sensations, and behaviors. By observing what is occurring
in the moment within these three domains, the
patient can begin to identify how responses in any of
these domains may be affecting the overall emotional
experience, to compare what is happening in these domains
with information from the current context, and
ultimately to identify and alter any maladaptive patterns
of responding.

These concepts are illustrated in session with the use
of a specific nonjudgmental emotion awareness practice
during formal mindfulness or awareness exercise.
This may be a guided meditation or some other practice
that allows the patient to focus on the present moment,
while he/she notices and practices letting go of
judgments and evaluation. After the patient has had a
chance to practice this skill, the next practice involves
using the skill to notice slightly stronger emotional experiences.
It is often helpful to have the patient identify
a salient piece of music to listen to in session; otherwise,
the therapist can select a piece of music. At the
conclusion of the music, the therapist helps the patient
elicit thoughts, feelings, or other reactions and practice
discussing this experience in an objective and nonjudgmental
way. The following excerpt describes Joseph’s
reaction to listening to a piece of music:

tHeraPist: What did you notice when you were listening
to the music?

JosePH: I noticed my mind was sort of jumping from

place to place. That was hard—observing my

thoughts.

tHeraPist: Although, it sounds like you were able to
notice that your thoughts were jumping around a bit
and hard to pin down. Since the goal of this exercise
is to practice observing, even just noticing your
thoughts have taken you somewhere else, even after
it has already happened, counts. What about physical
sensations—did you notice any of those?

JosePH: I noticed when one of the instruments came in,
I sort of felt it in my gut.

tHeraPist: So just hearing that new sound brought
about a physical sensation?

JosePH: Yes.


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

tHeraPist: And what about behaviors, did you notice
any behaviors, or any urges to do something?
JosePH: Well, I noticed a couple of times just feeling
uncomfortable and sort of wanting to move around.

tHeraPist: And what about the music itself, were you
able to listen to the music itself?
JosePH: I think I was more sort of lost in my head.

tHeraPist: This is what our emotions can do. An emotion
can trigger all sorts of associated thoughts, feelings,
and behaviors that have very little to do with
what is happening “in the room,” yet the initially
triggered emotion itself is connected to something
occurring in the present moment, just like the music
you were listening to, which was really just sounds
happening in the present moment. Getting better at
observing our reactions to the trigger (in this case,
the music), can help us to see how many of our associated
thoughts, feelings, and behaviors actually
“fit” with the current context, and how many of them
are just associations, which may or may not fit the
current context at all.

Module 4: Cognitive Appraisal
and Reappraisal

Cognitive appraisal first involves discussing the concept
that interpretations depend, in large part, on which
of the numerous aspects (or stimuli) a person chooses to
focus on in any given situation. Focusing only on limited
or specific aspects of a situation is critical for our
survival. We would be overwhelmed by information if
we focused on all stimuli everywhere we went. This
process helps us quickly evaluate situations for risk and
danger, and allows us to estimate what might happen
in the future. This process usually happens outside of
awareness. Importantly, the information we focus on
and what we perceive as risky or dangerous tends to
be the result of learned associations between specific
information or stimuli and the affective or threat value
of those stimuli. For example, if negative evaluation by
others has been associated with threat in the past, an
increase in vigilance for negative evaluation may result.
Importantly, appraisals can have a powerful impact on
our feelings or mood states, and vice versa. The therapist
can illustrate this concept by inquiring how appraisals
might vary depending on whether the patient
was feeling joyful, sad, or angry.

An in-session exercise is used to demonstrate the
many possible different appraisals that can be gener


ated from a situation. The therapist shows the patient
an “ambiguous” picture to which many cognitive appraisals
can be assigned, instructs the patient to look at
the picture for approximately 30 seconds, then elicits
both the patient’s initial appraisal and at least two or
three alternative appraisals. Additionally, the patient is
asked what specifically may have contributed to the automatic
appraisal (e.g., memories of similar situations,
specific details in the picture). This exercise is used to
demonstrate the way that situations can be interpreted
in many ways, if all available information is considered.


Automatic appraisals, interpretations of situations
that happen very quickly, are often negative or pessimistic
in nature. Core automatic appraisals (e.g., “I
am a failure”) are appraisals that may be driving many
emotional responses. It is helpful if the therapist can
identify one or more core automatic appraisals by using
the downward arrow technique instead of focusing only
on surface-level appraisals related to a specific situation.


Automatic appraisals can lead to a habitual and powerful
heuristic that begins to exclude other, possibly
more appropriate or realistic appraisals of a situation or
event. These automatic appraisals are called “thinking
traps,” because, over time, a patient may get “stuck” in
this way of thinking. As described earlier, two common
thinking traps, “probability overestimation” (jumping
to conclusions), or the tendency to assume a high likelihood
of the occurrence of a negative event, and “catastrophizing”
(thinking the worst), or assuming that the
consequences of an event will be beyond the individual’s
ability to cope, are presented as two cognitive biases
common to all emotional disorders. The therapist
guides the patient in beginning to identify these biases
in the context of his experience. Below, the therapist
discusses both of these cognitive biases based on a recent
situation in which Joseph was nearly hit by a car
while crossing the street.

tHeraPist: Tell me what happened when you were
nearly hit by the car.

JosePH: Well, I was crossing the street, and a car made
an illegal right turn and nearly ran me over. My
hands hit the hood of her car, and I could see the
driver’s face yelling at me.

tHeraPist: And what happened next?

JosePH: Well, I noticed people on the sidewalk were all
looking at me like I was a complete idiot, and I was


Emotional Disorders

so embarrassed I just ran home. I didn’t go out for the
rest of the day, I just couldn’t face anyone.

tHeraPist: Can you remember any of your thoughts
at the time?

JosePH: I just remember feeling like an idiot, like everyone
was just staring at me and thinking what a
jerk I am.

tHeraPist: You mentioned you were crossing at a
crosswalk—was the walk sign on to cross?

JosePH: Yes.

tHeraPist: And the driver, you mentioned the driver
was taking an illegal turn?

JosePH: Yes, there was a “No turn on red” sign.

tHeraPist: So you had the right of way?

JosePH: I guess so.

tHeraPist: Let’s go back to the reaction of the people
on the sidewalk—you said they were staring at you,
thinking you were an idiot?

JosePH: It seemed like it.

tHeraPist: What evidence did you have to suggest the
pedestrians thought you were an idiot?

JosePH: I don’t know, they were just looking at me and
pointing and frowning.

tHeraPist: Do you know for certain that was what

they were thinking?

JosePH: Well, not for certain.

tHeraPist: Exactly, because we actually don’t know
what they were thinking. So one possibility is they
thought you were an idiot, but can you think of any
other possible thoughts that might have been going
through their minds? If you were standing on the
sidewalk and saw someone almost get run over in
a crosswalk, what might some of your thoughts be?

JosePH: Well, I guess I might be sort of alarmed, or
hoping the person was OK.

tHeraPist: If you saw someone crossing the street and
they had the right of way and were nearly hit by a
car making an illegal turn, how likely do you think
it would be that you would be thinking that person
is an idiot?

JosePH: Not very likely, I would probably be more concerned.


tHeraPist: But for you, at that moment, how much did
it feel like that’s what the pedestrians were thinking

about you, that you were an idiot, on a scale of 0% or
not at all to 100% certain.

JosePH: At that moment? Probably 80–90%.

tHeraPist: And sitting here now, how likely do you
think it is that the pedestrians were thinking you
were an idiot, using the same percentage scale?

JosePH: I don’t know, maybe 20%?

tHeraPist: And at the time, what emotions were you
experiencing?

JosePH: Well, when she almost hit me, I think I felt
fear.

tHeraPist: Can you remember any physical sensations?


JosePH: I think my heart was racing, and I remember
feeling hot and shaky.

tHeraPist: So when you were experiencing fear, and
all of the associated physical sensations, the thoughts
that came with that was that others perceived you as
an idiot, in the wrong. And at the time, these thoughts
felt like they were true. Now, sitting here, without the
experience of fear or the associated physical symptoms,
how likely do those thoughts feel?

JosePH: Well, sitting here now, it doesn’t seem very
likely they would be thinking I was an idiot if I almost
got run over. It seems sort of extreme.

The therapist discusses the importance of monitoring
and recording automatic appraisals, in order to increase
the patient’s awareness that these automatic appraisals
are occurring, and reminds the patient that using the
present-focused awareness skills learned in the previous
module can help aid in this process—by anchoring
in the present moment using the patient’s chosen cue
(i.e., taking a deep breath and focusing attention on a
sound or sensation occurring in the present moment),
the patient can use the “three-point check” to observe
what thoughts are occurring at that moment. The goal
is to notice what automatic thoughts are occurring,
then, using information from the current situation, consider
other possible interpretations of what is occurring
within the current context. In this way, the patient can
more flexibly apply information from learned associations
(i.e., memory) and information from the current
context toward more adaptive appraisals.

As the patient begins to record automatic appraisals,
the therapist can help him/her begin to identify patterns
in the automatic thoughts. The therapist provides guid



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

ance on identifying thinking traps and tries to focus the
patient’s attention on the “core” appraisal through the
use of “downward arrow” Socratic questioning. The
excerpt below is from a discussion of Joseph’s fears of
having a flare-up of his IBS symptoms and needing to
use the bathroom in the middle of a party.

tHeraPist: You’ve talked about how your IBS symptoms
have kept you from going to parties. What specifically
concerns you about your IBS symptoms and
parties?

JosePH: Well, that I’ll be there at a party and all of a
sudden I’ll have to run to the bathroom.

tHeraPist: And what concerns you about that?

JosePH: Well, people will notice me rushing to the
bathroom.

tHeraPist: And what?

JosePH: And they’ll know I’m in there using the bathroom.


tHeraPist: And what concerns you about that?

JosePH: They’ll think I’m disgusting.

tHeraPist: And what does that mean to you?

JosePH: That I’m gross and worthless. No one will
want anything to do with me.

tHeraPist: Now that is what we want, the real core of
it, what is driving this interpretation. A lot of these
anxious thoughts you’ve recorded often do come
down to feeling worthless. So you think, “If I can’t
control my bowels, I am going to have to use the
bathroom, and if I have to use the bathroom people
are going to reject me as disgusting and worthless.”
Of course, anyone would be anxious about going to a
party with that type of appraisal.

As demonstrated earlier, the therapist then engages
the patient in a more detailed discussion of this core
cognitive reappraisal, focusing on flexible thinking.
Countering probability overestimation and decatastrophizing
strategies are presented as a way to generate
alternative appraisals and to place less focus on the
automatic appraisal. Countering probability estimation
involves drawing on past evidence to examine how
realistic the patient’s estimation is when experiencing
an emotion. The therapist guides the patient in making
concrete estimations and comparing the original
estimation to a more realistic one. Decatastrophizing
involves helping the patient to identify his/her ability

to cope with the feared situation using past evidence
and specific examples (e.g., similar experiences in the
past). It is important to communicate that these strategies
do not eliminate negative appraisals, but they
provide greater flexibility and allow the patient to gain
perspective on the feared situations, using more accurate
information as a guide rather than being caught up
in overlearned automatic appraisals.

Module 5

Emotion Avoidance

The therapist now introduces the concept of emotional
avoidance, describing how avoidance is harmful
in the long term, despite potentially providing some
short-term relief. As noted earlier, types of avoidance,
including subtle behavioral (e.g., procrastination), cognitive
(e.g., distraction) and safety signals (e.g., carrying
a medication bottle), are introduced. It is important
that the patient understand why and how avoidance is
problematic. The therapist explains that avoidance (1)
prevents habituation to a feared stimulus, so that fear
levels are maintained at a high or constant level while
in contact with the stimulus; (2) interferes with the process
of extinction, so that the conditioned association
between the cue and fearful response is maintained instead
of weakened; and (3) prevents the patient from
developing a sense of control or self-efficacy in managing
the fear because positive outcomes are attributed to
the avoidance strategy. The therapist asks the patient
to generate personally relevant examples of avoidance
and discusses how those strategies have maintained the
cycle of emotions.

tHeraPist: We’re going to shift our focus now and
look at how behaviors contribute to your emotional
experiences. First, let’s talk about avoidance. Sometimes
you might do things to avoid having to feel an
uncomfortable emotion to begin with. For example,
you mentioned that having to reach out to your coworkers
at the school to get information about something
you don’t know is very anxiety provoking for
you, and brings about appraisals like they will think
you are incompetent or stupid, correct?

JosePH: Yes, like the supplies I need for my class. I
need more music books for the kids but I don’t know
if I’m supposed to go get them myself, or if I’m supposed
to order them through the school, or how I’m
supposed to pay for them. I know I should just e-mail


Emotional Disorders

[his supervisor], but since she never mentioned anything
about ordering supplies I’m afraid she’s going
to think I’m stupid or asking too much, that I should
be taking care of it myself instead of asking her.

tHeraPist: So you avoid asking her, in order to avoid
having to feel anxious or “stupid.” This is a good example
of one of the ways we can actively do things to
avoid uncomfortable emotions. There are also some
behaviors that can be more subtle, things we aren’t
even aware we are doing as an avoidance strategy.
For example, someone who has panic attacks might
avoid caffeine so they don’t have to feel the physical
sensations of increased arousal. Can you think of
any examples of more subtle ways you may be avoiding
uncomfortable emotions?

JosePH: Well, when you said that, I immediately
thought of fruit. I haven’t eaten fruit in 2 years because
I’m afraid it will make my IBS symptoms flare
up.

tHeraPist: So you’re trying to avoid bloating and
cramping?

JosePH: Well that, and probably more important, I’m
trying to avoid embarrassing myself in public!

tHeraPist: So you can see, we have subtle and more
overt ways of avoiding uncomfortable emotions,
but the question is, does it make the problem go
away?

JosePH: Well no, I still don’t know what I’m going to do
about ordering books, and I guess I’m still worried
about my IBS even without eating fruit.

tHeraPist: So you can see, avoidance might make the
problem go away in the short term, but in the long
term this strategy is not particularly helpful and may
even make the situation worse. In fact, these avoidance
behaviors can strengthen the association of fear
and anxiety with these situations—the more you
avoid e-mailing your supervisor, the more anxiety
provoking the thought of contacting her gets.

JosePH: True, now it’s just looming out there and feels
even worse.

Next, in-session exercises to demonstrate the effects
of emotional avoidance are conducted. The first exercise
involves asking the patient directly to suppress a
thought, such as asking the patient to think of anything
at all for the next 30 seconds, but not to allow him/
herself to think about a white bear (Wegner, Schneider,

Carter, & White, 1987). In this classic example, patients
report great difficulty not thinking about a white
bear and continually experience recurrent images or
thoughts about a white bear throughout the experiment.
The effectiveness of suppression strategies is then discussed.
Second, the same exercise is conducted but the
patient is asked to suppress a personally relevant and
distressing memory or thought. Joseph, for example,
had been actively trying not to think about an e-mail he
had sent to his supervisor, asking for information about
how to order supplies for his students. He was worried
that he might have come across as incompetent, and
that she would respond negatively to his e-mail. The
same “white bear” experiment was conducted with this
thought: Joseph was asked to think about anything he
wanted to for 30 seconds, but not to think about this email.
Predictably, Joseph found it extremely difficult to
prevent ruminations about his supervisor’s potential reactions
from coming into his mind. Thus, this exercise
presents a poignant and personally relevant demonstration
of the futility of active attempts to avoid distressing
topics or situations.

Emotion-Driven Behaviors

The concept of EDBs was introduced earlier in treatment
(Module 2), and the goal of this module is to
focus on EDBs in greater detail and learn to identify
and counter maladaptive EDBs. The therapist begins
with a review of adaptive and nonadaptive EDBs.
Again, an EDB to escape a situation when experiencing
panic may be adaptive if a person is encountering a
direct threat to his/her safety; however, an EDB to escape
when panicking is maladaptive if there is no clear
threat present. In the latter example, the panic and resulting
EDB is an example of a “false alarm.” The therapist
can then explain how EDBs are established and
maintained through the concept of negative reinforcement.
Similar to emotional avoidance, habitual reliance
on EDBs does provide some relief in the short term,
and can therefore become a powerful learned response
that maintains the cycle of emotions. At this point, the
patient is asked to generate examples of EDBs from
his/her experience and discuss how negative reinforcement
may be contributing to emotional distress. In the
transcript below, Joseph describes personal examples
of EDBs, including repeatedly using the bathroom in
an attempt to control his IBS, and engaging in checking
behaviors in response to doubting thoughts and fears of
disappointing or causing harm to others.


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

tHeraPist: You mentioned you are getting up several
hours before you need to leave for work. Can you tell
me what you are doing during that time?

JosePH: Well, like I said, once I go to work it is hard
for me to use the bathroom, so I want to make sure
I have used the bathroom before I leave the house.

tHeraPist: And how many times are you using the
bathroom before you leave?

JosePH: About five or six times.

tHeraPist: And what caused you to start going five or
six times, instead of just the once?

JosePH: Well, in the beginning, I’d go once, but then
I would start worrying about if I need to go again,
so then I’d go again. Then I go back and forth for a
while, worrying about if I’ve gone enough, then go
again, then worry .. .

tHeraPist: And how do you know you’ve gone enough
times?

JosePH: I never really know for sure, but at some point
I just have to leave the house or I’ll be late for work.
That’s why I started getting up earlier, to make sure
I have enough time to use the bathroom.

tHeraPist: And what would happen if you went only
once?

JosePH: That would make me very anxious, I couldn’t
do that.

tHeraPist: And in that moment when you are experiencing
uncertainty about whether or not you have
gone enough times, what emotions come with that?

JosePH: I start feeling anxious.

tHeraPist: And what do you do when you start to feel
anxious?

JosePH: I go again.

tHeraPist: And does that make you feel less anxious,
at least in the short term?

JosePH: Yes, it makes me feel like I have some control
over it.

tHeraPist: This is what we refer to as an EDB. What
happens is, when you allow yourself to use the bathroom
again in response to the worry about not having
gone enough, it helps you to feel better temporarily,
and that strengthens that relationship—worry,
anxiety, use the bathroom again. It’s a very powerful
concept. So what will you do next time this uncertainty
comes along? Something that you know will
make you feel better. You have learned that the anxi


ety you experience resulting from being uncertain
as to whether you have dealt with the situation sufficiently
to leave the house can be alleviated by just
going again, which sets in motion a sort of loop. Can
you think of other examples of this kind of relationship,
between feeling anxious or uncertain and doing
some sort of action?

JosePH: Well, I guess it’s sort of the same thing when I
start worrying about forgetting to turn the stove off
or if I’ve somehow left a candle burning from the
night before, and I have to go back and check.

tHeraPist: And can you describe what happens right
before you go back and check?

JosePH: I start to feel fear. I get an image in my head of
the apartment on fire and my roommates still asleep,
then I start worrying about it, and thinking what if I
left for work and forgot to turn off the stove and the
kitchen catches on fire and I end up burning down
the apartment, and even worse with my roommates
still in the apartment?

tHeraPist: Which is a pretty anxiety-provoking
thought. What do you feel physically in that moment?


JosePH: I’m not sure, but probably pretty tense and nervous.


tHeraPist: And what do you do?

JosePH: I go back and check everything again.

tHeraPist: Once? Or more than once?

JosePH: I’ll check, then I’ll start doubting again, then
I’ll check again.

tHeraPist: And when you first check, how do you
feel?

JosePH: At first I feel better.

tHeraPist: So, just like the other example, this EDB
of checking gets reinforced each time you do it because
it makes you feel better, at least temporarily.
When you feel that anxiety, you feel driven to perform
the checking as a way of relieving or acting
on the anxiety. But these EDBs don’t seem to work
because the doubting thoughts return, and you end
up late for work, or you have to lose out on sleep
in order to make time for these behaviors. And just
like we talked about with the avoidance behaviors,
it seems to make it worse—the doubt and anxiety
you feel is so strong that it feels like you couldn’t
tolerate it if you didn’t do these behaviors. What we
need to do, just like we did with your thoughts, is


Emotional Disorders

start breaking down these associations so you can
learn new things about the doubt and anxiety driving
these behaviors, like maybe you can tolerate these
emotions more than you think, even without engaging
in the EDB.

This module concludes with an introduction to countering
patterns of avoidance and EDBs through targeting
and modifying specific behaviors. The two primary
therapeutic strategies are (1) beginning to engage in
activities to evoke emotions that are currently being
avoided and (2) counteracting maladaptive EDBs by
developing and engaging in behaviors that are different,
or thatcounteract, these responses.

Module 6: Awareness and Tolerance
of Physical Sensations

Module 6 introduces the first opportunity to engage in
an exposure that focuses on eliciting physical sensations
that often trigger strong emotional reactions, and
to begin to build the patient’s awareness of the contribution
of physical sensations to emotional experiences.
Following an introduction to the rationale for provoking
physical sensations, therapist and patient work
through a list of exercises designed to elicit emotion
through physical activation, known as “symptom induction
exercises.” Some examples include hyperventilating,
spinning, and running in place. In addition, any
exercises that may be particularly relevant to the patient
may be added. Prior to each exercise, the therapist
demonstrates the exercise, and following the patient’s
completion of the exercise asks the patient to rate the
intensity, distress, and similarity to physical sensations
typically experiences during an emotion, each on a
scale of 0 (Not at all) to 8 (Very much).

tHeraPist: So today we’ll do a number of exercises
to induce some of these physical sensations that are
often present when you experience anxiety, and look
at the intensity, distress, and how close the sensations
come to your experiences during uncomfortable
emotions. The first one I’m going to ask you to
do is the hyperventilation exercise. (following the
exercise) What sensations do you notice?

JosePH: I didn’t like that at all.

tHeraPist: So you are having thoughts and judgments
about the sensations, that you don’t like them. What
about the actual physical sensations themselves—
can you describe them?

JosePH: Dizzy, lightheaded, sort of unreal, like I’m disconnected.
tHeraPist: Great. So thinking about those sensations,
how would you rate the intensity of those sensations?
JosePH: Probably a 7.
tHeraPist: And how about the distress?
JosePH: Also a 7.
tHeraPist: And similarity?

JosePH: Well, I don’t usually get dizzy when I’m anxious,
but I guess feeling lightheaded and surreal is
closer, so maybe like a 5?

The therapist repeats the exposure two more times,
and the last time asks the patient to pay particular attention
to any thoughts he is having about the sensations,
particularly any negative appraisals, and how these
thoughts interact with and either lessen or intensify the
physical sensations.

tHeraPist: How would you rate the intensity this
time?
JosePH: Probably a 5.
tHeraPist: And the distress?
JosePH: It was much better that time, probably only a 4.
tHeraPist: What did you notice was different that
time?

JosePH: Well, I guess I knew what to expect, and I
wasn’t having the same thoughts as the first time.
The first time I kept thinking, “I don’t like this,” and
wondering when it was going to end. This time I just
sort of went with it.

tHeraPist: Interesting. So when you just focused on
the sensations themselves, without judgment or negative
thoughts about them, the intensity was less?

JosePH: Yes, definitely.

Following the completion of all the chosen exercises,
therapist and patient choose the most relevant exercises
to engage in regularly over the next week. The patient
is asked to complete one exercise several times a day,
until the associated distress decreases. This repeated
exposure helps facilitate learning of new information
about the dangerousness (or lack thereof) of physical
sensations and may help diminish future distress when
physical symptoms do occur. See Figure 6.3 for an example
of a Symptom Induction Test Form.


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

Please complete each of the exercises (as described) below. Be sure to engage in each exercise fully, and try to produce
at least moderate symptom intensity. After the exercise, please note:

1. the physical symptoms you experienced
2. the intensity of the symptoms (0- to 8-point scale; 0 = No intensity, 8 = Extreme intensity)
3. the level of distress you experienced during the task (0- to 8-point scale; 0 = No distress, 8 = Extreme distress)
4. the degree of similarity to your naturally occurring symptoms (0- to 8-point scale; 0 = Not at all similar, 8 =
Extremely similar)
Wait until the symptoms have mostly subsided before attempting the next exercise. Use the other spaces provided to be
creative and come up with additional exercises that are specific to you. When you are done, pick three of the exercises
that produced the most anxiety for you. Put a star next to those exercises.

Procedure Symptoms experienced Intensity Distress Similarity
Hyperventilation
(60 seconds)
Breathing through a thin straw
(2 minutes)
Spinning while standing
(60 seconds)
Running in place
(60 seconds)
Other:
( seconds)
Other:
( seconds)
Other:
( seconds)
Other:
( seconds)
Other:
( seconds)
Other:
( seconds)

figUre 6.3. Symptom Induction Test Form.


Emotional Disorders

Module 7: Interoceptive and Situational
Emotion Exposures

This treatment module allows application of all the
skills learned thus far to actual situations, events, or activities
that trigger strong levels of emotions that the patient
has previously avoided. The therapist begins with
a discussion about the rationale for emotion exposures.
Although this module in the treatment program is often
the most challenging, it is the best opportunity to make
lasting behavioral and emotional changes. Emotion exposures
serve three critical goals: (1) Interpretations
and appraisals about the dangerousness of situations
(internal or external) are modified and replaced with
newer, more adaptive interpretations and appraisals;
and (2) avoidance and related impairment is reversed,
EDBs are recognized and modified, and the primary
goal of extinguishing anxious and distressing reactions
to the experience of intense emotions can proceed.

In addition to engaging in emotion exposures for
homework, an important part of this module is practicing
emotion exposures in session. This is critical because
the therapist can often challenge the patient to engage
in more difficult exposures in session and will be
able to note any use of avoidance strategies or engagement
in EDBs that may be outside the patient’s awareness.
The particular in-session exposure tasks vary
from patient to patient, and it is important that the therapist
be able to generate a number of different possible
tasks in which to engage. Once the task has been identified,
the therapist can discuss any anxious or negative
automatic appraisals occurring and help the patient
consider other possibilities. The therapist should also
remind the patient to use the skills of present-focused
awareness and try to prevent any avoidance strategies
that would interfere with the exposure. At the end of
each session, the therapist helps the patient choose several
emotion exposures to engage in outside of session
for homework.

For Joseph, several different exposures were designed
that targeted a variety of anxiety-provoking
situations. Examples included walking straight ahead
on a crowded sidewalk, forcing oncoming pedestrians
to move aside rather than moving aside himself;
engaging in a mock debate with a stranger and sticking
to his opinion; eating a piece of fruit and riding
on public transportation, and focusing his attention on
what is going on around him rather than on any subsequent
physical reactions to the fruit (e.g., gas, bloating);
going to a party and excusing himself to the restroom,

in order to test some of his anticipatory automatic appraisals
about what others will think of him; reducing
the number of times he uses the bathroom in the morning
from five to one; and similarly reducing the number
of times he checks stoves, candles, and so forth, before
leaving the house.

An exposure near the top of Joseph’s hierarchy was
to go on a long car trip with some friends and acquaintances
to see a concert in a nearby city. This would
require him to face several of his fears at once. First,
he would have to assert himself and ask his friends if
he could come along in the car. Second, he would be
traveling with a small group of people, including a few
people he does not know well, and might be required
to carry on casual conversation. Third, he would be
locked in a small, confined space with no easy escape
route should his IBS symptoms flare up.

tHeraPist: This was a big exposure assignment for
you. Let’s start from the beginning, when you had to
ask your friend if you could come along on the trip.
Do you remember what you were experiencing just
before you made that call?

JosePH: I noticed I felt shaky. I felt butterflies in my
stomach, my face was hot, and my heart was beating
fast.

tHeraPist: So, a lot of physical sensations associated
with anxiety. What about thoughts?

JosePH: I was worried that my friend would be annoyed,
like I am putting him out, or that he would
be mad I waited so long to ask him. I also noticed I
kept procrastinating, looking things up on the Internet,
going to the corner store to buy a soda, things
like that.

tHeraPist: Good! So you noticed some behaviors, too.
And what happened when you called him? Did your
anticipatory appraisals come true?

JosePH: Not at all, he was actually pretty happy I asked.
He said he was hoping I was coming along, sort of
like he was expecting it and was happy about it.

tHeraPist: What about the trip itself, how did that go?

JosePH: Well, about 10 minutes into it I started to feel
some cramping in my stomach and thought, “Oh
boy, here we go.” Then I remembered the exposure
we did with the fruit and decided to try focusing on
the music on the stereo, the view out the window,
and the conversations that were happening in the car,
rather than focusing on my stomach.


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

tHeraPist: Did that help?

JosePH: Well, the cramping was still there, but it wasn’t
bothering me as much because I wasn’t just focusing
on that.

tHeraPist: Did you have any urges to use the bathroom?


JosePH: I did at one point, and I decided to try what we
talked about, and see if I could wait it out and see if
it passed, and it did! At one point, though, I did need
to use the bathroom.

tHeraPist: What happened then?

JosePH: I asked my friend if he could stop at the next
rest stop.

tHeraPist: And what was his reaction, or the reaction
of the other passengers?

JosePH: It was no big deal at all! No one seemed to
care, and in fact I think they also wanted to stop,
so it was no big deal! I also noticed something else.
On the car ride back, I didn’t really think about it
at all, and my gut started rumbling but I just didn’t
worry about it and kept focusing on what was going
on around me. It wasn’t even an issue at all on the
way back.

For Joseph, great progress was made through exposures
relating to his symptoms of anxiety and management
of his IBS symptoms. However, Joseph continued
to hold on to a core belief that he was “unworthy” and
“unlikable.” Additional exposures were designed to target
this belief directly.

tHeraPist: You seem to have made some great progress
over the last few weeks, would you agree?

JosePH: Yes, I definitely feel like I can cope with my
anxiety better, and things seem to be going really
well at work right now, which helps. The other teachers
have even started inviting me out for drinks after
work, and I’ve gone a few times and actually had a
lot of fun.

tHeraPist: That’s great news. One thing that is
interesting—despite these changes, on your weekly
questionnaires I notice you are still marking a few
items like “I dislike myself” or “I feel utterly worthless.”


JosePH: Yeah, I still don’t think I’m a great person, and
I still worry I’m just fooling people, or they are going
to find out the “true” me and run the other way.

tHeraPist: I wonder if we can do some exposure work
around those?

Using similar techniques learned in Module 4, the
therapist helps Joseph generate evidence for and against
the statements that he dislikes himself and that he is
worthless. He is able to generate some evidence against
this belief, for example, the large turnout of friends and
supporters at a recent concert he put on. Using this and
other evidence, the therapist helps Joseph generate a list
of positive self-statements.

tHeraPist: So, what might you say about your recent
experiences putting on the concert?
JosePH: I don’t know, “I am a good musician?”

tHeraPist: That’s one, but maybe something even
more objective and believable to you, like you work
hard on your music?

JosePH: That’s true. And when I play, people seem to
like it.
tHeraPist: So you work hard at your music, and you
entertain people with it?
JosePH: Yes, that’s true. I also am a good listener.
tHeraPist: Tell me more about that.

JosePH: Well, I have a friend who is going through a
hard time right now, and sometimes he calls me just
to talk about it. I usually am pretty good at letting
him talk it through.

tHeraPist: So can we add “I am there for people and
listen to them” to the list? Maybe even “I am a good
friend?”

Once the therapist and Joseph generated a list of
statements that are evidence against the core belief
of being worthless and disliking himself, Joseph was
asked to read these statements aloud and to notice his
reactions to them.

tHeraPist: How was that reading those statements?
JosePH: Awkward. I felt really uncomfortable. It makes

me feel anxious.
tHeraPist: Can you describe that for me?
JosePH: Well, I get this weird sort of “zap” of fear and

this feeling in the pit of my stomach, and I notice I
get these kind of sarcastic thoughts like “That’s not
true” or “Sure you are.”


Emotional Disorders

tHeraPist: So saying nice things about yourself brings
on a feeling of fear, and some negative thoughts
about yourself?

JosePH: Yes. I guess I feel kind of vulnerable, too, like
my guard is down.

tHeraPist: That’s a very interesting observation. So
saying something positive about yourself leaves you
feeling a bit vulnerable, exposed maybe? Is it maybe
a less familiar feeling to you than the self-criticism?

JosePH: Definitely. So is the fear like entering a foreign
territory, like I don’t know what might jump out at
me?

tHeraPist: Maybe something like that! Whereas the
negative thoughts are perhaps more familiar and less
fearful in a way. What if we made the statements a
little less new and unfamiliar by repeating them a
few times? (After Joseph rereads the statements two
more times.) How was it this time?

JosePH: Well, a little easier, not quite as foreign, I
guess, but still a little strange.

tHeraPist: Good. So exposing yourself to these statements
repeatedly seems to have a similar effect as
some of the other exposure exercises we’ve done? A
little easier and less foreign each time?

JosePH: Yeah, I guess it gets a little easier each time.

tHeraPist: How about continuing with this exposure
this week, generating a few more statements, and
reading them out loud to yourself each day?

JosePH: I could try that.

In future sessions, the therapist revisits the patient’s
continuing need for emotional exposures. If he/she determines
that the patient would benefit from additional
emotion exposures, they can be continued both in session
and for homework at this time. Additionally, the
therapist can focus on any events or emotional reactions
over the past week that can be processed in session. Obstacles
to exposure completion and reactions to exposures
are discussed in session.

Module 8: Accomplishments, Maintenance,
and Relapse Prevention

In the final treatment session, the therapist reviews
both the major concepts presented in treatment and
the patient’s progress. The therapist reviews the threecomponent
model of emotions, focusing on cognitive

reappraisal, preventing emotional avoidance, and modifying
EDBs. The patient is asked for his/her impression
of progress made over the course of treatment,
and the therapist can highlight areas of improvement
and areas in need of continued practice. Reasons for
lack of improvement (e.g., initial error in diagnosis,
lack of understanding treatment principles, unrealistic
goals, and lack of motivation) should also be reviewed.
The therapist then discusses the inevitability of future
stressors and potential reoccurrence of symptoms. The
continuation of informal emotion exposures and use of
skills learned are encouraged. The therapist may further
assist the patient in staying committed to treatment
by establishing long-term goals for the patient.

outcoMe aND coNclusioN

Joseph’s symptoms were assessed at pre- and posttreatment
using a battery of self-report questionnaires, as
described earlier. During treatment, Joseph’s SIAS
score decreased from 51 at pretreatment to 26 at posttreatment.
His BDI-II score decreased from 49 at pretreatment
to 11 at post-treatment. His PSWQ score decreased
from 80 to 35. Functionally, Joseph was able
to meet many of his treatment goals over the course
of treatment. For example, he was able to find a job
he thoroughly enjoyed that matched his career goals.
He significantly increased his social interactions and
began engaging in activities, such as playing more local
concerts, all of which significantly increased his selfconfidence
and sense of self-worth. He gained control
of his IBS symptoms and no longer engaged in avoidance
behaviors related to his symptoms. At the time of
termination, Joseph noted that he felt “like a completely
different person” and was noticeably more positive and
confident in his demeanor and presentation. Although
Joseph was not part of the research program and,
therefore, did not participate in an independent posttreatment
clinical interview, his clinician (K. K. E.)
estimated that his CSRs for both the social phobia and
GAD diagnoses had dropped to a 3 (subclinical), the
diagnosis of MDD was in partial remission with a CSR
of 2, and although he improved in many of his OCDrelated
symptoms, the diagnosis of OCD warranted a
CSR rating of 4 (just above clinical severity).

Joseph returned to our Center for a follow-up assessment
8 months posttreatment that comprised of
readministration of the ADIS and self-report questionnaires.
At follow-up, Joseph’s self-reported symptom


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

ratings increased slightly from posttreatment. He endorsed
somewhat higher scores on the SIAS, particularly
on items related to greeting strangers or encountering
strangers on the street, with a total follow-up
score of 37. His scores on the PSWQ increased slightly,
from 35 to 40. Notably, Joseph’s BDI score increased
from 11 at posttreatment to 35 at follow-up, suggesting
a relapse of depressive symptoms. In particular, Joseph
indicated increases in pessimistic feelings about the future,
guilty feelings, fatigue, and sleep disruption. At
the time of his follow-up interview, Joseph reported
that he had recently gone through a breakup with his
girlfriend at the start of the holiday season, and he attributed
his low mood to this breakup and the winter
weather. Without further follow-up data, however, it is
unclear the degree to which the increase in depressive
symptoms is attributable to these situational variables
or represents a relapse of his depression. Despite these
increases at follow-up, Joseph did show a decrease in
WSAS scores from pretreatment to follow-up (from
34, Severe interference, to 21, Moderate interference),
which may reflect that even though his symptoms had
returned to some degree, he was able to manage interference
from the symptoms much better. However, Joseph
did not complete the WSAS at posttreatment, so it
is not clear exactly what the trajectory of change is on
this measure.

Clinician ratings using the ADIS seemed largely to
coincide with Joseph’s self-report. He experienced a
slight worsening of his GAD and MDD symptoms from
posttreatment to follow-up, receiving CSR ratings of 4
and 5, respectively. He was able to maintain his treatment
gains for his OCD symptoms, which were again
given a CSR of 4. Notably, Joseph’s social phobia was
given a CSR rating of 2, suggesting that he was able
to maintain and possibly even improve on gains made
in treatment; whereas he still endorsed some fear and
anxiety related to social situations, the interference and
distress related to these fears was no longer endorsed at
a clinical level.

referenCes

Allen, L. B., White, K. S., Barlow, D. H., Shear, M. K., Gorman,
J. M., & Woods, S. W. (2010). Cognitive-behavior
therapy (CBT) for panic disorder: Relationship of anxiety
and depression comorbidity with treatment outcome.

Journal of Psychopathology and Behavioral Assessment,

32(2), 185–192.
American Psychiatric Association. (2000). Diagnostic and

statistical manual of mental disorders (4th ed., text rev.).
Washington, DC: Author.

American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and
statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.). Arlington,
VA: Author.

Andrews, G. (1990). Classification of neurotic disorders.
Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine, 83(10), 606–
607.

Andrews, G. (1996). Current controversies in the anxiety
disorders. In R. M. Rapee (Ed.), Comorbidity in neurotic
disorders: The similarities are more important than the
difference (pp. 3–20). New York: Guilford Press.

Barlow, D. H. (1988). Anxiety and its disorders: The nature
and treatment of anxiety and panic. New York: Guilford
Press.

Barlow, D. H. (1991). Disorders of emotion. Psychological
Inquiry, 2, 58–71.

Barlow, D. H. (2000). Unraveling the mysteries of anxiety
and its disorders from the perspective of emotion theory.
American Psychologist, 55(11), 1247–1263.

Barlow, D. H. (2002). Anxiety and its disorders: The nature
and treatment of anxiety and panic (2nd ed.). New York:
Guilford Press.

Barlow, D. H., Bullis, J. R., Comer, J. S., & Ametaj, A. A.
(2013). Evidence-based psychological treatments: An update
and the way forward. Annual Review of Clinical Psychology,
9, 1–27.

Barlow, D. H., & Craske, M. G. (2007). Mastery of your anxiety
and panic: Client workbook for anxiety and panic (4th
ed.). New York: Oxford University Press.

Barlow, D. H., Gorman, J. M., Shear, M. K., & Woods, S.

W. (2000). Cognitive-behavioral therapy, imipramine, or
their combination for panic disorder: A randomized controlled
trial. Journal of the American Medical Association,
283, 2529–2536.
Barlow, D. H., Sauer-Zavala, S. E., Carl, J. R., Bullis, J. R., &
Ellard, K. K. (in press). The nature, diagnosis, and treatment
of neuroticism: Back to the future. Clinical Psychological
Science.

Beck, A. T. (1967). The diagnosis and management of depression.
Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.

Beck, A. T., Rush, A. J., Shaw, B. F., & Emery, G. (1979).
Cognitive therapy of depression. New York: Guilford
Press.

Beck, A. T., Steer, R. A., & Brown, G. K. (1996). Beck Depression
Inventory manual (2nd ed.). San Antonio, TX:
Psychological Corporation.

Bentley, K. H., Gallagher, M. W., Carl, J. R., Farchione, T.
J., & Barlow, D. H. (2013). Development and validation
of an Overall Depression Severity and Impairment Scale.
Manuscript submitted for publication.

Boelen, P. A., Vrinssen, I., & van Tulder, F. (2010). Intolerance
of uncertainty in adolescents: Correlations with
worry, social anxiety, and depression. Journal of Nervous
and Mental Disease, 198, 194–200.


Emotional Disorders

Borkovec, T. D. (1994). The nature, functions, and origins
of worry. In G. C. L. Davey & F. Tallis (Eds.), Worrying:
Perspectives on theory, assessment, and treatment
(pp. 5–34). New York: Wiley.

Borkovec, T. D., Hazlett-Stevens, H., & Diaz, M. L. (1999).
The role of positive beliefs about worry in generalized
anxiety disorder and its treatment. Clinical Psychology
and Psychotherapy, 6, 126–138.

Boswell, J. F., Thompson-Holland, J., Farchione, T. J., &
Barlow, D. H. (2013). The intolerance of uncertainty: A
common factor in the treatment of emotional disorders.
Journal of Clinical Psychology, 69, 630–645.

Bouton, M. E. (2005). Behavior systems and the contextual
control of anxiety, fear, and panic. In L. Feldman Barrett,

P. M. Niedenthal, & P. Winkielman (Eds.), Emotion and
consciousness (pp. 205–227). New York: Guilford Press.
Bouton, M. E., Mineka, S., & Barlow, D. H. (2001). A modern
learning theory perspective on the etiology of panic disorder.
Psychological Review, 108, 4–32.

Brown, T. A. (2007). Temporal course and structural relationships
among dimensions of temperament and DSM-IV
anxiety and mood disorder constructs. Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 116, 313–328.

Brown, T. A., Antony, M. M., & Barlow, D. H. (1995). Diagnostic
comorbidity in panic disorder: Effect on treatment
outcome and course of comorbid diagnoses following
treatment. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,
63, 408–418.

Brown, T. A., & Barlow, D. H. (1995). Long-term outcome in
cognitive-behavioral treatment of panic disorder: Clinical
predictors and alternative strategies for assessment. Journal
of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 63, 754–765.

Brown, T. A., & Barlow, D. H. (2002). Classification of anxiety
and mood disorders. In D. H. Barlow (Ed.), Anxiety
and its disorders: The nature and treatment of anxiety and
panic (2nd ed., pp. 292–327). New York: Guilford Press.

Brown, T. A., & Barlow, D. H. (2009). A proposal for a dimensional
classification system based on the shared features
of the DSM-IV anxiety and mood disorders: Implications
for assessment and treatment. Psychological
Assessment, 21, 256–271.

Brown, T. A., Campbell, L. A., Lehman, C. L., Grisham, J.
R., & Mancill, R. B. (2001). Current and lifetime comorbidity
of the DSM-IV anxiety and mood disorders in a
large clinical sample. Journal of Abnormal Psychology,
110, 49–58.

Brown, T. A., Chorpita, B. F., & Barlow, D. H. (1998). Structural
relationships among dimensions of the DSM-IV
anxiety and mood disorders and dimensions of negative
affect, positive affect, and autonomic arousal. Journal of
Abnormal Psychology, 107, 179–192.

Brown, T. A., Di Nardo, P. A., & Barlow, D. H. (2014). Anxiety
Disorders Interview Schedule for DSM-5. New York:
Oxford University Press.

Brown, T. A., Di Nardo, P. A., Lehman, C. L., & Campbell,

L. A. (2001). Reliability of DSM-IV anxiety and mood
disorders: Implications for the classification of emotional
disorders. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 110, 49–58.
Campbell-Sills, L., Barlow, D. H., Brown, T. A., & Hofmann,

S. G. (2006a). Acceptability and suppression of negative
emotion in anxiety and mood disorders. Emotion, 6,
587–595.
Campbell-Sills, L., Barlow, D. H., Brown, T. A., & Hofmann,

S. G. (2006b). Effects of suppression and acceptance on
emotional responses in individuals with anxiety and mood
disorders. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 44, 1251–
1263.
Campbell-Sills, L., Liverant, G. I., & Brown, T. A. (2004).
Psychometric evaluation of the behavioral inhibition/behavioral
activation scales in a large sample of outpatients
with anxiety and mood disorders. Psychological Assessment,
16(3), 244–254.

Campbell-Sills, L., Norman, S. B., Craske, M. G., Sullivan,
G., Lang, A. J., Chavira, D. A. (2009). Validation of a brief
measure of anxiety-related severity and impairment: the
Overall Anxiety Severity and Impairment Scale (OASIS).
Journal of Affective Disorders, 112(1-3), 92–101.

Caspi, A., Sugden, K., Moffitt, T. E., Taylor, A., Craig, I. W.,
& Harrington, H. (2003). Influence of life stress on depression:
Moderation by a polymorphism in the 5-HTT
gene. Science, 301, 386–389.

Chorpita, B. F., Albano, A. M., & Barlow, D. H. (1998). The
structure of negative emotions in a clinical sample of children
and adolescents. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology,
107, 74–85.

Chorpita, B. F., & Barlow, D. H. (1998). The development
of anxiety: The role of control in the early environment.
Psychological Bulletin, 124, 3–21.

Clark, D. A. (2012). The English Improving Access to Psychological
Therapies (IAPT) program: History and progress.
In R. K. McHugh & D. H. Barlow (Eds.), Dissemination
and implementation of evidence-based psychological
interventions (pp. 61–77). New York: Oxford University
Press.

Clark, L. A. (2005). Temperament as a unifying basis for personality
and psychopathology. Journal of Abnormal Psychology,
114, 505–521.

Clark, L. A., & Watson, D. (1991). Tripartite model of anxiety
and depression: Psychometric evidence and taxonomic
implications. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 103, 103–
116.

Craske, M. G., & Barlow, D. H. (2006). Mastery of your anxiety
and worry (2nd ed.). New York: Oxford University
Press.

Craske, M. G., Rowe, M., Lewin, M., & Noriega-Dimitri, R.
(1997). Interoceptive exposure versus breathing retraining
within cognitive-behavioural therapy for panic disorder
with agoraphobia. British Journal of Clinical Psychology,
36, 85–99.

Dimidjian, S., Hollon, S. D., Dobson, K. S., Schmaling, K.


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

B., Kohlenberg, R. J., & Addis, M. E. (2006). Randomized
trial of behavioral activation, cognitive therapy, and
antidepressant medication in the acute treatment of adults
with major depression. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 74(4), 658–670.

Di Nardo, P. A., Brown, T. A., & Barlow, D. H. (1994). Anxiety
Disorders Interview Schedule for DSM-IV. Albany,
NY: Graywind.

Drabant, E. M., Ramel, W., Edge, M. D., Hyde, L. W., Kuo,

J. R., Goldin, P. R. (2012). Neural mechanisms underlying
5-HTTLPR-related sensitivity to acute stress. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 169, 397–405.
Endicott, J., Nee, J., Harrison, W., & Blumenthal, R. (1993).
Quality of Life Enjoyment and Satisfaction Questionnaire:
A new measure. Psychopharmacology Bulletin, 29(2),
321–326.

Eysenck, H. J. (1947). Dimension of personality. London:
Routledge & Kegan Paul.

First, M. B., Spitzer, R. L., Gibbon, M., & Williams, J. B. W.
(1996). Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV Axis I
Disorders—Patient Edition (SCID-I/P, Version 2.0). New
York: Biometrics Research Department, New York State
Psychiatric Institute.

Foa, E. B., Riggs, D. S., Dancu, C. V., & Rothbaum, B. O.
(1993). Reliability and validity of a brief instrument for assessment
post-traumatic stress disorder. Journal of Traumatic
Stress, 6(4), 459–473.

Foa, E. B., & Tolin, D. F. (2000). Comparison of the PTSD
Symptom Scale—Interview Version and the Clinician-
Administered PTSD scale. Journal of Traumatic Stress,
13(2), 181–191.

Goodman, W. K., Price, L. H., Rasmussen, S. A., Mazure,
C., Fleischmann, R. L., & Hill, C. L. (1989). The Yale–
Brown Obsessive Compulsive Scale: I. Development, use,
and reliability. Archives of General Psychiatry, 46(11),
1006–1011.

Hafner, J., & Marks, I. M. (1976). Exposure in vivo of agoraphobics:
Contributions of diazepam, group exposure, and
anxiety evocation. Psychological Medicine, 6, 71–88.

Hamilton, M. (1959). The assessment of anxiety states by
rating. British Journal of Medical Psychology, 32, 50–55.

Hamilton, M. (1960). A rating scale for depression. Journal
of Neurology, Neurosurgery, and Psychiatry, 23, 56–62.

Hayes, S. C., Strosahl, K. D., & Wilson, K. G. (1999). Acceptance
and commitment therapy: An experiential approach
to behavior change. New York: Guilford Press.

Heimberg, R. G., Horner, K. J., Juster, H. R., Safren, S. A.,
Brown, E. J., & Schneier, F. R. (1999). Psychometric properties
of the Liebowitz Social Anxiety Scale. Psychological
Medicine, 29(1), 199–212.

Heimberg, R. G., Liebowitz, M. R., Hope, D. A., Schneier,

F. R., Holt, C. S., & Welkowitz, L. A. (1998). Cognitive
behavioral group therapy vs phenelzine therapy for social
phobia: 12-week outcome. Archives of General Psychiatry,
55(12), 1133–1141.
Hettema, J. M., Neale, M. C., & Kendler, K. S. (2001). A
review and meta-analysis of the genetic epidemiology of
anxiety disorders. American Journal of Psychiatry, 158,
1568–1578.

Huppert, J. D., Bufka, L. F., Barlow, D. H., Gorman, J. M.,
Shear, M. K., & Woods, S. W. (2001). Therapists, therapist
variables and cognitive-behavioral therapy outcome in a
multicenter trial for panic disorder. Journal of Consulting
and Clinical Psychology, 69, 747–755.

Izard, C. E. (1971). The face of emotion. New York: AppletonCentury-
Crofts.

Jacobson, N. S., Martell, C. R., & Dimidjian, S. (2001). Behavioral
activation treatment for depression: Returning to
contextual roots. Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice,
8, 255–270.

Kendler, K. S. (1996). Major depression and generalized
anxiety disorder: Same genes, (partly) different
environments—revisited. British Journal of Psychiatry,
30(Suppl.), 68–75.

Kendler, K. S., Walters, E. E., Neale, M. C., Kessler, R. C.,
Heath, A. C., & Eaves, L. J. (1995). The structure of genetic
and environmental risk factors for six major psychiatric
disorders in women: Phobia, generalized anxiety disorder,
panic disorder, bulimia, major depression, and alcoholism.
Archives of General Psychiatry, 52, 374–382.

Kessler, R. C., Nelson, C. B., McGonagle, K. A., Lui, J.,
Swartz, M., & Blazer, D. G. (1996). Comorbidity of DSM-
III-R major depressive disorder in the general population:
Results from the National Comorbidity Survey. British
Journal of Psychiatry, 168, 17–30.

Keyes, C. L., Wissing, M., Potgieter, J. P., Temane, M., Kruger,
A., & van Rooy, S. (2008). Evaluation of the Mental
Health Continuum—Short Form (MHC-SF) in Setswanaspeaking
South Africans. Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy,
15(3), 181–192.

Keyes, C. L. M. (2005). Mental illness and/or mental health?:
Investigating axioms of the complete state model of health.
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 73, 539–
548.

Keyes, C. L. M. (2006). Mental health in adolescence: Is
America’s youth flourishing? American Journal of Orthopsychiatry,
76, 395–402.

Lamers, S. M., Westerhof, G. J., Bohlmeijer, E. T., ten
Klooster, P. M., & Keyes, C. L. (2011). Evaluating the
psychometric properties of the Mental Health Continuum-
Short Form (MHC-SF). Journal of Clinical Psychology,
67(1), 99–110.

Lee, J. K., Orsillo, S. M., Roemer, L., & Allen, L. B. (2010).
Distress and avoidance in generalized anxiety disorder:
Exploring the relationships with intolerance of uncertainty
and worry. Behaviour Therapy, 39, 126–136.

Liebowitz, M. R. (1987). Social phobia. Modern Problems in
Pharmacopsychiatry, 22, 141–173.

Liebowitz, M. R., Heimberg, R. G., Schneier, F. R., Hope, D.
A., Davies, S., & Holt, C. S. (1999). Cognitive-behavioral


Emotional Disorders

group therapy versus phenelzine in social phobia: Longterm
outcome. Depression and Anxiety, 10(3), 89–98.

Linehan, M. M. (1993). Cognitive behavioral treatment of
borderline personality disorder. New York: Guilford
Press.

Liverant, G. I., Brown, T. A., Barlow, D. H., & Roemer, L.
(2008). Emotion regulation in unipolar depression: The
effects of acceptance and suppression of subjective emotional
experience on the intensity and duration of sadness
and negative affect. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 46,
1201–1209.

Lonsdorf, T. B., Golkar, A., Lindstöm, K. M., Fransson,
P., Schalling, M., & Ohman, A. (2011). 5-HTTLPR and
COMTval158met genotype gate amygdala reactivity and
habituation. Biological Psychology, 87, 106–112.

Margraf, J., Taylor, C. B., Ehlers, A., Roth, W. T., & Agras,

W. S. (1987). Panic attacks in the natural environment.
Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 175, 558–565.
Mattick, R. P., & Clarke, J. C. (1998). Development and validation
of measures of social phobia scrutiny fear and social
interaction anxiety. Behaviour Research and Therapy,
36, 455–470.

McHugh, R. K., & Barlow, D. H. (Eds.). (2012). Dissemination
and implementation of evidence-baed psychological
interventions. New York: Oxford University Press.

Mennin, D. S., Heimberg, R. G., Turk, C. L., & Fresco, D.

M. (2005). Preliminary evidence for an emotion dysregulation
model of generalized anxiety disorder. Behaviour
Research and Therapy, 43, 1281–1310.
Merikangas, K. R., Zhang, H., & Aveneoli, S. (2003). Longitudinal
trajectories of depression and anxiety in a prospective
community study. Archives of General Psychiatry, 60,
993–1000.

Meyer, T. J., Miller, M. L., Metzger, R. L., & Borkovec, T.

D. (1990). Development and validation of the Penn State
Worry Questionnaire. Behaviour Research and Therapy,
28, 487–495.
Miller, W. R., & Rollnick, S. (2013). Motivational interviewing:
Preparing people for change (3rd ed.). New York:
Guilford Press.

Montag, C., Fiebach, C. J., Kirsch, P., & Reuter, M. (2011).
Interation of 5-HTTLPR and a variation on the oxytocin
recepter gene influences negative emotionality. Biological
Psychiatry, 69, 601–603.

Munafò, M. R., Brown, S. M., & Hariri, A. R. (2008). Seratonin
transporter (5-HTTLPR) genotype and amygdala
activation: A meta-analysis. Biological Psychiatry, 63,
852–857.

Nathan, P. E., & Gorman, J. M. (Eds.). (2007). A guide to
treatments that work (3rd ed.). New York: Oxford University
Press.

Norman, S. B., Cissell, S. H., Means-Christensen, A. J., &
Stein, M. B. (2006). Development and validation of an
Overall Anxiety Severity and Impairment Scale (OASIS).
Depression and Anxiety, 23(4), 245–249.

Pezawas, L., Meyer-Lindenberg, A., Drabant, E. M., Verchinski,
B. A., Munoz, K. E., & Kolachana, B. S. (2005). 5-HT-
TLPR polymorphism impacts human cingulate-amygdala
interactions: A genetic susceptibility mechanism for depression.
Nature Neuroscience, 8(6), 828–834.

Raffa, S. D., Stoddard, J. A., White, K. S., Barlow, D. H.,
Gorman, J. M., & Shear, M. K. (2008). Relapse following
combined-treatment discontinuation in a placebocontrolled
trial for panic disorder. Journal of Nervous and
Mental Disease, 196(7), 548–555.

Rapee, R. M., Craske, M. G., & Barlow, D. H. (1990). Subject
described features of panic attacks using a new selfmonitoring
form. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 4, 171–
181.

Roy-Byrne, P. P., Craske, M. G., & Stein, M. B. (2006). Panic
disorder. Lancet, 368, 1023–1032.

Rutter, M., Moffit, T. E., & Caspi, A. (2006). Gene–
environment interplay and psychopathology: Multiple varieties
but real effects. Journal of Child Psychology and
Psychiatry, 47, 226–261.

Ruzek, J. I., Karlin, B. E., & Zeiss, A. (2012). Implementation
of evidence-based psychological treatments in the
Veterans Health Administration. In R. K. McHugh & D.

H. Barlow (Eds.), Dissemination and implementation of
evidence-based psychological interventions (pp. 78–96).
New York: Oxford University Press.
Safren, S. A., Heimberg, R. G., Horner, K. J., Juster, H. R.,
Schneier, F. R., & Liebowitz, M. R. (1999). Factor structure
of social fears: The Liebowitz Social Anxiety Scale.
Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 13(3), 253–270.

Sauer-Zavala, S. E., & Barlow, D. H. (2013). The case for
borderline personality disorder as an emotional disorder:
Implications for treatment. Manuscript submitted for publication.


Shear, K., Belnap, B. H., Mazumdar, S., Houck, P., & Rollman,
B. L. (2006). Generalized anxiety disorder severity
scale (GADSS): A preliminary validation study. Depression
and Anxiety, 23(2), 77–82.

Shear, M. K., Brown, T. A., Barlow, D. H., Money, R., Sholomskas,
D. E., & Woods, S. W. (1997). Multicenter collaborative
Panic Disorder Severity Scale. American Journal
of Psychiatry, 154, 1571–1575.

Shear, M. K., Vander Bilt, J., & Rucci, P. (2001). Reliability
and validity of a Structured Interview Guide for the Hamilton
Anxiety Rating Scale (SIGH-A). Depression and
Anxiety, 13, 166–178.

Stein, M. B., Campbell-Sills, L., & Gelernter, J. (2009). Genetic
variation in 5HTTLPR is associated with emotional
resilience. Neuropsychiatric Genetics, 150B, 900–906.

Storch, E. A., Larson, M. J., Price, L. H., Rasmussen, S. A.,
Murphy, T. K., & Goodman, W. K. (2010). Psychometric
analysis of the Yale–Brown Obsessive–Compulsive Scale
Second Edition Symptom Checklist. Journal of Anxiety
Disorders, 24, 650–656.

Suárez, L., Bennett, S. M., Goldstein, C., & Barlow, D. H.


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

(2009). Understanding anxiety disorders from a “triple
vulnerability” framework. In M. M. Antony & M. B. Stein
(Eds.), Handbook of anxiety and the anxiety disorders
(pp. 153–172). New York: Oxford University Press.

Tsao, J. C. I., Mystkowski, J. L., Zucker, B. G., & Craske, M.

G. (2002). Effects of cognitive-behavior therapy for panic
disorder on comorbid conditions: Replication and extension.
Behavior Therapy, 33, 493–509.
Tsao, J. C. I., Mystkowski, J. L., Zucker, B. G., & Craske,

M. G. (2005). Impact of cognitive-behavioral therapy for
panic disorder on comorbidity: A controlled investigation.
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 43, 959–970.
Tull, M. T., & Roemer, L. (2007). Emotion regulation difficulties
associated with the experience of uncued panic
attacks: Evidence of experiential avoidance, emotional
nonacceptance, and decreased emotional clarity. Behaviour
Research and Therapy, 38, 378–391.

Tyrer, P. J. (1989). Classification of neurosis. Chichester, UK:
Wiley.

Tyrer, P. J., Seivewright, N., Murphys, S., Ferguson, B., Kingdon,
D., & Barczak, B. (1998). The Nottingham study of
neurotic disorder: Comparison of drug and psychological
treatments. Lancet, 2, 235–240.

Watson, D. (2005). Rethinking the mood and anxiety disorders:
A quantitative hierarchical model for DSM-V. Journal
of Abnormal Psychology, 114, 522–536.

Watson, D., Clark, L. A., & Tellegen, A. (1988). Development
and validation of brief measures of positive and negative

affect: The PANAS scales. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 54, 1063–1070.

Wegner, D. M., Schneider, D. J., Carter, S. R., III, & White,

T. L. (1987). Paradoxical effects of thought suppression.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 53(1),
5–13.
Weinberg, A., & Hajcak, G. (2010). Electrocortical evidence
for vigilance–avoidance in generalized anxiety disorder.
Psychophysiology, 48(6), 1–10.

Weiser, M., Pauli, P., Weyers, P., Alpers, G., & Mühlberger,
A. (2009). Fear of negative evaluation and the
hypervigilance–avoidance hypothesis: An eye-tracking
study. Journal of Neural Transmission, 116, 717–723.

Westerhof, G. J., & Keyes, C. L. (2009). Mental illness and
mental health: The two continua model across the lifespan.
Journal of Adult Development, 17(2), 110–119.

Westra, H. A., Arkowitz, H., & Dozois, D. J. A. (2009). Adding
a motivational interviewing pretreatment to cognitive
behavioral therapy for generalized anxiety disorder: A
preliminary randomized controlled trial. Journal of Anxiety
Disorders, 23, 1106–1117.

Westra, H. A., & Dozois, D. J. A. (2006). Preparing clients
for cognitive behavioural therapy: A randomized pilot
study of motivational interviewing for anxiety. Cognitive
Therapy and Research, 30, 481–498.

Williams, J. B. (1988). A structured interview guide for the
Hamilton Depression Rating Scale. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 45, 742–747.


CHaPter 7

Cognitive Therapy for Depression

Jeffrey e. youNG
JayNe l. ryGh
arthur D. weiNBerGer
aaroN t. Beck

one of the most important developments in psychological approaches to emotional problems
has been the success of cognitive therapy for depression. evidence for the powerful
efficacy of this approach has increased steadily over the years, particularly in regard to
successful long‑term outcome. employing a variety of well‑specified cognitive and behavioral
techniques, cognitive therapy is also distinguished by the detailed structure of
each session with its specific agendas, and by the very deliberate and obviously effective
therapeutic style of interacting with the patient through a series of questions (socratic
style). Moreover, the authors underscore very clearly the importance of a collaborative
relationship between therapist and patient, and outline specific techniques to achieve
this collaborative state, so that patient and therapist become an investigative team. in
this chapter, the authors cover not only traditional cognitive therapy but also an expansion
of cognitive therapy called “schema‑focused” therapy. This approach concentrates
on identifying and modifying early maladaptive or “core” schemas thought to develop
during childhood in more severely depressed and treatment‑resistant patients, often with
comorbid personality disorders that may make them vulnerable to relapse. Detailed explication
of this expanded treatment will be invaluable to experienced cognitive therapists,
as well as to those becoming acquainted with cognitive therapy for depression for
the first time. Two compelling cases, Denise, treated with traditional cognitive therapy,
and Barbara, treated with schema‑focused therapy, illustrate each approach.—D. H. B.

overview aND research

Depression and the Emergence
of Cognitive Therapy

Depression is one of the most common disorders encountered
by mental health professionals. Research
from the U.S. National Comorbidity Survey Replication
(NCS-R; 2005) studies, the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention (CDC; 2010), and the World
Health Organization (WHO; 2008), and data provided

by the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH;
2006) indicate the following:

••
The lifetime prevalence estimate for major depressive
disorder in the United States is 29.9% (Kessler,
Petukhova, Sampson, Zaslavsky, & Wittchen,
2012).

••
The 12-month prevalence estimate for major depressive
disorder in the United States is 8.6%
(Kessler et al., 2012).

275


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

••
Across countries and cultures, the lifetime prevalence
estimates for major depressive disorder are
14.6% in high- and 11.1% in low- to middle-income
countries; the 12-month prevalence estimates are
5.5% in high- and 5.6% low- to middle-income
countries (Bromet et al., 2011).

••
Major depressive episodes in the United States
are associated with higher rates of substance dependence
or abuse among adults ages 18 or older
(21.5%) and among youth ages 12–17 (18.9%) than
among those without such episodes (8.2% and
6.7%, respectively) (Substance Abuse and Mental
Health Services Administration [SAMHSA],
2008).

••
Depression increases the risk of heart attacks and
is more common in those with chronic conditions
such as obesity, diabetes, cardiovascular disease,
cancer, asthma, and arthritis (NIMH, 2006; Strine
et al., 2008; Chapman, Perry, & Strine, 2005).

••
Major depressive disorder in the United States is
associated with 27.2 lost workdays and bipolar disorder
(I or II) with 65.5 lost workdays for each ill
worker per year (Kessler et al., 2006).

••
Major depressive disorder is the leading cause
of disability in the United States for ages 15–44
(NIMH, 2006), and is a major contributor to the
global burden of disease (WHO, 2004).

The high risk of relapse (Scott, 2000), high resource
utilization (Howland, 1993), and loss of human capital
(Berndt et al., 2000) associated with depression reveal
the seriousness of the problem. The WHO (2004) projects
that depression will be among the top three causes
of the total number of years of life lost to illness, disability,
or premature death by 2030. As these reports
indicate, depression is widespread, debilitating, costly,
and potentially devastating.

No amount of data can adequately capture or convey
the personal pain and suffering experienced in depression.
Many depressed people do not get professional
help (Frank & Thase, 1999; Jarrett, 1995; Wang et al.,
2005), and although the number seeking help increased
over the last decade, undertreatment remains a serious
problem (Olfson et al., 2002; Wang et al., 2005).
The cost and/or lack of sufficient coverage by health
insurance companies, concerns about confidentiality,
continued social stigma, and the lack of information regarding
where to go and what type of services to obtain
are still obstacles to receiving appropriate and adequate
mental health services (SAMHSA, 2008). Obtaining

the right type of help can be at once inhibiting and
overwhelming, especially to those already impaired.
The following quote remains relevant today:

Americans who do seek treatment for depressive symptoms
must decide where to seek which treatment and
from what type of practitioner. . . . The clinician must
select a somatic, psychological, or combination of
treatment, at a given dose and/or schedule of appointments.
. . . Throughout this procedure, the patient decides
to what extent he/she will comply with the recommendations,
for how long, against recognized and
unrecognized economic, practical, physical, and emotional
costs. . . . Sadly, the lack of information as well
as the continued social stigma of psychiatric illness and
treatment influence decision-making. Simultaneously,
the decisions occur in an environment filled with social,
political, and economic debate, and tension among
policy makers, third-party payers, and clinicians, as
well as among different types of practitioner guilds.
(Jarrett, 1995, p. 435)

When care is provided, it is frequently inadequate or
minimally adequate (Wang et al., 2005). Evidencedbased
treatments have not been widely adopted in clinical
practice (Stirman et al., in press), reflecting a public
health crisis (Keller & Boland, 1998). The need for
delivery of treatments with proven and rapid efficacy
remains paramount.

One of the major developments in the treatment of
depression has been the emergence of cognitive therapy,
which has expanded exponentially since Beck’s publication
of a detailed treatment manual for depression in
1979 (Beck, 1967, 1976; Beck, Rush, Shaw, & Emery,
1979). The work of Beck and his colleagues has led
to a paradigm shift within psychotherapy (Salkovskis,
1996). Due in part to Beck’s development of testable
hypotheses and clinical protocols, cognitive therapy
has received an enormous amount of professional attention
(Hollon, 1998; McGinn & Young, 1996; Rehm,
1990). Of all the cognitive-behavioral treatment approaches
to depression, Beck’s paradigm (Beck, 1967;
Beck et al., 1979) has received the greatest amount of
empirical study, validation, and clinical application
(Barlow & Hofmann, 1997; de Oliveira, 1998; Dobson
& Pusch, 1993; Hollon, 1998; Hollon, Thase, &
Markowitz, 2002; Jarrett & Thase, 2010; Rehm, 1990;
Roberts & Hartlage, 1996; Scott, 1996a). Cognitive
therapy has become the treatment of choice for many
disorders (Clark & Beck, 2010; Newman, Leahy, Beck,
Reilly-Harrington, & Gyulai, 2002). There are many


Cognitive Therapy for Depression

excellent books for practitioners who teach cognitive
therapy procedures (e.g., J. S. Beck, 2011), as well as
workbooks and/or guides for clients (e.g., Gilson, Freeman,
Yates, & Freeman, 2009; Leahy, 2010; Wright &
McCray, 2011).

Along with this attention, however, has come confusion
about what is actually meant by the term “cognitive
therapy.” The actual cognitive therapeutic strategies
employed in “cognitive” treatments may differ in
many ways from one another and from those explicitly
prescribed by Beck and colleagues (1979) in their
manual for cognitive therapy of depression. Thus, the
reader should be aware that common use of the term
“cognitive therapy” does not necessarily imply uniformity
in procedures. The therapy described by Beck
and colleagues involves the use of both cognitive and
behavioral techniques, and can therefore be accurately
labeled “cognitive-behavioral”; however, in the literature,
both terms have been applied in describing Beck
and colleagues’ procedures, with some articles utilizing
the term “cognitive therapy” (Sacco & Beck, 1995,
p. 345).

Research on Treatment of the Acute Phase

Outcome research has found cognitive therapy to be
effective with clinical populations in numerous controlled
trials (see review by Beck & Alford, 2009;
Hollon & Shelton, 2001). Although some early studies
(Blackburn, Bishop, Glen, Whalley, & Christie, 1981;
Rush, Beck, Kovacs, & Hollon, 1977) suggested that
cognitive therapy may be superior to drug treatment for
depression at termination, Meterissian and Bradwejn
(1989) noted that psychopharmacological interventions
often were not adequately implemented. In research in
which interventions were adequate, cognitive therapy
generally was shown to be equivalent in efficacy to
antidepressant medications, including tricyclic antidepressants
(TCAs) and selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitors (SSRIs) in the treatment of outpatients with
nonbipolar depression (DeRubeis et al., 2005; Hollon
et al., 1992; Murphy, Simmons, Wetzel, & Lustman,
1984) and a monoamine oxidase inhibitor (MAOI) in
the treatment of outpatients with atypical depression
(Jarrett et al., 1999). Although many studies did not
include pill-placebo conditions, the studies by Jarrett
and colleagues and DeRubeis and colleagues (2005)
found the active treatments superior to pill-placebos. In
a mega-analysis by DeRubeis, Gelfand, Tang, and Simons
(1999) of treatment outcome in four studies with

severely depressed outpatients, cognitive therapy was
equivalent to antidepressant medication (imipramine or
nortriptyline). A study by Bhar and colleagues (2008)
found that CBT and pharmacotherapy (paroxetine) produced
similar trajectories of change in cognitive and
vegetative symptoms of major depression throughout
16 weeks of treatment.

Only two studies that included a pill-placebo found
cognitive therapy to be less effective than psychopharmacological
intervention. The first was the NIMH
Treatment of Depression Collaborative Research Program
(TDCRP) with moderate to severe depression
in adults. The second was the multisite Treatment for
Adolescents with Depression Study (TADS) for reduction
of depressive symptoms in adolescents.

The NIMH TDCRP was the first major study to
include a pill-placebo condition. The initial results of
TDCRP (Elkin et al., 1989) suggested lower rates of
improvement with cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT)
than did earlier studies. It also appeared that with more
severely depressed patient groups, interpersonal psychotherapy
and antidepressant drugs might be superior
to CBT. The high visibility and prestige of the NIMH
TDCRP study generated a great deal of debate (Hollon,
DeRubeis, & Evans, 1996; Wolpe, 1993) because it appeared
that the benefits of CBT in the acute treatment
phase might have been overestimated in previous studies.
However, on later examination of the data, Elkin,
Gibbons, Shea, and Shaw (1996) acknowledged Jacobson
and Hollon’s (1996) observation that the outcome
results varied across sites, with cognitive therapy performing
as well as medication at one of the three sites
with severely depressed clients. Jacobson and Hollon
noted that the best results were obtained at the site with
the most experienced therapists. Hollon and colleagues
(2002, p. 62) “suspect that the explanation is not that
cognitive therapy cannot be effective with such patients,
but that the therapist’s expertise makes a greater difference
the more difficult the depression is to treat.” Additionally,
a study by Albon and Jones (2003) raised the
question of the distinctiveness of the two types of psychotherapy
treatments in the TDCRP. Albon and Jones,
expert therapists in CBT and interpersonal psychotherapy,
respectively, developed prototypes of ideal regimens
of their own respective treatments. Then, actual
transcripts of treatment sessions from the TDCRP were
compared to these expert prototypes. Albon and Jones
found that both CBT and interpersonal psychotherapy
sessions conformed most closely to the cognitivebehavioral
prototype, and that closer adherence to the


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

cognitive-behavioral prototype produced more positive
correlations with outcome measures across both types
of treatment. Perhaps this is why Quilty, McBride, and
Bagby (2008) found equivalent outcomes with interpersonal
psychotherapy, CBT, and pharmacotherapy, and
Peeters and colleagues (2013) found similar remission
rates with CBT, interpersonal psychotherapy, and both
treatments combined with medication. Similarly, Luty
and colleagues (2007) found interpersonal psychotherapy
and CBT equally effective overall but (in contrast to
the NIMH TDCRP study) they found CBT to be more
effective with severe depression.

In further analysis of the same dataset used in the
Luty and colleagues (2007) study, Joyce and colleagues
(2007) found that comorbidity of personality and major
depressive disorders adversely affected the treatment
response to interpersonal psychotherapy but not CBT.
Bellino, Zizza, Rinaldi, and Bogetto (2007) found interpersonal
psychotherapy and CBT (each combined
with fluoxetine) equally effective in the treatment of
depression in patients with borderline personality and
major depressive disorders. Fournier and colleagues
(2008) found that at 16 weeks of treatment, CBT was
more effective in reducing depression than medication
(paroxetine) for patients with moderate to severe depression
and no personality disorder, but less effective
for those with a personality disorder. This study did not
include patients with borderline, schizotypal, or antisocial
personality disorders. The efficacy of CBT (alone
or as an adjunct to psychopharmacological treatment)
with coexisting major depressive and personality disorders
is still not clear.

Some writers have argued that the major psychotherapies
are essentially equivalent in effectiveness, regardless
of the disorder studied. To test this hypothesis, a
recent meta-analysis examined whether CBT was superior
to other forms of psychotherapy across a range of
disorders (Tolin, 2010). The results showed that, across
all disorders included in the study, CBT was superior
to psychodynamic therapy, although not to interpersonal
or supportive therapies, at posttreatment and at
follow-up. However, the analysis found that CBT was
significantly superior to the alternative therapies studied
for depressive and anxiety disorders. Tolin (2010)
concluded that “these results argue against previous
claims of treatment equivalence and suggest that CBT
should be considered a first-line psychosocial treatment
of choice, at least for patients with anxiety and depressive
disorders” (p. 710).

The multisite TADS (2004) for reduction of depressive
symptoms in adolescents found that the combination
of medication (fluoxetine) and CBT produced the
most positive outcome, medication alone was superior
to pill-placebo, but CBT alone did not significantly differ
from pill-placebo. These findings were based on
12-week outcome measures. Analyses (TADS, 2007)
on data from outcome measures at Weeks 18, 24, and
36, however, indicated that by Week 36 the effectiveness
of CBT significantly increased and was equivalent
to medication, and that the combination of medication
and CBT was slightly more effective than CBT or medication
alone.

Spirito, Esposito-Smythers, Wolff, and Uhl (2011)
recently completed an updated review of outcome studies
regarding CBT for adolescent depression and suicidality.
They summarized the data regarding depression
by concluding: “CBT for adolescent depression has
received considerable support in the research literature.
Individual and group CBT, with and without a parent
component, appears to be well established and/or efficacious
for the majority of participants.” Regarding
CBT and suicidality in adolescents, the authors concluded
that “the majority of studies of CBT for depressed
adolescents have found a reduction in suicidal
ideation regardless of CBT format (i.e., individual,
group). It should be noted that reductions in suicidality
have also been found in response to family therapy,
supportive therapy, and pharmacotherapy. Nonetheless,
while various forms of therapy resulted in comparable
reductions in adolescent suicidality, CBT has shown
the most promise in concurrently reducing MDD diagnoses/
symptoms and suicidal ideation.”

Several studies have not found the combination of
CBT and drugs to be superior to either treatment alone
with depressed outpatients in the acute phase of treatment
(Biggs & Rush, 1999; Evans et al., 1992; Hollon,
Shelton, & Loosen, 1991; Scott, 1996a; Shaw & Segal,
1999). The increment in efficacy appears to be modest
in the acute phase of treatment at best, with increases
in efficacy from 10 to 20% (Conte, Plutchik, Wild, &
Karasu, 1986). Studies regarding treatment with depressed
inpatients suggest beneficial results when CBT
is combined with medication (Bowers, 1990; Miller,
Norman, Keitner, Bishop, & Dow, 1989; Stuart & Bowers,
1995; Wright, 1996). Although cognitive therapy
appears to be a useful adjunct to standard care with inpatients,
it remains unclear whether cognitive therapy
alone is sufficient (Hollon et al., 2002).


Cognitive Therapy for Depression

In attempts to make traditional cognitive therapy
more accessible and/or affordable for the general public,
Internet-based (ICBT) and group (CBGT) CBTs
have been explored. In a review of rapidly accumulating
data on ICBT, Johansson and Andersson (2012)
concluded that there is mounting support for the effectiveness
of guided ICBT (structured self-help materials
with therapist contact via e-mail) over unguided
ICBT (no therapist contact); the research indicates that
guided ICBT is comparable to face-to-face therapy in
effectiveness; tailored treatments (which include additional
specific techniques for coexisting diagnoses) are
superior to nontailored treatments (same material for
all patients) with severe depression.

Regarding CGBT, a recent meta-analysis (Feng
et al., 2012) on studies published from 2000 to 2010
revealed that CBGT was more effective with mild to
moderate depression. The effect decreased as depression
severity increased. The optimal length of session
was 60–90 minutes. Take-home assignments improved
results. Higher turnover rates were related to poorer
outcomes. Feng and colleagues (2012) found a small
effect on relapse rates at 6 months. The relapse rates
were lowest, with no residual symptoms posttreatment.

Research on Relapse Prevention1

Even though the vast majority of patients recover from
an episode of depression, they nevertheless remain vulnerable
to future depression.

Recurrence is a major problem for many individuals
suffering from depression: at least 50% of individuals
who suffer from one depressive episode will have
another within 10 years. Those experiencing two episodes
have a 90% chance of suffering a third, while
individuals with three or more lifetime episodes have
relapse rates of 40% within 15 weeks of recovery from
an episode (Kupfer, Frank, & Wamhoff, 1996, p. 293).

Other investigators have estimated that 85% of patients
with unipolar depression are likely to experience
recurrences (Keller & Boland, 1998, p. 350). Wang
(2004), through a 6-year follow-up, found that 49.8%
of those treated for major depression developed subsequent
major depressive episodes. As these numbers
clearly show, there is an urgent need for treatments capable
of minimizing and preventing relapse.

What we consider a very exciting finding in the treatment
of depression with cognitive therapy is the con


sistent observation (Paykel, 2007) that patients treated
with cognitive therapy alone or with a combination
of cognitive therapy and medication fare far better in
terms of relapse than do patients treated with medication
alone (when both treatments are stopped at termination).
Despite differences in sample characteristics
and methodologies across studies, cognitive therapy appears
to have important prophylactic properties. After a
1-year follow-up, numerous studies have reported lower
relapse rates for patients treated with cognitive therapy
than for patients treated with antidepressants. Simons,
Murphy, Levine, and Wetzel (1986) found relapse rates
of 12% with cognitive therapy versus 66% with antidepressants;
Bowers (1990) found relapse rates of 20%
with cognitive therapy versus 80% with antidepressants;
Shea and colleagues (1992) reported 9% relapse
with cognitive therapy versus 28% with antidepressants;
Hollon and colleagues (2005) reported rates of
31% relapse with cognitive therapy versus 76% with
antidepressants. Results from the most extensive metaanalysis
to date revealed that “on average, only 29.5%
of the patients treated with cognitive therapy relapsed
versus 60% of those treated with antidepressants” (Gloaguen,
Cottraux, Cucherat, & Blackburn, 1998, p. 68).
The prophylactic benefits of cognitive therapy are all
the more significant because

there is no evidence that pharmacotherapy confers any
protection against the return of symptoms after treatment
has been terminated.2 Since the majority of depressed
individuals will experience multiple episodes,
the capacity of an intervention to prevent the return of
symptoms after treatment may be at least as important
as its ability to treat the current episode. (Evans et al.,
1992, p. 802)

A related concern—and one of the most salient (but
not exclusively associated) with psychotropic agents—
is the presence of residual symptoms after treatment:
“Treatment of depression by pharmacological means is
likely to leave a substantial amount of residual symptoms
in most patients” (Fava, Rafanelli, Grandi, Conti,
& Belluardo, 1998, p. 820). Inevitably, patients who
improve on antidepressants continue to manifest some
of the symptoms of depression and, as numerous investigators
have concluded, unless patients achieve full recovery,
residual symptoms increase the risk of relapse
(Evans et al., 1992; Fava, Rafanelli, Grandi, Conti, et
al., 1998; Hardeveld, Spijker, de Graaf, Nolen, & Beekman,
2010; Keller & Boland, 1998; Rush et al., 2006).


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

A group of investigators who were concerned about
the risk of relapse associated with residual symptoms
looked at the lingering symptoms after treatment with
fluoxetine (Prozac). They found that

even among subjects who are considered full responders
to fluoxetine 20 mg for 5 weeks, more than 80% had
1 or more residual DSM-III-R symptoms of major depressive
disorder, more than 30% had 3 or more symptoms,
and 10.2% met formal criteria for either minor
or subsyndromal depression. . . . These findings imply
that minimal depressive symptoms are prodromal and
increase the risk of developing an initial full-blown
episode of major depression. (Nierenberg et al., 1999,
pp. 224–225)

Cognitive therapy has been found to be effective in
reducing both residual symptoms and relapse after the
termination of medication: “Short-term CBT after successful
antidepressant drug therapy had a substantial
effect on relapse rate after discontinuation of antidepressant
drugs. Patients who received CBT reported a
substantially lower relapse rate (25%) during the 2-year
follow-up than those assigned to [clinical management]
(80%)” (Fava, Rafanelli, Grandi, Conti, et al., 1998,

p. 818). The protective benefits of cognitive therapy
were still noticeable in a 4-year follow-up study, although
the benefits faded after a 6-year period (Fava,
Rafanelli, Grandi, Canestrari, & Morphy, 1998). Another
study found that only 5% of the “CBT treated
and recovered” group sought additional treatment
compared with 39% of the antidepressant group (see
Williams, 1997). Paykel and colleagues (1999) found
significantly lower cumulative relapse rates at 68 weeks
in patients who received 16 sessions of CBT following
a partial response to pharmacotherapy. Bockting and
colleagues (2005) compared treatment as usual (TAU,
which included continuation of medication) with TAU
augmented with brief cognitive therapy and found relapse
significantly reduced in patients with five or more
previous episodes of depression. The relapse rates were
72% for TAU versus 46% for TAU augmented with
brief cognitive therapy.
A preventive strategy used by psychiatrists to deal
with high relapse rates associated with antidepressant
medication is “continuation medication,” which is longterm
(and in many cases lifelong) maintenance treatment
(Evans et al., 1992; Fava, Rafanelli, Grandi, Conti,
et al., 1998; Thase, 1999)—usually at the same dosage
provided during the acute phase of treatment. The research
comparing relapse rates in patients continuing

medication over the long term versus those treated and
then withdrawn from cognitive therapy does not suggest
a significant advantage to this practice. For example,
DeRubeis and colleagues (2005) found that both
groups had equivalent relapse rates (40%); Hollon and
colleagues (2005) found that 31% relapsed when treated
and then withdrawn from cognitive therapy compared
to 47% that relapsed when treated with continuation
medication. Fournier and colleagues (2008) found that
patients with both major depression and a personality
disorder who responded positively to 16 weeks of CBT,
with three optional booster sessions over a 12-month
period, showed superior sustained improvement with
CBT compared to pharmacotherapy withdrawal, and
equivalent improvement to pharmacotherapy with continuation
over those 12 months. Dobson and colleagues
(2008) followed patients who responded to a treatment
of CBT, behavioral activation, or pharmacotherapy
for acute depression. During a 2-year follow-up, psychotherapy
patients received no further treatment and
pharmacotherapy patients received either continuation
pharmacotherapy or continuation pill-placebo. They
found that CBT provided the strongest protection; both
psychotherapies were equivalent to pharmacotherapy
with continuation; both psychotherapies were superior
to continuation pill-placebo.

Some researchers have pointed out the tautological
nature of this solution: “Drug treatment results in a
higher relapse rate than cognitive-behavioral therapy;
therefore patients should be maintained on drugs to
prevent relapse” (Antonuccio, Danton, & DeNelsky,
1995, p. 578). Although drugs are still the initial and
most frequently prescribed form of treatment for major
depression in the United States (Antonuccio et al.,
1995; Cipriani et al., 2009), and the most commonly
used method to maintain treatment gains (Geddes et
al., 2003), three important points need to be considered:
premature termination, iatrogenic effects of pharmacotherapy,
and cost-effectiveness.

Research has shown that “a sizeable group of patients
either chooses not to continue long-term pharmacotherapy
in the absence of any depressive symptoms,
cannot take medication due to a medical condition that
precludes the use of antidepressants, or suffer from side
effects that are intolerable to them” (Spanier, Frank,
McEachran, Grochocinski, & Kupfer, 1999, p. 250).
Although the newer “first-line” medications are more
tolerable than older medications, 70% of patients continue
to experience significant depressive symptoms
with one of these medications, and up to 50% discon



Cognitive Therapy for Depression

tinue trials due to unwanted side effects (Connolly &
Thase, 2012). Thase (2011) has noted that various combinations
of antidepressants are widely prescribed as
the result of problems with insufficient or nonresponse,
even though properly controlled and adequately powered
clinical trials have not yet been conducted on such
combinations.

Regarding iatrogenic effects, one group of researchers
concluded that “there is much evidence that antidepressant
medications are not benign treatments. . . .
Many antidepressants are cardiotoxic, have dangerous
side effects, and are often used in suicide attempts. . . .
[They also] result in relatively poorer compliance than
psychotherapy, have a higher dropout rate, and result
in as much as a 60% non-response rate with some patient
populations” (Antonuccio et al., 1995, p. 581). We
should note that psychotherapy also may have unintended
and undesirable side effects (Mohr, 1995), but
very little is known about negative effects associated
with cognitive therapy.

The third consideration is the cost-effectiveness of
treatment. The research on this topic is surprisingly
limited. Antonuccio, Thomas, and Danton (1997) conducted
a cost-effectiveness analysis on several outcome
studies on depression and found that over a 2-year period
the cost of fluoxetine alone was 33% higher than
individual CBT, and that the cost of the combined treatment
of fluoxetine with CBT was 23% higher than CBT
alone. An Australian study (Vos, Corry, Haby, Carter,
& Andrews, 2005) examined the costs and benefits of
CBT and drugs in the episodic and maintenance treatment
of depression. They found maintenance treatment
with SSRIs to be the most expensive option, nearly
double that of bibliotherapy, group CBT, individual
CBT, and TCAs. Scott, Palmer, Paykel, Teasdale, and
Hayhurst (2003) compared the cost-effectiveness of relapse
prevention in depression by comparing CBT as
an adjunctive treatment to antidepressants and clinical
management, and with antidepressants and clinical
management alone, over a 17-month period. They
found the addition of CBT was more expensive but also
more effective in reducing cumulative relapse rates
(relapse rates were 29% with adjunctive CBT vs. 47%
without adjunctive CBT). Importantly, they noted that
the costs associated with adjunctive CBT in their study
were a “worst-case” scenario because the follow-up
extended only 17 months; other research (as noted in
the previous section) has demonstrated maintenance
of gains and lowered relapse rates up to 6 years with
CBT. Sava, Yates, Lupu, Szentogatai, and David (2009)

conducted a cost comparison of CBT, rational–emotive
therapy, and pharmacotherapy (fluoxetine), and found
all three treatments equally effective with symptom
reduction, but both psychotherapies were more costeffective
than pharmacotherapy for the number of
depression-free days/month over a 40-week period.
Although Dobson and colleagues (2008) did not conduct
a formal statistical comparisons of costs among
treatment conditions, they noted that the “cumulative
cost of continued medications proved to be more expensive
by the end of the first year of follow-up in this
study” (p. 471). Scott and colleagues (2003) argued that
the incrementally adjusted costs over time to relapse
should be considered in decision making on the value
of various treatments. These findings suggest that CBT,
either alone or in combination with drugs, can enhance
cost-effectiveness, particularly when higher short-term
costs of combined treatments are balanced against better
outcomes and lower marginal costs in the long term.

What is the optimum frequency and duration of
sessions for cognitive therapy to be effective, both at
termination and at long-term follow-up? According to
Sacco and Beck (1995, p. 332):

General guidelines suggest 15 to 25 (50-minute) sessions
at weekly intervals, with more seriously depressed
clients usually requiring twice-weekly meetings for the
initial 4–5 weeks. To avoid an abrupt termination, a
“tapering off” process is recommended, with the last
few sessions occurring once every 2 weeks. After termination,
some clients may also need a few booster sessions
(four or five are common).

Some writers have noted that longer courses of
treatment may be necessary for full and more lasting
recovery (Elkin et al., 1996; Thase, 1992). Research
by Jarrett and colleagues (2001) suggests that relapse
rates in high-risk patients with an early age of onset
or unstable remission might possibly be reduced further
with “continuation-phase cognitive therapy” (C-
CT), which consists of 10 sessions (biweekly during
the first 2 months and once a month for the following
6 months) following the acute phase of treatment. The
focus in the continuation phase is on relapse prevention
and the generalization of skills (across responses, settings,
stimuli, and times). This strategy is supported by
studies (Jarrett et al., 2001; Vittengl, Clark, Dunn, &
Jarrett, 2007; Vittengl, Clark, & Jarrett, 2009) aimed
at preventing relapse in responders to a variety treatment
modalities (pharmacotherapy, interpersonal psy



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

chotherapy, and/or CBT) for the acute phase of depression.
While more research is being conducted on this
strategy (Jarrett & Thase, 2010; Jarrett, Vittengl, and
Clark (2008) have suggested using scores on a variety
of measures (Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression,
Beck Depression Inventory [BDI], Inventory for Depressive
Symptomatology, and the Longitudinal Interval
Follow-Up Evaluation) to help cognitive therapists
decide how many more sessions may be needed to help
avoid relapse or recurrence.

Another alternative for relapse prevention is mindfulness-
based cognitive therapy (MBCT), developed
by Teasdale, Segal, and Williams (1995). MBCT draws
from acceptance and meditation strategies that are also
central to dialectical behavior therapy for borderline
personality (Linehan, 1993a, 1993b). “MBCT aims at
developing participants’ awareness of, and changing
their relationship to, unwanted thoughts, feelings, and
body sensations, so that participants no longer avoid
them or react to them in an automatic way but rather
respond to them in an intentional and skillful manner”
(Ma & Teasdale, 2004, p. 32). Teasdale and colleagues
(Ma & Teasdale, 2004; Teasdale, 1997a, 1997b; Teasdale
et al., 1995, 2002) have argued that the primary
mechanism of therapeutic change in cognitive therapy
is in distancing or decentering from cognition rather
than changing the content of thought. Two studies conducted
on MBCT found that TAU followed by MBCT,
in comparison with TAU alone, significantly reduced
relapse in patients with three or more episodes of depression.
In the first study, 66% relapsed with TAU
alone versus 37% with TAU followed by MBCT (Teasdale
et al., 2000); in the second study, 78% relapsed
with TAU alone versus 36% with TAU followed by
MBCT (Ma & Teasdale, 2004). Extending the followup
period to 2 years, Matthew, Whitford, Kenny, and
Denson (2010) found TAU followed by MBCT more
effective than TAU alone in the “decrease of depressive
symptoms, worry and rumination, and improvement
in mindfulness skills” (p. 998) but noted a weakening
of effects over time that appeared to be related to the
amount of formal MBCT practice.

Although prior researchers (Segal, Williams, &
Teasdale, 2002) presumed that the difficulty concentrating
and negative thinking during a depressive episode
would preclude training in attentional control
skills with MBCT, van Aalderen and colleagues (2012)
recently found that MBCT plus TAU, compared to TAU
alone, showed equivalent gains in effectiveness for patients
in remission as for those currently depressed.

Manicavasagar, Perich, and Parker (2012) also examined
the effectiveness of MBCT in reducing current depression.
They compared CBGT and MBCT, and found
equivalent improvements in depression. Interestingly,
they found no significant differences between the two
conditions in mindfulness or rumination scores. The
potential for lower costs associated with treatments that
can be implemented in a group format suggest that they
may be attractive for not only relapse prevention but
also recurrent depression.

Research on Chronic Depression

As the previous data demonstrate, CBT has been shown
to be an effective treatment across a wide range of depressed
populations. Nevertheless, many depressed patients
still do not respond to treatment. Depression that
is resistant to current treatments remains a major public
health problem. Of patients, 40–50% of patients may
not complete or respond to CBT treatment for acute depression
(DeRubeis et al., 2005; Jarret & Thase, 2010).
Fifty percent of patients do not achieve full remission
in depressive symptoms after two trials of medication
(Mathys & Mitchell, 2011; Rush et al., 2006; Trivedi et
al., 2006). Wiersma and colleagues (2008) note from
current research that 20% of depressions persist after
2 years and that 25–35% of outpatient mental health
patients suffer from chronic depression.

McCullough (2003) has proposed, on the basis of
existing research, that there are qualitative differences
between chronic and nonchronic forms of depression,
and that they require different treatment strategies.
According to McCullough, research “shows that the
chronic disorders, when compared with acute/episodic
major depression (both single and recurrent episodes
with interepisode full recovery), differ significantly in
terms of age of onset, clinical course patterns, developmental
history, modal Axis II comorbidity profiles,
characteristic response-to-treatment rates, predictable
relapse percentages, and need for long-term treatment”

(p. 243). He notes that these differences largely have not
been addressed in the treatment literature; consequently,
therapeutic work by psychologists, psychiatrists, and
social workers has been conducted as if patients with
depression are an undifferentiated population. Young,
Klosko, and Weishaar (2003) noted that although traditional
CBT is highly effective for many patients, there
remain a significant number who either are not helped
or continue to experience emotional distress and impaired
functioning, particularly those with significant

Cognitive Therapy for Depression

character pathology. For those with chronic problems,
a more extensive treatment approach may be required.

Before discussing specific treatments for chronic depression,
we describe the general characteristics of this
population. An early age of onset (usually in midadolescence,
before age 20) in the form of dysthymia tends
to differentiate between the chronic and nonchronic
forms of depression in 70–75% of clinical populations
(Keller & Boland, 1998; Keller & Hanks, 1995; Mc-
Cullough, 2000). Early life trauma or adverse family
relations (loss of a parent in childhood; sexual, physical,
and/or verbal abuse; neglect; and overprotection)
are more evident in those with chronic depression
(Chapman et al., 2004; Cong et al., 2012; Dube et al.,
2001; Heim & Nemeroff, 2001; Kendler et al., 1995;
Lizardi et al., 1995; Randolph & Dykman, 1998; Sachs-
Ericsson, Verona, Joiner, & Preacher, 2006). In patients
with early-onset dysthymia who experience chronic
stress, those with the addition of an adverse family history
evidence an increase in depression severity over
time, compared to those without such adverse family
histories but with familial loadings for dysthymic disorder
(Dougherty, Klein, & Davila, 2004). There is a
higher prevalence of comorbid disorders, particularly
personality disorders (Garyfallos et al., 1999; Pepper
et al., 1995). Cluster C personality disorders are associated
with chronic depression (Hayden & Klein, 2001).

Five potentially promising treatments that expand on
CBT have been developed that can address chronic depression.
These treatments are Harley, Sprich, Safren,
Jacob, and Fava’s (2008) application of Linehan’s
(1993b) dialectical behavior therapy (DBT) skills training;
applications (Barnhofer et al., 2009; Eisendrath
et al., 2011) of Segal and colleagues’ (2002) MBCT;
Wells and colleagues’ (2012) metacognitive therapy
(MCT); McCullough’s (2000) cognitive-behavioral
analysis system of psychotherapy (CBASP); and Young
and colleagues’ (2003) schema therapy (ST).

Harley and colleagues (2008) have provided preliminary
evidence that DBT skills training conducted
in groups may be an effective alternative for treatmentresistant
depression. Patients who had not achieved remission
with antidepressant medication were assigned
to either a 16-session, once-weekly DBT skills training
condition (mindfulness, interpersonal effectiveness,
emotion regulation, and distress tolerance) or a
wait-list condition. They found significantly greater
improvement (with large effect sizes on the Hamilton
Rating Scale and BDI) in depressive symptoms in the
DBT skills training group. Feldman, Harley, Kerrigan,

Jacobo, and Fava (2009) hypothesized that DBT skills
training helps patients process their emotional experience
in a way that reduces rather than exacerbates their
depressive symptoms.

Another preliminary study (Barnhofer et al., 2009)
and one case study (Eisendrath, Chartier, & McLane,
2011) successfully used MBCT to treat chronic depression.
Barnhofer and colleagues (2009) compared
MBCT plus TAU and TAU alone, and found significantly
greater improvement in the MBCT plus TAU group.
Eisendrath and colleagues (2011) successfully treated a
patient with a modified version of MCBT. They added
exercises and metaphors from acceptance and commitment
therapy (ACT; Luoma, Hayes, & Walser, 2007;
Zettle, 2007) and focused on current depression in their
MCBT treatment. These are intriguing initial results,
especially since these treatments are of relatively short
duration and conducive to a group format.

Wells and colleagues (2012) also conducted a preliminary
study in which they used MCT to treat patients
with treatment-resistant depression. Attentional
control, rumination, worry, and metacognitive beliefs
were targeted in eight treatment sessions. They found
significant improvements both posttreatment and at
12-month follow-up. This treatment will be of further
interest if the positive results can be replicated in a randomized
controlled trial.

McCullough’s (2000) CBASP is an integrative,
time-limited treatment that contains elements of cognitive,
behavioral, interpersonal, and psychodynamic
psychotherapies. McCullough (2003) states:

Treatment begins with a cognitive-emotionally retarded
adult child who brings a negative “snapshot” view
of the world to the session. The chronic patient functions,
at least in the social–interpersonal arena, with
the structural mindset of a 4–6 year old preoperational
(Piaget) child. . . . The patient must be taught to function
formally, to perceive that his or her behavior has
consequences, be taught to generate authentic empathy,
and to learn to assert himself or herself effectively. Psychotherapy
begins with an “adult child” who must be
assisted to mature developmentally in the cognitive–
emotive sphere. (pp. 247, 248)

Change is brought about through a contingency program
that relies on negative reinforcement. First, contingencies
between behaviors and consequences are
exposed. Then, as the result of positive changes in behavior,
discomfort and distress are reduced or eliminated.
Three techniques are used to bring about change:


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

situational analysis, interpersonal discrimination exercise,
and behavioral skill training/rehearsal. Two
studies have used CBASP with chronically depressed
outpatients. The first (Keller et al., 2000) compared the
effects of CBASP alone, Serzone (nefazodone) alone,
and combined treatment after a 12-week acute phase
of treatment. The overall response rate was 48% for
both monotherapies, compared with 73% for the combined
treatment. Among the 76% (519 out of 681) completers
of the study, 52% responded to CBASP, 55%
responded to Serzone, and 85% responded to combined
treatments. The second (Klein et al., 2004), a 1-year
follow-up to this initial study, examined relapse and depressive
symptoms over time in the CBASP responders
by comparing the effects of continuation CBASP therapy
(16 sessions over 52 weeks) with assessment only.
There were significantly fewer relapses and depressive
symptoms for those in the continuation CBASP
therapy. A more recent study, however, has provided
mixed results. Kocsis and colleagues (2009) compared
pharmacotherapy augmented with CBASP, pharmacotherapy
augmented with brief supportive therapy, and
continued pharmacotherapy alone with nonresponders
and partial responders to an initial medication trial.
Although 37.5% experienced a partial response or remitted
with these three treatments, the researchers did
not find significant differences among the three groups.
Two more studies currently are in progress (Schramm
et al., 2011; Wiersma et al., 2008) to help clarify the
specific utility of CBASP for chronic depression.

ST (or schema-focused therapy) also is an integrative
therapy (Young et al., 2003), with elements of cognitive,
behavioral, interpersonal, and emotion-focused
therapies. Hawke and Povencher (2011) note that
“Young’s schema theory does not attempt to compete
with traditional Beckian theory, but rather expands on
it for treatment-resistant clientele whose psychological
problems are thought to be maintained by complex
characterological underpinnings. It does so by placing
greater emphasis on the developmental origins of severe
psychopathology” (p. 258).

A study by Giesen-Bloo and colleagues (2006)
found surprisingly strong and significant results in
favor of ST over transference-focused therapy with
the chronic disorder of borderline personality. After
3 years of treatment (sessions twice per week), 45%
of the patients in schema-focused therapy (vs. 24% in
transference-focused therapy) completely recovered.
One year later, over half (52%) in ST fully recovered
(vs. 29% in transference-focused therapy) and two


thirds (70%) in ST showed significant improvement. In
addition, patients in ST were significantly less likely to
drop out of therapy (27% dropped out of ST vs. 50%
out of transference-focused therapy). Even stronger results
were reported (Farrell, Shaw, & Webber, 2009)
for group schema-focused therapy (GST; see Farrell
& Shaw, 2012) for people with borderline personality
disorder. This study compared individual TAU (CBT
or psychodynamic) plus adjunct GST with TAU alone.
Ninety-four percent receiving TAU plus GST, compared
to 16% receiving TAU alone, no longer met criteria for
borderline personality disorder at the end of 20 months
of treatment. In addition, there was a 0% dropout rate
in the TAU plus GST condition compared to 25% in the
TAU condition. Given the high degree of similarities
between patients with chronic disorders (adverse childhood
histories, early-onset depression, and a multitude
of schemas), we believe that ST is very likely to be an
effective treatment for the chronically depressed population
as well. Fritz Renner, at Maastricht University in
the Netherlands, is currently conducting a study on the
effectiveness of ST with chronic depression (Web link:
clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/nct01153867).

Current Status and Future Research
on Treating Depression

There is now a considerable body of research on treatments
for depression. Certainly there are enough inconsistencies
in the literature to warrant continued debate
and research regarding the relative merits of different
treatments for depression. Nevertheless, the overall efficacy
of cognitive therapy for depression is clearly a
replicable and robust finding.

Many important, unanswered questions—along with
inconsistent research findings—will probably make
it impossible for proponents of any single treatment
to make firm recommendations favoring one treatment
for depression over another across disorders and
populations. In the spirit of Beck’s emphasis on testable
hypotheses and clinical protocols, we hope that,
through more sophisticated research studies, it will
eventually be possible to better understand which types
of depressed patients benefit most from which type of
treatment, or combination of treatments, and in what
sequence.

The remainder of this chapter is devoted to describing
the cognitive model of depression and schema theory;
detailing the basic characteristics of cognitive and


Cognitive Therapy for Depression

schema therapies; and demonstrating applications of
cognitive and schema therapies to depression in clinical
practice.

coGNitive MoDel of DePressioN

The cognitive model assumes that cognition, behavior,
and biochemistry are all important components
of depressive disorders. We do not view them as competing
theories of depression but as different levels of
analysis. Each treatment approach has its own “focus
of convenience.” The pharmacotherapist intervenes at
the biochemical level; the cognitive therapist intervenes
at the cognitive, affective, and behavioral levels. Our
experience suggests that when we change depressive
cognitions, we simultaneously change the characteristic
mood, behavior, and, as some evidence suggests
(Free, Oei, & Appleton, 1998; Joffe, Segal, & Singer,
1996), the biochemistry of depression. Although the
exact mechanism of change remains a target of considerable
investigation, speculation, and debate (Barber
& DeRubeis, 1989; Castonguay, Goldfried, Wiser,
Raue, & Hayes, 1996; Crews & Harrison, 1995; DeRubeis
et al., 1990; DeRubeis & Feeley, 1990; Hayes &
Strauss, 1998; Oei & Free, 1995; Oei & Shuttlewood,
1996; Shea & Elkin, 1996; Sullivan & Conway, 1991;
Whisman, 1993), “there are indications that cognitive
therapy works by virtue of changing beliefs and
information-processing proclivities and that different
aspects of cognition play different roles in the process
of change” (Hollon et al., 1996, p. 314).

Our focus in this chapter is on the cognitive disturbances
in depression. Cognitive science research emphasizes
the importance of information processing in
depressive symptomatology (Ingram & Holle, 1992).
According to these theories, negatively biased cognition
is a core process in depression. This process is
reflected in the “cognitive triad of depression”: Depressed
patients typically have a negative view of themselves,
of their environment, and of the future. They
view themselves as worthless, inadequate, unlovable,
and deficient. Depressed patients view the environment
as overwhelming, as presenting insuperable obstacles
that cannot be overcome, and that continually result in
failure or loss. Moreover, they view the future as hopeless:
Their own efforts will be insufficient to change the
unsatisfying course of their lives. This negative view
of the future often leads to suicidal ideation and actual
suicide attempts.

Depressed patients consistently distort their interpretations
of events, so that they maintain negative views
of themselves, their environment, and the future. Beck
suggests that much of this distorted cognitive processing
takes place outside of conscious awareness, in the
form of “automatic thoughts,” those thoughts that intervene
between life events and the patient’s emotional
reactions to those events. Automatic thoughts often go
unnoticed by the patient because they are out of awareness,
they are part of a repetitive or habitual way of
thinking, and because they occur so often. Automatic
thoughts are often contrary to what a patient logically
and consciously knows to be true, and most patients,
prior to therapy, cannot stop them through rational
thought processes.

This process of cognitive distortion is far more common
in depressed patients than in nondepressed individuals.
For example, a depressed woman whose husband
comes home late one night may conclude that he
is having an affair with another woman, even though
there is no other evidence supporting this conclusion.
This example illustrates an “arbitrary inference,”
reaching a conclusion that is not justified by the available
evidence. Other distortions include all-or-nothing
thinking, overgeneralization, selective abstraction, and
magnification (Beck et al., 1979).

scheMa theory

According to subsequent developments within the
cognitive model, an important predisposing factor for
many patients with depression is the presence of schemas
(Stein & Young, 1992; Young, 1990/1999).3 Beck
(1976) emphasized the importance of schemas in depression
and provided the following definition:

A schema is a cognitive structure for screening, coding,
and evaluating the stimuli that impinge on the organism.
. . . On the basis of this matrix of schemas, the
individual is able to orient himself in relation to time
and space and to categorize and interpret experiences
in a meaningful way. (p. 233)

Furthermore, Beck, Freeman, and Associates (1990)
noted:

In the field of psychopathology, the term “schema” has
been applied to structures with a highly personalized
idiosyncratic content that are activated during disorders
such as depression, anxiety, panic attacks, and


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

obsessions, and become prepotent. . . . Thus, in clinical
depression, for example, the negative schemas are
in ascendancy, resulting in a systematic negative bias
in the interpretation and recall of experiences as well
as in short-term and long-term predictions, whereas
the positive schemas become less accessible. It is easy
for depressed patients to see the negative aspects of an
event, but difficult to see the positive. They can recall
negative events much more readily than positive ones.
They weigh the probabilities of undesirable outcomes
more heavily than positive outcomes. (p. 32)

There has also been increasing recognition that “focusing
on core schemas is a key to effective short-term
therapy” (Freeman & Davison, 1997, p. 8).

Through clinical observation, Young has identified
a subset of schemas that he terms early maladaptive
schemas (EMSs): “Early Maladaptive Schemas refer
to extremely stable and enduring themes that develop
during childhood and are elaborated upon throughout
the individual’s lifetime and that are dysfunctional to
a significant degree” (Young, 1990/1999, p. 9). The 18
EMSs identified by Young are listed in Figure 7.1.4

According to Young’s (see Young et al., 2003) theory,
early schemas5 result from an interaction between
the child’s innate temperament and early negative life
experiences, especially with significant others. Children
gradually construct pervasive, maladaptive views
of themselves and others that are filtered through, and
consistent with, their schemas.

According to Young, EMSs are (1) a priori truths
about oneself and/or the environment; (2) selfperpetuating
and resistant to change; (3) dysfunctional;

(4) often triggered by some environmental change (e.g.,
loss of a job or mate); (5) tied to high levels of affect
when activated; and (6) as noted earlier, usually result
from an interaction of the child’s temperament with
dysfunctional developmental experiences with family
members, caretakers, and peers (Young, 1990/1999).
Young goes on to elaborate that when an EMS is triggered,
specific early memories, core beliefs, strong
emotions, and physiological reactions are also activated.
(In Young’s model, core beliefs represent the cognitive
component of schemas.6)
EMSs are likely to develop when the environment
does not meet the child’s core needs for safety, stability
or predictability, love, nurturance and attention, acceptance
and praise, empathy, realistic limits, and validation
of feelings and needs. When their core needs are
not met, children often internalize attitudes and beliefs

that later prove maladaptive. For example, a child who
is criticized repeatedly may develop a Failure schema:
a sense that no matter what he/she does, his/her performance
will never be good enough.

A schema usually occurs outside of awareness and
may remain dormant until a life event (e.g., being fired
from a job) activates it. In this example, once the Failure
schema has been activated, the patient categorizes,
selects, and encodes information in such a way that
the schema is maintained. EMSs therefore predispose
many depressed patients to distort events in a characteristic
fashion, leading to a negative view of themselves,
the environment, and the future.

For patients who have a large number of strong and
deeply entrenched EMSs, and for patients who cope
with their schemas by rigidly avoiding life situations
or by overcompensating for them, we have found that
the concept of “schema modes” (Young et al., 2003) is
very often invaluable in understanding and changing
patients’ thoughts, feelings, and behaviors. Mode work
strengthens and develops healthy modes and weakens
dysfunctional modes, thereby increasing control over
one’s responding.

Young’s concept of a mode is similar to that of an
ego state. A “mode” is defined as “those schemas or
schema operations—adaptive or maladaptive—that are
currently active for an individual” (Young et al., 2003,

p. 271). Modes include whatever an individual is thinking,
feeling, and doing at a given point in time, and may
therefore be thought of as states rather than traits. A
dysfunctional mode is activated when specific maladaptive
schemas have erupted into distressing emotions,
avoidance responses, or self-defeating behaviors
that take over and control an individual’s functioning
at a given point in time. An individual may “flip” from
one mode to another; as that shift occurs, an individual’s
cognitions, emotions, and coping responses change
as well. Young and colleagues have identified four main
types of modes: Child modes (Figure 7.2a), Maladaptive
Coping modes (Figure 7.2b), Dysfunctional Parent
modes (Figure 7.2c), and the Healthy Adult mode. The
Healthy Adult mode is
the healthy, adult part of the self that serves an “executive”
function relative to the other modes. The Healthy
Adult helps meet the child’s basic emotional needs.
Building and strengthening the patient’s Healthy Adult
to work with the other modes more effectively is the
overarching goal of mode work in ST (Young et al.,
2003, p. 277).


Cognitive Therapy for Depression

1. ABANDONMENT/INSTABILITY
The perceived instability or unreliability of those available for support and connection. Involves the sense that
significant others will not be able to continue providing emotional support, connection, strength, or practical
protection because they are emotionally unstable and unpredictable (e.g., angry outbursts), or unreliable or erratically
present; because they will die imminently; or because they will abandon the patient in favor of someone better.
2. MISTRUST/ABUSE
The expectation that others will hurt, abuse, humiliate, cheat, lie, manipulate, or take advantage. Usually involves
the perception that the harm is intentional or the result of unjustified and extreme negligence. May include the sense
that one always ends up being cheated relative to others or “getting the short end of the stick.”
3. EMOTIONAL DEPRIVATION
Expectation that one’s desire for a normal degree of emotional support will not be adequately met by others. The
three major forms of deprivation are as follows:
A. Deprivation of nurturance: Absence of attention, affection, warmth, or companionship.
B. Deprivation of empathy: Absence of understanding, listening, self-disclosure, or mutual sharing of feelings from
others.
C. Deprivation of protection: Absence of strength, direction, or guidance from others.
4. DEFECTIVENESS/SHAME
The feeling that one is defective, bad, unwanted, inferior, or invalid in important respects; or that one would
be unlovable to significant others it exposed. May involve hypersensitivity to criticism, rejection, and blame;
self-consciousness, comparisons, and insecurity around others; or a sense of shame regarding one’s perceived
flaws. These flaws may be private (e.g., selfishness, angry impulses, unacceptable sexual desires) or public (e.g.,
undesirable physical appearance, social awkwardness).
5. SOCIAL ISOLATION/ALIENATION
The feeling that one is isolated from the rest of the world, different from other people, and/or not part of any group
or community.
6. DEPENDENCE/INCOMPETENCE
Belief that one is unable to handle one’s everyday responsibilities in a competent manner, without considerable help
from others (e.g., take care of oneself, solve daily problems, exercise good judgment, tackle new tasks, make good
decisions). Often presents as helplessness.
7. VULNERABILITY TO HARM OR ILLNESS
Exaggerated fear that imminent catastrophe will strike at any time and that one will be unable to prevent it.
Fears focus on one or more of the following: (A) medical catastrophes (e.g., heart attacks, AIDS); (B) emotional
catastrophes (e.g., going crazy); (C) external catastrophes (e.g., elevators collapsing, victimized by criminals, airplane
crashes, earthquakes).
8. ENMESHMENT/UNDEVOLOPED SELF
Excessive emotional involvement and closeness with one or more significant others (often parents), at the expense
of full individuation or normal social development. Often involves the belief that at least one of the enmeshed
individuals cannot survive or be happy without the constant support of the other. May also include feelings of being
smothered by, or fused with, others OR insufficient individual identity. Often experienced as a feeling of emptiness
and floundering, having no direction, or in extreme cases questioning one’s existence.
(continued)

figUre 7.1. Early maladaptive schemas. Copyright 1999 by Jeffrey E. Young. Reprinted by permission.


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

9. FAILURE
The belief that one has failed, will inevitably fail, or is fundamentally inadequate relative to one’s peers, in areas of
achievement (school, career, sports, etc.) Often involves beliefs that one is stupid, inept, untalented. ignorant, lower
in status, less successful than others, and so forth.
10. ENTITLEMENT/GRANDIOSITY
The belief that one is superior to other people; entitled to special rights and privileges; or not bound by the rules
of reciprocity that guide normal social interaction. Often involves insistence that one should be able to do or have
whatever one wants regardless of what is realistic, what others consider reasonable, or the cost to others; OR an
exaggerated focus on superiority (e.g., being among the most successful, famous, and wealthy) in order to achieve
power or control (not primarily for attention or approval). Sometimes includes excessive competitiveness toward, or
domination of others: asserting ones power, forcing one’s point of view, or controlling the behavior of others in line
with one’s own desires—without empathy or concern for others’ needs or feelings.
11. INSUFFICIENT SELF-CONTROL/SELF-DISCIPLINE
Pervasive difficulty or refusal to exercise sufficient self-control and frustration tolerance to achieve one’s personal
goals, or to restrain the excessive expression of one’s emotions and impulses. In its milder form, patient presents
with an exaggerated emphasis on discomfort avoidance: avoiding pain, conflict, confrontation, responsibility, or
overexertion—at the expense of personal fulfillment, commitment, or integrity.
12. SUBJUGATION
Excessive surrendering of control to others because one feels coerced—usually to avoid anger, retaliation, or
abandonment. There are two major forms of subjugation:
A. Subjugation of needs: Suppression of one’s preferences, decisions, and desires.
B. Subjugation of emotion: Suppression of emotional expression, especially anger.
Usually involves the perception that one’s own desires, opinions, and feelings are not valid or important to others.
Frequently presents as excessive compliance, combined with hypersensitivity to feeling trapped. Generally leads to a
buildup of anger, manifested in maladaptive symptoms (e.g., passive–aggressive behavior, uncontrolled outbursts of
temper, psychosomatic symptoms, withdrawal of affection, “acting out,” substance abuse).

13. SELF-SACRIFICE
Excessive focus on voluntarily meeting the needs of others in daily situations at the expense of one’s own
gratification. The most common reasons are to prevent causing pain to others, to avoid guilt from feeling selfish,
or to maintain the connection with others perceived as needy. Often results from an acute sensitivity to the pain of
others. Sometimes leads to a sense that one’s own needs are not being adequately met and to resentment of those
who are taken care of. (Overlaps with concept of codependency.)
14. APPROVAL SEEKING/RECOGNITION SEEKING
Excessive emphasis on gaining approval, recognition or attention from other people or fitting in, at the expense of
developing a secure and true sense of self. One’s sense of esteem is dependent primarily on the reactions of others
rather than on one’s own natural inclinations. Sometimes includes an overemphasis on status, appearance, social
acceptance, money, or achievements—as a means of gaining approval, admiration, or attention (not primarily for
power or control). Frequently results in major life decisions that are inauthentic or unsatisfying, or in hypersensitivity
to rejection.
(continued)

figUre 7.1. (continued)


Cognitive Therapy for Depression

15. NEGATIVITY/PESSIMISM
A pervasive, lifelong focus on the negative aspects of life (pain, death, loss, disappointment, conflict, guilt,
resentment, unsolved problems, potential mistakes, betrayal, things that could go wrong, etc.), while minimizing or
neglecting the positive or optimistic aspects. Usually includes an exaggerated expectation—in a wide range of work,
financial, or interpersonal situations—that things will eventually go seriously wrong, or that aspects of one’s life that
seem to be going well will ultimately fall apart. Usually involves an inordinate fear of making mistakes that might
lead to financial collapse, loss, humiliation or being trapped in a bad situation. Because potential negative outcomes
are exaggerated, these patients are frequently characterized by chronic worry, vigilance, complaining, or indecision.
16. EMOTIONAL INHIBITION
The excessive inhibition of spontaneous action, feeling, or communication—usually to avoid disapproval by others,
feelings of shame, or losing control of one’s impulses The most common areas of inhibition involve (A) inhibition of
anger and aggression; (B) inhibition of positive impulses (e.g., joy, affection, sexual excitement, play); (C) difficulty
expressing vulnerability or communicating freely about one’s feelings, needs, etc.; or (D) excessive emphasis on
rationality while disregarding emotions.
17. UNRELENTING STANDARDS/HYPERCRITICALNESS
The underlying belief that one must strive to meet very high internalized standards of behavior and performance
usually to avoid criticism. Typically results in feelings of pressure or difficulty slowing down and in hypercriticalness
toward oneself and others. Must involve significant impairment in pleasure, relaxation, health, self-esteem sense of
accomplishment, or satisfying relationships. Unrelenting standards typically present as (A) perfectionism, inordinate
attention to detail, or an underestimate of how good one’s own performance is relative to the norm; (B) rigid rules
and “shoulds” in many areas of life, including unrealistically high moral, ethical, cultural or religious precepts; or (C)
preoccupation with time and efficiency so that more can be accomplished.
18. PUNITIVENESS
The belief that people should be harshly punished for making mistakes. Involves the tendency to be angry,
intolerant, punitive, and impatient with those people (including oneself) who do not meet one’s expectations or
standards. Usually includes difficulty forgiving mistakes in oneself or others because of a reluctance to consider
extenuating circumstances, allow for human imperfection, or empathize with feelings.
figUre 7.1. (continued)

Research Related to Schema Theory

A large number of research studies have examined the
18 EMSs, as measured by the Young Schema Questionnaire
(YSQ; Young, 2005). While the results have varied
somewhat across different populations, all 18 EMSs
have generally been supported (Lee, Taylor, & Dunn,
1999; Schmidt, 1994; Schmidt, Joiner, Young, & Telch,
1995).

Numerous studies have looked at EMSs in depressed
patients. Hawke and Provencher (2011) provide an
excellent review of research on EMSs in both mood
(Bailleux, Romo, Kindynis, Radtchenko, & Debray,
2008; Halvorsen et al., 2009; Halvorsen, Wang, Eisemann,
& Waterloo, 2010; Riso et al., 2003, 2006;
Wang, Halvorsen, Eisemann, & Waterloo, 2010) and
anxiety disorders. Elevations across most, if not all,

schema domains have been evident when comparing
depressed patients with never-ill controls. In a study
specifically comparing EMSs in patients with chronic
depression, nonchronic depression, and healthy controls,
Riso and colleagues (2003) found that both depressed
groups scored higher on all schema domains
compared to healthy controls. However, the scores in
the chronic depression group were highest on schemas
in the disconnection and rejection, impaired autonomy
and performance, and overvigilance domains, even
when researchers controlled for depressive and personality
disorder symptoms. Hawke and Provencher (2011,

p. 261) note: “This suggests that chronic depression
is associated more strongly with EMSs than the nonchronic
form, and that this association is not simply a
function of current depressive or Axis II symptoms.”

CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

Child Mode Description Common associated schemas

Vulnerable Child Experiences dysphoric or anxious affect,
especially fear, sadness, and helplessness,
when “in touch” with associated schemas.
Abandonment, Mistrust/Abuse, Emotional
Deprivation, Defectiveness, Social Isolation,
Dependence/Incompetence, Vulnerability to
Harm or Illness, Enmeshment/Undeveloped
Self, Negativity/Pessimism.
Angry Child Vents anger directly in response to perceived
unmet core needs or unfair treatment related to
core schemas.
Abandonment, Mistrust/Abuse, Emotional
Deprivation, Subjugation (or, at times, any of the
schemas associated with the Vulnerable Child).
Impulsive/
Undisciplined Child
Impulsively acts according to immediate desires
for pleasure without regard to limits or others’
needs or feelings (not linked to core needs).
Entitlement, Insufficient Self-Control/Self-
Discipline.
Happy Child Feels loved, connected, content, satisfied. None. Absence of activated schemas.

figUre 7.2a. Child modes. From Young, Klosko, and Weishaar (2003). Copyright 2003 by The Guilford Press. Reprinted
by permission.

Maladaptive Coping Modes Description

Compliant Surrenderer Adopts a coping style of compliance and dependence.
Detached Protector Adopts a coping style of emotional withdrawal,
disconnection, isolation, and behavioral avoidance.
Overcompensator Adopts a coping style of counterattack and control.
May overcompensate through semiadaptive means,
such as workaholism.

figUre 7.2b. Maladaptive Coping modes. From Young, Klosko, and Weishaar (2003). Copyright 2003 by The Guilford
Press. Reprinted by permission.

Dysfunctional Parent Mode Description Common associated schemas

Punitive/Critical Parent Restricts, criticizes, or punishes the self or
others.
Subjugation, Punitiveness, Defectiveness,
Mistrust/Abuse (as abuser).
Demanding Parent Sets high expectations and high level of
responsibility toward others; pressures the self
or others to achieve them.
Unrelenting Standards, Self-Sacrifice.

figUre 7.2C. Dysfunctional Parent modes. From Young, Klosko, and Weishaar (2003). Copyright 2003 by The Guilford
Press. Reprinted by permission.


Cognitive Therapy for Depression

Renner and colleagues (2012) also found EMSs, particularly
those in the disconnection and rejection and
impaired autonomy and performance domains, to be
related to severity of depressive symptoms. They note
that, consistent with Beck’s theory, “these findings are
consistent with the cognitive model of depression, placing
schemas or core beliefs in the domains of failure,
loss, and worthlessness at the core of depressive symptoms”
(p. 587). In their examination of the robustness of
EMSs with evidence-based treatments (CBT and interpersonal
psychotherapy [IPT], with and without medication)
for depression, they found that EMSs remained
relatively stable over time (pre- and posttreatment). This
finding is consistent with Young and colleagues’ (2003)
notion of EMSs as stable, trait-like beliefs that remain
even after successful treatment of Axis I symptoms. According
to the schema model, these results should not
be surprising, since none of the treatments in this study
specifically targeted change in EMSs.

In a recent study, Eberhart, Auerbach, Bigda-Peyton,
and Abela (2011) examined how EMSs and stress impact
depressive symptoms by comparing two models
of stress: diathesis–stress and stress-generation. The
diathesis–stress model posits that EMSs only create
vulnerability to depression when interacting with high
levels of stressors. The stress generation model posits
that EMSs are instrumental in creating stressful conditions
which then increase depression. The results supported
the stress generation hypothesis. The researchers
noted that

a number of maladaptive schemas in the domains of
disconnection and rejection, impaired autonomy and
performance, and other-directedness predicted the
generation of dependent, interpersonal stressors. These
dependent interpersonal stressors, in turn, predicted increases
in depressive symptoms. Moreover, there was
evidence that these stressors mediated the relationships
between maladaptive schemas and depressive symptoms.
In particular, mediation effects were observed for
subjugation schemas, failure schemas, and a number of
schemas related to disconnection and rejection” (p. 96).
[body]This research highlights the importance of targeting
EMSs in the treatment of chronic depression.

In the following sections we present information
about the general characteristics and nature of cognitive
therapy, a discussion of the process of cognitive
therapy, then two case examples that illustrate cognitive
therapy in action. The patient in the first case has
a nonchronic form of depression and is treated with

“standard” cognitive therapy (as originally outlined in
Beck et al.’s 1979 book). The focus of standard cognitive
therapy is on changing depressive thinking in the
present. The patient in the second case has chronic depression
and is treated with both cognitive and schema
therapies. The focus of ST, in this case, is on identifying
and modifying the patient’s underlying schemas
through mode work.

characteristics of theraPy

Cognitive therapy with adult depressed outpatients is
usually undertaken in the therapist’s office. It has most
frequently been applied in a one-to-one setting. However,
group cognitive therapy has also been shown to
be successful with many depressed outpatients (Beutler
et al., 1987; Jarrett & Nelson, 1987), although it may
not be as effective as individual treatment (Wierzbicki
& Bartlett, 1987). Additionally, computer-assisted cognitive
therapy for depression (50-minute vs. 25-minute
sessions with computer assistance) also has been
found effective (Wright et al., 2005). It is not unusual
to involve spouses, partners, parents, and other family
members during treatment. For example, they may provide
information that helps patients test the validity of
their thinking with respect to how other family members
view them. Moreover, couple therapy based on
the cognitive model is often very effective in relieving
depression related to chronic interpersonal problems
(Beck, 1988; O’Leary & Beach, 1990).

In our clinical experience, a number of therapist
characteristics contribute to effective cognitive therapy.
First, cognitive therapists ideally should demonstrate
the “nonspecific” therapy skills identified by other
writers (see, e.g., Truax & Mitchell, 1971): They should
be able to communicate warmth, genuineness, sincerity,
and openness. Second, the most effective cognitive
therapists seem to be especially skilled at seeing events
from their patients’ perspectives (accurate empathy).
They are able to suspend their own personal assumptions
and biases while listening to depressed patients
describe their reactions and interpretations. Third,
skilled cognitive therapists can reason logically and
plan strategies; they are not “fuzzy” thinkers. In this
respect they resemble good trial lawyers, who can spot
the sometimes subtle flaws in another individual’s reasoning
and skillfully elicit a more convincing interpretation
of the same events. Skilled cognitive therapists
plan strategies several steps ahead, anticipating the


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

desired outcome. Fourth, the best practitioners of this
approach are active. They have to be comfortable taking
the lead, providing structure and direction to the
therapy process.

Although patient characteristics have received some
empirical attention (Eifert, Beach, & Wilson, 1998;
Padesky, with Greenberger, 1995; Persons, Burns, &
Perloff, 1988; Shea et al., 1990), we do not yet have
adequate knowledge as to which patient characteristics
are related to success in cognitive therapy. Our experience
suggests that patients with major depressive disorder
(or milder forms of depression) respond well to the
cognitive therapy approach described in this chapter.
To the extent that the patient is diagnosed with Axis
II personality disorders and/or his/her depression is
chronic, the combination of cognitive and schema therapies
may be significantly longer in duration and more
crucial in obtaining a more complete and lasting positive
response to treatment.

Cognitive therapy can serve an important adjunctive
role to pharmacotherapy for bipolar disorders (Ball et
al., 2006; Basco & Rush, 1996; Colom, Vieta, Martinez,
Jorquera, & Gastó, 1998; Craighead, Miklowitz,
Vajk, & Frank, 1998; Lam, Hayward, Watkins, Wright,
& Sham, 2005; Scott, 1996b), and is effective in treating
patients with severe endogenous depression (Thase,
Bowler, & Harden, 1991; Whisman, 1993). Preliminary
evidence also suggests that cognitive therapy is effective
in the treatment of women with postpartum depression
(Bledsoe & Grote, 2006).

It is advisable to assess patients’ suitability for cognitive
therapy (Padesky, with Greenberger, 1995; Safran
& Segal, 1990; Safran, Segal, Vallis, Shaw, & Samstag,
1993). In our experience, certain patient characteristics
are predictive of a more rapid response. “Ideal” cognitive
therapy patients are appropriately introspective and
can reason abstractly; are well organized, good planners,
and conscientious about carrying out responsibilities;
are employed or have a history of employment; are
not excessively angry at either themselves or at other
people; are less dogmatic and rigid in their thinking;
can identify a clear precipitating event for the depressive
episode; and have close relationships with others.
Most patients deviate in some ways from this prototype,
and these characteristics are not essential to successful
treatment. However, patients with more of these
attributes often show faster improvement in depressive
symptoms through cognitive therapy.

Age is not an obstacle: Patients across the lifespan
seem to benefit from cognitive therapy (Beutler et al.,

1987; Floyd, Scogin, McKendree-Smith, Floyd, &
Rokke, 2004; Gallagher-Thompson, Hanley-Peterson,
& Thompson, 1990; Harrington, Wood, & Verduyn,
1998; Koder, Brodaty, & Anstey, 1996; Levendusky
& Hufford, 1997; Reinecke, Ryan, & DuBois, 1998).
Many studies have indicated that children and adolescents
show significant clinical improvement following
CBT (Curry, 2001). Studies of older patients show that
“various forms of cognitive and behavioral psychotherapy
can be as effective in treating geriatric depression
as depressions occurring earlier in life” (Futterman,
Thompson, Gallagher-Thompson, & Ferris, 1995,
p. 511).

collaBoratioN

Basic to cognitive therapy is a collaborative relationship
between patient and therapist. When therapist
and patient work together, the learning experience is
enhanced for both, and the cooperative spirit that is developed
contributes greatly to the therapeutic process.
Equally important, the collaborative approach helps to
ensure compatible goals for treatment, and to prevent
misunderstandings and misinterpretations between patient
and therapist. Because of the importance of the
collaborative relationship, we place great emphasis on
the interpersonal skills of the therapist, the process of
joint selection of problems to be worked on, regular
feedback, and the investigative process we call “collaborative
empiricism.”

Interpersonal Qualities

Because collaboration requires that the patient trust
the therapist, we emphasize those interpersonal qualities
that contribute to trust. As noted earlier, warmth,
accurate empathy, and genuineness are desirable personal
qualities for the cognitive therapist, as well as for
all psychotherapists. It is important that the cognitive
therapist not seem to be playing the role of therapist.
The therapist should be able to communicate both verbally
and nonverbally that he/she is sincere, open, concerned,
and direct. It is also important that the therapist
not seem to be withholding impressions or information,
or evading questions. The therapist should be careful
not to seem critical or disapproving of the patient’s perspective.


Rapport between patient and therapist is crucial in
the treatment of depressed patients. When rapport is


Cognitive Therapy for Depression

optimal, patients perceive the therapist as someone who
is tuned in to their feelings and attitudes, who is sympathetic
and understanding, and with whom they can
communicate without having to articulate feelings in
detail or qualify statements. When the rapport is good,
both patient and therapist feel comfortable and secure.

A confident, professional manner is also important
in cognitive therapy. A therapist should convey relaxed
confidence in his/her ability to help a depressed patient.
Such confidence can help to counteract the patient’s initial
hopelessness about the future. Because the cognitive
therapist must sometimes be directive and impose
structure, especially in the early stages of treatment, it
is helpful to maintain a clear sense of professionalism.

Joint Determination of Goals for Therapy

The patient and therapist collaboratively work together
to set therapeutic goals, determine priorities among
them, and create an agenda for each session. Problems
to be addressed over the course of therapy include specific
depressive symptoms (e.g., hopelessness, crying,
and difficulty concentrating) and external problems
(e.g., couple difficulties, career issues, childrearing
concerns). Priorities are then jointly determined in
accordance with how much distress is generated by a
particular problem and how amenable that particular
problem is to change. During the agenda-setting portion
of each therapy session (discussed in detail in the
next section), therapist and patient together determine
the items to be covered in that session. Through this
collaborative process, target problems are selected on
a weekly basis.

The process of problem selection often presents difficulties
for the novice cognitive therapist, including
failure to reach agreement on specific problems on
which to focus, selection of peripheral concerns, and
the tendency to move from problem to problem instead
of persistently seeking a satisfactory solution to only
one problem at a time. Because the problem selection
process entails both structuring and collaboration on
the part of the therapist, considerable skill is necessary.

Regular Feedback

Feedback is especially important in therapy with depressed
patients; it is a crucial ingredient in developing
and maintaining the collaborative therapeutic relationship.
The cognitive therapist initiates the feedback
component early in therapy by eliciting the patient’s

thoughts and feelings about many aspects of the therapy,
such as the handling of a particular problem, the
therapist’s manner, and homework assignments. Since
many patients misconstrue therapists’ statements and
questions, it is only through regular feedback that the
therapist can ascertain whether he/she and the patient
are on the same “wavelength.” The therapist must also
be alert for verbal and nonverbal clues to covert negative
reactions.

As part of the regular feedback process, the cognitive
therapist shares the rationale for each intervention. This
helps to demystify the therapy process and facilitates
the patient’s questioning of the validity of a particular
approach. In addition, when a patient understands how
a particular technique or assignment may help solve a
particular problem in the patient’s life, he/she is more
likely to participate conscientiously.

Another key element of the feedback process is for
the therapist to check regularly to determine whether
the patient understands his/her formulations. Patients
sometimes agree with a formulation simply out of compliance,
and depressed patients frequently exhibit both
compliance and reluctance to “talk straight” with their
therapists for fear of being rejected or criticized, or of
making a mistake. Therefore, the therapist must make
an extra effort to elicit the patient’s feelings or wishes
relevant to compliance (e.g., anxiety about rejection,
wish to please) and be alert for verbal and nonverbal
clues that the patient may indeed not understand the
explanations.

At the close of each session the cognitive therapist
provides a concise summary of what has taken place,
and asks the patient to abstract and write down the main
points from the session. The patient keeps this summary
for review during the week. In practice, the therapist
uses capsule summaries frequently during a standard
therapeutic interview: in preparing the agenda, in a
midpoint recapitulation of the material covered up to
that point, and in the final summary of the main points
of the interview. Patients generally respond favorably to
the elicitation of feedback and presentation of capsule
summaries. We have observed that the development of
empathy and rapport is facilitated by these techniques.

Collaborative Empiricism

When the collaborative therapeutic relationship has
been successfully formed, patient and therapist act as
an investigative team. Though we elaborate on the investigative
process later, it is appropriate to introduce


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

it in the context of the collaborative relationship. As a
team, patient and therapist approach the patient’s automatic
thoughts and schemas in the same manner that
scientists approach questions: Each thought or schema
becomes a hypothesis to be tested, and evidence is
gathered that supports or refutes the hypothesis. Events
in the past, circumstances in the present, and possibilities
in the future are the data that constitute evidence,
and the conclusion to accept or reject the hypothesis
is jointly reached as patient and therapist subject the
evidence to logical analysis. Experiments may also be
devised to test the validity of particular cognitions.
Cognitive therapists need not persuade patients of illogicality
or inconsistency with reality because patients
“discover” their own inconsistencies. This guided discovery
process, a widely accepted educational method,
is one of the vital components of cognitive therapy.

the Process of coGNitive theraPy

Here we attempt to convey a sense of how cognitive
therapy sessions are structured and of the course of
treatment. Detailed discussion of particular techniques
follows this section.

The Initial Sessions

A main therapeutic goal of the first few sessions is to
produce some symptom relief. Reducing the patient’s
suffering helps to increase rapport, collaboration, and
confidence in the therapeutic process. Symptom relief,
however, should be based on more than rapport, sympathy,
and implied promise of “cure.” In the first few
sessions, the cognitive therapist starts the process of defining
the patient’s problems and demonstrating some
of the strategies that will be used in the therapy to deal
with those problems.

Problem definition is a primary goal in the early stages
of therapy. The therapist collaboratively works with
the patient to define the specific problems on which
they will focus during therapy sessions. The cognitive
therapist does this by obtaining as complete a picture as
possible of the patient’s psychological and life situation
difficulties. The therapist also seeks details concerning
the depth of depression and particular symptomatology.
Cognitive therapists are especially concerned with how
patients see their problems.

Once the specific problems have been defined, patient
and therapist establish priorities among them.

Decisions are made on the basis of amenability to
therapeutic change and centrality of the life problem or
cognition to the patient’s emotional distress. To help establish
priorities effectively, the therapist must see the
relationships among particular thoughts, particular life
situations, and particular distressing emotions.

Another goal of the initial session is to illustrate
the close relationship between cognition and emotion.
When the therapist is able to observe the patient’s mood
change (e.g., crying), he/she points out the alteration
in affect and asks for the patient’s thoughts just before
the mood shift. The therapist then labels the negative
thought and points out its relationship to the change in
mood. He/she initially gears homework assignments
toward helping the patient see the close connection between
cognition and emotion.

A frequent requirement in the early stage of therapy
is to socialize the patient to cognitive therapy. A patient
who has previously undertaken analytically oriented
or Rogerian therapies may begin cognitive therapy
expecting a more insight-oriented, nondirective therapeutic
approach. The cognitive therapist can facilitate
the transition to a more active and structured approach
by maintaining a problem-oriented stance, which often
entails gently interrupting a patient who tends to speculate
about the sources of the problems and to seek interpretations
from the therapist.

Finally, the therapist must communicate the importance
of self-help homework assignments during the
initial session by stressing that doing the homework is
actually more important than the therapy session itself.
The therapist also can enhance motivation by explaining
that patients who complete assignments generally
improve more quickly. The nature and implementation
of self-help homework assignments are considered in
further detail in a later section of this chapter.

The Progress of a Typical Therapy Session

Each session begins with the establishment of an agenda
for that session. This ensures optimal use of time
in a relatively short-term, problem-solving therapeutic
approach. The agenda generally begins with a short
synopsis of the patient’s experiences since the last session,
including discussion of the homework assignment.
The therapist then asks the patient what he/she wants
to work on during the session, and often offers topics
to be included.

When a short list of problems and topics has been
completed, patient and therapist determine the order


Cognitive Therapy for Depression

in which to cover them and, if necessary, the time to
be allotted to each topic. There are several issues to
consider in establishing priorities, including stage of
therapy, severity of depression, likelihood of making
progress in solving the problem, and potential pervasiveness
of the effect of a particular theme or topic.
The cognitive therapist is sensitive to a patient’s occasional
desire to talk about something that seems important
to him/her at the moment, even if such discussion
seems not to be productive in terms of other goals.
This kind of flexibility characterizes the collaborative
therapeutic relationship.

After these preliminary matters have been covered,
patient and therapist move on to the one or two problems
to be considered during the session. The therapist
begins the discussion of a problem by asking the patient
a series of questions designed to clarify the nature of
the patient’s difficulty. In doing so, the therapist seeks
to determine whether early maladaptive schemas, misinterpretations
of events, or unrealistic expectations are
involved. The therapist also seeks to discover whether
the patient had unrealistic expectations, whether the
patient’s behavior was appropriate, and whether all
possible solutions to the problem were considered. The
patient’s responses suggest to the therapist a cognitivebehavioral
conceptualization of why the patient is having
difficulty in the area of concern. The therapist by
now has discerned the one or two significant thoughts,
schemas, images, or behaviors on which to work. When
this target problem has been selected, the therapist
chooses the cognitive or behavioral techniques to apply
and shares their rationale with the patient. The specific
techniques used in cognitive therapy are explained in
the following sections of this chapter.

At the close of the session, the therapist asks the patient
for a summary, often in writing, of the major conclusions
drawn during the session. The therapist asks
for the patient’s reactions to the session to ascertain
whether anything disturbing was said and to forestall
any delayed negative reactions following the interview.
Finally, the therapist gives a homework assignment designed
to assist the patient in applying the particular
skills and concepts from the session to the problem during
the following week.

Progression of Session Content over Time

Although the structure of cognitive therapy sessions
does not change during the course of treatment, the
content often changes significantly. The first phase of

treatment, symptom reduction, focuses on overcoming
hopelessness, identifying problems, setting priorities,
socializing the patient to cognitive therapy, establishing
a collaborative relationship, demonstrating the relationship
between cognition and emotion, labeling errors
in thinking, and making progress on a target problem.
Therapy is initially centered on the patient’s symptoms,
with attention given to behavioral and motivational difficulties.


In the second phase, which is focused on changing
schemas for relapse prevention and chronic cases,
therapist and patient turn from specific thoughts about
particular problems to core schemas about the self and
others, and to the modes associated with those schemas.
Therapist and patient explore how the schemas
and modes initiate, exacerbate, and maintain many of
the patient’s problems. Therapist and patient then work
collaboratively to restructure and modify the schemas
and modes through a variety of techniques, which
eventually brings about a broader and more pervasive
improvement in life functioning and mood.

Over the course of therapy, the patient assumes increased
responsibility for identifying problems, coming
up with solutions, and implementing the solutions
through homework assignments. The therapist increasingly
assumes the role of advisor or consultant as the patient
learns to implement therapeutic techniques without
constant support. As the patient becomes a more
effective problem solver, the frequency of sessions is
reduced, and therapy is eventually discontinued.

The remainder of this chapter is devoted to a detailed
description of cognitive- and schema-based treatment
strategies.

syMPtoM reDuctioN

Behavioral Techniques

Behavioral techniques are used throughout the course
of cognitive therapy, but they are generally concentrated
in the earlier stages of treatment. Behavioral techniques
are especially necessary for those more severely
depressed patients who are passive, anhedonic, socially
withdrawn, and unable to concentrate for extended periods
of time. By engaging such a patient’s attention
and interest, the cognitive therapist tries to induce the
patient to counteract withdrawal and become more involved
in constructive activity. From a variety of be



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

havioral techniques, the therapist selects those that will
help the patient cope more effectively with situational
and interpersonal problems. Through homework assignments,
the patient implements specific procedures
for dealing with concrete situations or for using time
more adaptively.

The cognitive therapist uses behavioral techniques,
with the goal of modifying automatic thoughts. For
example, a patient who believes “I can’t get anything
done any more” can modify this thought after completing
a series of graded tasks designed to increase
mastery. The severely depressed patient is caught in a
vicious cycle, in which a reduced activity level leads
to a negative self-label, which in turn results in even
further discouragement and consequent inactivity. Intervention
with behavioral techniques can change this
self-destructive pattern.

The most commonly used behavioral techniques
include scheduling activities that include both mastery
and pleasure exercises, cognitive rehearsal, selfreliance
training, role playing, and diversion techniques.
The scheduling of activities is frequently used
in the early stages of cognitive therapy to counteract
loss of motivation, hopelessness, and excessive rumination.
The therapist uses the Weekly Activity Schedule
for planning activities hour by hour, day by day (see
Figure 7.3). Patients maintain an hourly record of the
activities in which they engaged. Activity scheduling
also helps patients obtain more pleasure and a greater
sense of accomplishment from activities on a daily
basis. The patients rate each completed activity (using
a 0- to 10-point scale) for both mastery and pleasure.
The ratings usually contradict patients’ beliefs that they
cannot accomplish or enjoy anything anymore. To as-

Note:
Grade
activities
M
for
mastery
and
P
for
pleasure
0–10.


Mon.Tues.Wed.Thurs.Fri.Sat.Sun.
Morning6–77–88–99–1010–1111–12Afternoon12–11–22–33–44–55–6Evening6–77–88–99–1010–1111–1212–6
figUre 7.3. Weekly Activity Schedule.


Cognitive Therapy for Depression

sist some patients in initiating mastery and pleasure activities,
the therapist may sometimes find it necessary
to subdivide an activity into segments, ranging from the
simplest to the most difficult and complex aspects of
the activity. We call this the “graded task” approach.
The subdivision enables depressed patients to undertake
tasks that were initially impossible, thus providing
proof of success.

Cognitive rehearsal entails asking a patient to picture
or imagine each step involved in the accomplishment
of a particular task. This technique can be especially
helpful with those patients who have difficulty
carrying out a task that requires successive steps for
its completion. Sometimes impairment in the ability to
concentrate creates difficulties for the patient in focusing
attention on the specific task. The imagery evoked
by the cognitive rehearsal technique helps the patient to
focus and the therapist to identify obstacles that make
the assignment difficult for the particular patient.

Some depressed patients rely on others to take care
of most of their daily needs. With self-reliance training,
patients learn to assume increased responsibility
for routine activities such as showering, making their
beds, cleaning the house, cooking their own meals, and
shopping. Self-reliance involves gaining increased control
over emotional reactions.

Role playing has many uses in cognitive therapy.
First, it may be used to bring out automatic thoughts
through the enactment of particular interpersonal situations,
such as an encounter with a supervisor at work.
Second, through homework assignments, it may also
guide the patient in practicing and attending to new
cognitive responses in problematic social encounters.
A third use of role playing is to rehearse new behaviors.
Thus, role playing may be used as part of assertiveness
training and is often accompanied by modeling and
coaching.

Role reversal, a variation of role playing, can be very
effective in helping patients test how other people might
view their behavior. This is well illustrated by a patient
who had a “humiliating experience” while buying some
clothes in a store. After playing the role of the clerk, the
patient had to conclude that she had insufficient data
for her previous conclusion that she appeared clumsy
and inept. Through role reversal, patients begin to view
themselves less harshly as “self-sympathy” responses
are elicited.

Finally, the therapist may introduce various distraction
techniques to assist the patient in learning to reduce
the intensity of painful affects. The patient learns

to divert negative thinking through physical activity,
social contact, work, play, and visual imagery. Practice
with diversion techniques also helps the patient gain
further control over emotional reactivity.

Cognitive Techniques

The specific cognitive techniques provide points of
entry into the patient’s cognitive organization. The
cognitive therapist uses techniques for eliciting and
testing automatic thoughts, and identifying schemas to
help both therapist and patient understand the patient’s
construction of reality. In applying specific cognitive
techniques in therapy, it is important that the therapist
work within the framework of the cognitive model of
depression. Each set of techniques is discussed in turn.

Eliciting Automatic Thoughts

“Automatic thoughts” are those thoughts that intervene
between outside events and the individual’s emotional
reactions to them. They often go unnoticed because
they are part of a repetitive pattern of thinking, and
because they occur so often and so quickly. People
rarely stop to assess their validity because they are so
believable, familiar, and habitual. The patient in cognitive
therapy must learn to recognize these automatic
thoughts for therapy to proceed effectively. The cognitive
therapist and the patient make a joint effort to
discover the particular thoughts that precede emotions
such as anger, sadness, and anxiety. The therapist uses
questioning, imagery, and role playing to elicit automatic
thoughts.

The simplest method to uncover automatic thoughts
is for therapists to ask patients what thoughts went
through their minds in response to particular events.
This questioning provides a model for introspective
exploration that patients can use on their own, when
the therapist is not present, and after the completion of
treatment.

Alternatively, when a patient is able to identify those
external events and situations that evoke a particular
emotional response, the therapist may use imagery by
asking the patient to picture the situation in detail. The
patient is often able to identify the automatic thoughts
connected with actual situations when the image
evoked is clear. In this technique, therapists ask patients
to relax, close their eyes, and imagine themselves
in the distressing situation. Patients describe in detail
what is happening as they relive the event.


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

If a distressing event is an interpersonal one, cognitive
therapists also can utilize role playing. The therapist
plays the role of the other person in the encounter,
while the patient plays him/herself. The automatic
thoughts can usually be elicited when the patient becomes
sufficiently engaged in the role play.

In attempting to elicit automatic thoughts, the
therapist is careful to notice and point out any mood
changes that occur during the session, and to ask the
patient his/her thoughts just before the shift in mood.
Mood changes include any emotional reaction, such as
tears or anger. This technique can be especially useful
when the patient is first learning to identify automatic
thoughts.

Once patients become familiar with the techniques
for identifying automatic thoughts, they are asked to
keep a Daily Record of Dysfunctional Thoughts (Beck
et al., 1979; see Figure 7.4), in which they record the
emotions and automatic thoughts that occur in upsetting
situations between therapy sessions. In later sessions,
patients are taught to develop rational responses
to their dysfunctional automatic thoughts and to record

them in the appropriate column. Therapist and patient
generally review the daily record from the preceding
week, near the beginning of the next therapy session. In
sessions, the therapist also teaches chronic patients to
recognize modes. Various affective exercises are then
used to bring about change in the underlying schemas
associated with those modes.

Eliciting automatic thoughts should be distinguished
from the interpretation process of other psychotherapies.
In general, cognitive therapists work only with
those automatic thoughts mentioned by patients. Suggesting
thoughts to patients may undermine collaboration
and inhibit patients from learning to continue the
process on their own. As a last resort, however, when
nondirective strategies fail, a cognitive therapist may
offer several possible automatic thoughts, then ask the
patient whether any of these choices fit.

Even when many efforts to elicit automatic thoughts
have been made by the therapist, sometimes the thought
remains inaccessible. When this is the case, the cognitive
therapist tries to ascertain the particular meaning
of the event that evoked the emotional reaction. For ex-

DATE
SITUATION
Describe:
1. Actual event leading to
unpleasant emotion, or
2. Stream of thoughts,
daydream, or
recollection, leading to
unpleasant emotion.
EMOTION(S)
1. Specify sad/
anxious/
angry, etc.
2. Rate degree
of emotion,
1–100.
AUTOMATIC
THOUGHT(S)
1. Write automatic
thought(s) that preceded
emotion(s).
2. Rate belief in automatic
thought(s), 0–100%.
RATIONAL
RESPONSE
1. Write rational response
to automatic thought(s).
2. Rate belief in rational
response, 0–100%.
OUTCOME
1. Rerate belief
in automatic
thought(s),
0–100%.
2. Specify and
rate
subsequent
emotions,
0–100%.

Explanation:
When you experience an unpleasant emotion, note the situation that seemed to stimulate the emotion. (If the emotion
occurred while you were thinking, daydreaming, etc., please note this.) Then note the automatic thought associated with the emotion.
Record the degree to which you believe this thought: 0% = not at all; 100% = completely. In rating degrees of emotion: 1 = a trace;
100 = the most intense possible.

figUre 7.4. Daily Record of Dysfunctional Thoughts.


Cognitive Therapy for Depression

ample, one patient began to cry whenever she had an
argument with her roommate, who was a good friend.
Efforts to elicit automatic thoughts proved unsuccessful.
Only after the therapist asked a series of questions
to determine the meaning of the event did it become
clear that the patient associated having an argument or
fight with ending the relationship. Through this process,
therapist and patient were able to see the meaning
that triggered the crying.

Testing Automatic Thoughts
with Nonchronic Patients

When therapist and patient have managed to isolate a
key automatic thought, they approach the thought as a
testable hypothesis. In this “scientific” approach, which
is fundamental to cognitive therapy, the patient learns
to think in a way that resembles the investigative process.
Through the procedures of gathering data, evaluating
evidence, and drawing conclusions, patients learn
firsthand that their view of reality can be quite different
from what actually takes place. By designing experiments
that subject their automatic thoughts to objective
analysis, patients learn how to modify their thinking
because they learn the process of empirical thinking.
Patients who learn to think this way during treatment
are better able to continue the empirical approach after
the end of formal therapy.

The cognitive therapist approaches the testing of automatic
thoughts by asking the patient to list evidence
from his/her experience for and against the hypothesis.
Sometimes, after considering the evidence, the patient
immediately rejects the automatic thought, recognizing
that it is either distorted or actually false.

When previous experience is not sufficient or appropriate
to test a hypothesis, the therapist asks the patient
to design an experiment for that purpose. The patient
then makes a prediction and proceeds to gather data. If
the data contradict the prediction, the patient can reject
the automatic thought. The outcome of the experiment
may, of course, confirm the patient’s prediction. It is
therefore very important for the therapist not to assume
that the patient’s automatic thought is distorted.

Some automatic thoughts do not lend themselves to
hypothesis testing through the examination of evidence.
In these cases, two options are available: The therapist
may either produce evidence from his/her own experience
and offer it in the form of a question that reveals
the contradiction or ask a question designed to uncover
a logical error inherent in the patient’s beliefs. The

therapist might say, for example, to a male patient who
is sure he cannot survive without a close personal relationship,
“You were alone last year, and you got along
fine; what makes you think you can’t make it now?”

In testing automatic thoughts, it is sometimes necessary
to refine the patient’s use of a word. This is particularly
true for global labels such as “bad,” “stupid,”
or “selfish.” What is needed in this case is an operational
definition of the word. To illustrate, a patient at
our clinic had the recurring automatic thought, “I’m a
failure in math.” Therapist and patient had to narrow
down the meaning of the word before they could test
the thought. They operationalized “failure” in math
as “being unable to achieve a grade of C after investing
as much time studying as the average class member.”
Now they could examine past evidence and test
the validity of the hypothesis. This process can help
patients to see the overinclusiveness of their negative
self-assessments and the idiosyncratic nature of many
automatic thoughts.

Reattribution is another useful technique for helping
the patient to reject an inappropriate, self-blaming
thought. It is a common cognitive pattern in depression
to ascribe blame or responsibility for adverse events to
oneself. Reattribution can be used when the patient unrealistically
attributes adverse occurrences to a personal
deficiency, such as lack of ability or effort. Therapist
and patient review the relevant events and apply logic
to the available information to make a more realistic
assignment of responsibility. The aim of reattribution
is not to absolve the patient of all responsibility but to
examine the many factors that contribute to adverse
events. Through this process, patients gain objectivity,
relieve themselves of the burden of self-reproach, and
can then search for ways to solve realistic problems or
prevent their recurrence.

Another strategy involving reattribution is for therapists
to demonstrate that patients’ criteria for assigning
responsibility to their own unsatisfactory behavior are
stricter than criteria they use in evaluating the behavior
of others. Cognitive therapists also use reattribution to
show patients that some of their thinking or behavior
problems can be symptoms of depression (e.g., loss of
concentration) and not signs of physical decay.

When a patient is accurate in identifying a realistic
life problem or skills deficit, the cognitive therapist can
use the technique of generating alternatives, in which
therapist and patient actively search for alternative solutions.
Because a depressed person’s reasoning often
becomes restricted, an effort to reconceptualize the


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

problem can result in the patient’s seeing a viable solution
that he/she may previously have rejected.

It should be noted that all the cognitive techniques
outlined here entail the use of questions by the therapist.
A common error we observe in novice cognitive
therapists is an exhortative style. We have found that
therapists help patients to change their thinking more
effectively by using carefully formed questions. If patients
are prompted to work their own way through
problems and reach their own conclusions, they learn
an effective problem-solving process. We next elaborate
on the use of questioning in cognitive therapy.

Questioning

As we have stressed throughout this chapter, questioning
is a major therapeutic device in cognitive therapy. A
majority of the therapist’s comments during the therapy
session are questions. Single questions can serve several
purposes at one time, whereas carefully designed
series of questions can help patients consider a particular
issue, decision, or opinion. The cognitive therapist
seeks through questioning to elicit what patients are
thinking, instead of telling patients what he/she believes
they are thinking.

In the beginning of therapy, questions are employed
to obtain a full and detailed picture of a patient’s particular
difficulties; to obtain background and diagnostic
data; to evaluate the patient’s stress tolerance, capacity
for introspection, coping methods, and so on; to obtain
information about the patient’s external situation and
interpersonal context; and to modify vague complaints
by working with the patient to arrive at specific target
problems on which to work.

As therapy progresses, the therapist uses questioning
to explore approaches to problems, to help the patient
to weigh advantages and disadvantages of possible solutions,
to examine the consequences of staying with
particular maladaptive behaviors, to elicit automatic
thoughts, and to demonstrate EMSs and their consequences.
In short, the therapist uses questioning in most
cognitive therapeutic techniques.

Although questioning is itself a powerful means of
identifying and changing automatic thoughts and schemas,
it is important that the questions be carefully and
skillfully posed. If questions are used to “trap” patients
into contradicting themselves, patients may come to
feel that they are being attacked or manipulated by the
therapist. Too many open-ended questions can leave
patients wondering what the therapist expects of them.

Therapists must carefully time and phrase questions
to help patients recognize their thoughts and schemas,
and to weigh issues objectively.

Self‑Help Homework Assignments

Rationale

Regular homework assignments are very important in
cognitive therapy. When patients systematically apply
what they have learned during therapy sessions to their
outside lives, they are more likely to make significant
progress in therapy and to be able to maintain their
gains after termination of treatment. Burns and Spangler
(2000) found that patients who did the most homework
showed larger and more significant decreases in
depression than those who were less compliant. Homework
assignments are often the means through which
patients gather data, test hypotheses, and begin to modify
their thoughts and schemas. In addition, the data
provided through homework assignments help to shift
the focus of therapy from the subjective and abstract
to more concrete and objective concerns. When a patient
and therapist review the previous week’s activities
during the agenda-setting portion of the interview, they
may do so quickly, and the therapist can draw relationships
between what takes place in the session and specific
tasks, thereby avoiding tangents and side issues.
Homework assignments further patients’ self-reliance
and provide them with methods to continue working on
problems after the end of treatment. Cognitive therapists
emphasize the importance of homework by sharing
with patients their rationale for assigning homework
in therapy. They are also careful to explain the
particular benefits to be derived from each individual
assignment.

Assigning and Reviewing Homework

The cognitive therapist designs each assignment for the
particular patient. The assignment should be directly
related to the content of the therapy session, so that the
patient understands its purpose and importance. Each
task should be clearly articulated and very specific in
nature. Near the end of each session, the assignment is
written in duplicate, with one copy going to the therapist
and the other to the patient.

Some typical homework assignments include reading
a book or article about a specific problem, practicing
distraction or relaxation techniques, counting auto



Cognitive Therapy for Depression

matic thoughts on a wrist counter, rating activities for
pleasure and mastery on the Weekly Activity Schedule,
maintaining a Daily Record of Dysfunctional
Thoughts, and listening to a tape of the therapy session.

During the therapy session, the therapist asks for
the patient’s reactions to homework assignments. For
example, the therapist might ask whether the assignment
is clear and manageable. To determine potential
impediments, the therapist may ask the patient to imagine
taking the steps involved in the assignment. This
technique can be especially helpful during the earlier
stages of therapy. The patient assumes greater responsibility
for developing homework assignments as therapy
progresses through the middle and later stages.

It is essential that patient and therapist review the
previous week’s homework during the therapy session
itself. If they do not, the patient may conclude that the
homework assignments are not important. During the
first part of the therapy sessions, therapist and patient
discuss the previous week’s assignment, and the therapist
summarizes the results.

Difficulties in Completing Homework

When a patient does not complete homework assignments,
or does them without conviction, the cognitive
therapist elicits automatic thoughts, schemas, or
behavioral problems that may help them both understand
where the difficulty resides. The therapist does
not presuppose that the patient is being “resistant” or
“passive–aggressive.” When the difficulties have been
successfully identified, therapist and patient work collaboratively
to surmount them. It is, of course, common
for patients to have difficulties in completing homework,
and here we consider some of the typical problems
and ways to counteract them.

When patients do not understand the assignment
completely, the therapist should explain it more fully,
specifying his/her expectations in detail. Sometimes
using the behavioral technique of cognitive rehearsal
(described earlier) can be helpful in such situations.

Some patients believe that they are naturally disorganized
and cannot maintain records and follow
through on detailed assignments. Therapists can usually
help to invalidate such general beliefs by asking
patients about other circumstances in which they make
lists—for example, when planning a vacation or shopping
trip. Therapists can also ask these patients whether
they could complete the assignment if there were a substantial
reward entailed. This kind of question helps

such patients recognize that self-control is not the problem;
rather, they do not believe that the reward is great
enough. When patients realize that the problem is an attitudinal
one, therapist and patient can proceed to enumerate
the advantages of completing the assignment.

More severely depressed patients may need assistance
to structure their time, so that homework
becomes a regular activity. This can generally be accomplished
by setting a specific time each day for the
homework assignment. If necessary, patient and therapist
can set up a reward system to increase motivation
to complete the homework. For example, patients can
reward themselves for doing the assignment by making
a special purchase.

Some patients are afraid of failing the assignments
or of doing them inadequately. In these cases, the therapist
can explain that self-help assignments cannot be
“failed”: Doing an assignment partially is more helpful
than not doing it at all, and mistakes provide valuable
information about problems that still need work. In addition,
because performance is not evaluated, patients
cannot lose if they view the activity from a more adaptive
perspective.

Sometimes patients believe their problems are too
deeply embedded and complex to be resolved through
homework assignments. The therapist can explain to
these patients that even the most complex undertakings
begin with and comprise small, concrete steps.
A writer, for example, may resolve “writer’s blocks”
by taking the attitude, “If I can’t write a book, I can
at least write a paragraph.” When enough paragraphs
have been written, the result is a book. Therapist and
patient can consider the advantages and disadvantages
of the patient’s belief that problems cannot be solved by
doing homework. Or the therapist can ask the patient
to experiment before reaching such a conclusion. In instances
in which a patient believes that he/she has not
made enough progress and that the homework is therefore
not helpful, the therapist can detail the progress the
patient has made or help the patient see that it may take
more time before substantial change can be perceived.

When patients seem to resent being given assignments,
the therapist can encourage them to develop
their own assignments. He/she might also offer patients
alternative assignments from which to choose, making
one of the alternatives noncompliance with homework
assignments. If patients choose noncompliance, the
therapist can help to examine the consequences of that
choice. Still another strategy is to present patients with
a consumer model of therapy: Patients have a certain


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

goal (overcoming depression), and the therapist offers
a means to achieve that goal; patients are free to use or
reject the tools, just as they are free to buy or not to buy
in the marketplace.

Some patients believe that they can improve just as
readily without homework. In this case, therapists have
two options. First, they can offer their own clinical
experience (which is supported by existing empirical
evidence) that most patients who do not actively engage
with and complete therapeutic homework progress
more slowly in therapy. The other option is to set up an
experiment for a given period of time, during which patients
do not have to complete assignments. At the end
of the predetermined period, therapists and patients
can evaluate patients’ progress during that time interval.
Once again, it is important for cognitive therapists
to keep an open mind: Some patients do indeed effect
significant change without formally completing homework
assignments.

Special Problems

The novice cognitive therapist often errs by staying with
the standard method we have outlined here, even if it is
not working very well. The cognitive therapist should
be flexible enough to adapt to the needs of patients and
to the several special problems that commonly arise
in therapy. We have grouped these special problems
into two categories: difficulties in the therapist–patient
relationship, and problems in which the therapy itself
seems not to be working.

Therapist–Patient Relationship Difficulties

The first set of problems concerns the therapist–patient
relationship itself. When the therapist first perceives a
patient to be dissatisfied, oppositional, angry, or hostile,
it is imperative that he/she present these observations
to the patient in an empathic manner. It is important
that the therapist refrain from responding to the patient
simply with an increased and rigid adherence to prescribed
techniques or the therapeutic rationale. It also
is important that the therapist refrain from self-critical
statements. Research indicates that such responses
have detrimental effects on the therapeutic relationship
(Castonguay et al., 1996; Henry, Strupp, Butler,
Schact, & Binder, 1993; Piper et al., 1999). Instead,
preliminary research (Castonguay et al., 2004; Safran,
Muran, Samstag, & Stevens, 2002) indicates that

the therapist’s use of metacommunication skills (open
discussion about the patient’s negative reaction, exploration
of the patient’s experience, recognition and acknowledgment
of the therapist’s contribution to those
negative reactions) is significantly more likely to repair
and restore—and even improve—the therapeutic bond.

It is essential for therapists to be aware that many
interventions can be misinterpreted in a negative way
by depressed patients. Therapists approach problems of
misinterpretation in the same way that they approach
other thoughts: They work with patients to gather data
and search for alternative accounts of the evidence. Difficulties
in the therapist–patient relationship can generally
be resolved through dialogue. There are times when
a therapist may need to tailor behavior to the particular
needs of an individual patient. For instance, a therapist
may become freer with appropriate self-disclosure and
personal reactions to meet the needs of a patient who
persists in seeing the therapist as impersonal. Similarly,
the therapist can make a point of checking formulations
of the patient’s thoughts more frequently to meet
the needs of a patient who continues to believe that the
therapist does not understand him/her.

It is imperative in situations like these for the therapist
not to assume that the patient is being stubbornly
resistant or irrational. Therapeutic reactance (“a motivational
state characterized by the tendency to restore
or re-assert one’s ability to engage in freedoms
perceived as lost or threatened” [Arnow et al., 2003,

p. 1026]) was found to be a positive predictor of treatment
outcome in directive therapy with chronically
depressed patients. Arnow and colleagues found that
treatment was enhanced when therapists responded in
a flexible manner to such patient behaviors. Cognitive
therapists collaborate with patients to achieve a better
understanding of patients’ responses. The reactions
themselves often provide data regarding the kinds of
distortions patients make in their other social and personal
relationships. Therefore, patients’ responses give
therapists the opportunity to work with them on their
maladaptive interpretations in relationships.
Unsatisfactory Progress

A second set of problems occurs when the therapy appears
not to be working, even when the patient conscientiously
completes homework assignments and the
collaborative relationship seems successful. Sometimes
problems stem from inappropriate expectations


Cognitive Therapy for Depression

on the part of the patient—or unrealistic expectations
on the part of the therapist—regarding the rapidity and
consistency of change. When therapy seems not to be
progressing as quickly as it “should,” both patient and
therapist must remember that ups and downs are to be
anticipated in the course of treatment. It is important
for therapists to keep in mind that some patients simply
progress more slowly than others. The therapist or
patient, or both, may be minimizing small changes that
have indeed been taking place. In this case the therapist
can emphasize the small gains that have been made and
remind the patient that large goals are attained through
small steps toward them.

At times, hopelessness can lead patients to invalidate
their gains. Therapists should seek to uncover the maladaptive
automatic thoughts, cognitive distortions, and
early schemas that contribute to the pervasive hopelessness.
In these cases, therapists must work to correct
mistaken notions about the process of change and the
nature of depression before further progress in therapy
can occur.

In some cases in which therapy seems not to be
working successfully, it may be that some of the therapeutic
techniques have not been correctly used. Problems
often arise when patients do not really believe the
rational responses or are not able to remember them in
times of emotional distress. It is important for a therapist
to determine the amount of a patient’s belief in the
rational responses and help him/her use the new responses
as closely as possible to the moment when the
automatic thoughts occur. To the patient who does not
fully believe a rational response, the therapist can suggest
an experimental stance—taking the new belief and
“trying it on for size.” The patient who cannot think of
answers because of emotional upset should be told that
states of emotional distress make reasoning more difficult,
and that thoughts such as “If this doesn’t work,
nothing will” can only aggravate the problem. Patients
should be assured that they will be able to think of rational
responses more readily with practice.

Another problem that derives from the misapplication
of cognitive therapy techniques occurs when
the therapist uses a particular technique inflexibly. It
is often necessary for the therapist to try out several
behavioral or cognitive techniques before finding an
approach to which a patient responds well. The cognitive
therapist must stay with a particular technique
for a while to see whether it works, but he/she must
also be willing to try an alternative technique when

it becomes apparent that the patient is not improving.
To give a specific example, behavioral homework assignments
are sometimes more helpful with particular
patients, even though the therapist has every reason to
predict in advance that cognitive assignments will be
more effective.

In some instances in which it appears that little progress
is being made in therapy, it turns out that the therapist
has selected a tangential problem. The cognitive
therapist should be alert to this possibility, especially
during the early stages of therapy. When there appears
to be little or no significant change in depression level,
even when the patient seems to have made considerable
progress in a problem area, the therapist should consider
the possibility that the most distressing problem
has not yet been uncovered. A typical example of this
kind of difficulty is the patient who presents difficulty
at work as the major problem, when it turns out that
relationship problems are contributing significantly to
the work difficulties. The real issue may be avoided by
the patient because it seems too threatening.

Finally, cognitive therapy is not for everyone. If the
therapist has tried all available approaches to the problem
and has consulted with other cognitive therapists, it
may be best to refer the patient to another therapist with
either the same or a different orientation.

Regardless of why therapy is not progressing satisfactorily,
cognitive therapists should attend to their own
affect and cognitions. They must maintain a disciplined,
problem-solving stance. If the cognitive therapist finds
him/herself unduly influenced by a patient’s despair or
begins to notice that his/her own schemas are triggered
by therapeutic interactions, then he/she should seek supervision.
Hopelessness in patients or therapists is an
obstacle to problem solving. If therapists can effectively
counteract their own negative self-assessments and
other dysfunctional thoughts, then they will be better
able to concentrate on helping patients find solutions to
their problems.

Case Study of Denise: Nonchronic Depression

In the case study that follows, we describe the course
of treatment for a nonchronically depressed woman
seen at our Center. Through the case study, we illustrate
many of the concepts described earlier in this
chapter, including elicitation of automatic thoughts, the
cognitive triad of depression, collaborative empiricism,
structuring a session, and feedback.


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

Assessment and Presenting Problems

At the initial evaluation, Denise, a 59-year-old widow,
reported that she had been living alone for the last year.
Denise’s husband had been diagnosed with brain cancer
three years earlier and had died approximately 1 year
ago. She had two grown, unmarried children (27 and 25
years old) who were pursuing careers in other parts of
the country. Denise had an undergraduate degree and
had worked until age 30 but stopped after marrying.
Denise described her major problems as depression
(over the last year and a half), difficulty coping with
daily life, and loneliness. She reported one prior episode
of major depression around age 25, following the
death of her father.

Denise said she had become increasingly socially
isolated with the onset of her husband’s illness (brain
cancer). She reported having had normal friendships as
a child, teenager, and young adult. She and her husband
had led a relatively quiet life together, with a focus on
raising their children and their respective work. When
they had free time, they had enjoyed intellectual and
cultural activities together (museums, lectures, concerts,
and fine restaurants). The few close friends with
whom they socialized had retired to Florida and Arizona
during the time of the husband’s illness.

Denise was diagnosed with a major depressive disorder,
recurrent. Her test scores verified the diagnosis of
depression. Denise’s BDI-II score was 28, placing her
in the moderate to severe range of depression. Her most
prominent depressive symptoms included loss of pleasure,
irritability, social withdrawal, inability to make
decisions, fatigue, guilt, difficulty motivating herself to
perform daily functions, and loneliness.

Session I

The session began with Denise describing the “sad
feelings” she was having. The therapist almost immediately
started to elicit Denise’s automatic thoughts
during these periods.

tHeraPist: What kind of thoughts went through your
mind when you had these sad feelings this past week?

Denise: Well, I guess I’m thinking what’s the point of
all this. My life is over. It’s just not the same. I have
thoughts like “What am I going to do?” Sometimes I
feel mad at him, you know, my husband. How could
he leave me? . . . Isn’t that terrible of me? What’s

wrong with me? How can I be mad at him? He didn’t
want to die a horrible death. I should have done
more. I should have made him go to the doctor when
he first started getting headaches. . . . Oh, what’s the
use?

tHeraPist: It sounds like you are feeling quite bad
right now. Is that right?

Denise: Yes.

tHeraPist: Keep telling me what’s going through your
mind right now?

Denise: I can’t change anything. It’s over. I don’t
know. . . . It all seems so bleak and hopeless. What do
I have to look forward to . . . sickness and then death?

tHeraPist: So one of the thoughts is that you can’t
change things, and that it’s not going to get any better?


Denise: Yes.

tHeraPist: And sometimes you believe that completely?
Denise: Yeah, I believe it, sometimes.

tHeraPist: Right now do you believe it?

Denise: I believe it—yes.

tHeraPist: Right now you believe that you can’t
change things and it’s not going to get better?
Denise: Well, there is a glimmer of hope, but it’s mostly
. . .
tHeraPist: Is there anything that you kind of look forward
to in terms of your own life from here on?

Denise: Well, what I look forward to . . . I enjoy seeing
my kids, but they are so busy right now. My son is
a lawyer and my daughter is in medical school. So,
they are very busy. They don’t have time to spend
with me.

By inquiring about Denise’s automatic thoughts, the
therapist began to understand her perspective—that she
would go on forever, mostly alone. This illustrates the
hopelessness about the future that is characteristic of
most depressed patients. A second advantage to this
line of inquiry is that the therapist introduced Denise
to the idea of looking at her own thoughts, which is
central to cognitive therapy.

As the session continued, the therapist probed Denise’s
perspective regarding her daily life. The therapist
chose to focus on her inactivity and withdrawal. This is


Cognitive Therapy for Depression

frequently the first therapeutic goal in working with a
severely depressed patient.

In the sequence that follows, the therapist guided
Denise to examine the advantages and disadvantages
of staying in her house all day.

Denise: Usually I don’t want to leave my house. I want
to stay there and just keep the shades closed; you
know, I don’t want to do anything. I just want to keep
everything out, keep everything away from me.

tHeraPist: Now, do you feel better when you stay in
the house all day trying to shut everything out?
Denise: Sort of . . .

tHeraPist: What do you mean?

Denise: Well, I can watch TV all day and just lose myself
in these silly shows. I feel better when I see other
people and their problems on these shows. It makes
me feel less lonely and like my problems aren’t so
bad.

tHeraPist: And so how much time do you spend doing
that?

Denise: Now, lately? . . . Most of the time. Staying inside
and watching TV feels safe, sort of secure, everything
. . . like my loneliness, feels more distant.

tHeraPist: Now, after you have spent some time like
this, how do you feel about yourself?
Denise: Afterwards? I usually try not to pay much attention
to how I’m feeling.

tHeraPist: But when you do, how do you feel?

Denise: I feel bad. I feel bad for wasting the day. I don’t
get to things that I need to take care of . . . like my
bills, like cleaning, like taking a shower. I usually
end up feeling kind of pathetic . . . and guilty.

tHeraPist: On the one hand you seem to feel soothed
and on the other hand, afterwards, you’re a bit critical
of yourself?

Note that the therapist did not try to debate or exhort
Denise to get out of the house or become involved with
necessary daily tasks. Rather, through questioning, the
therapist encouraged her to examine more closely her
assumption that she was really better off watching TV
all day in her house. This is the process we call “collaborative
empiricism.” By the second session, Denise
had reexamined her hypothesis about watching TV and
remaining in the house all day.

Denise: About watching TV in the house versus getting
out, I thought about that the other day. I remember
telling you that it made me feel better to stay
there. When I paid attention to what I really felt, it
didn’t make me feel better. It just kind of blocked out
feeling bad, but I didn’t feel better.

tHeraPist: It is funny then that when you talked about
it, your recollection of the experience was more positive
than it actually was, but that sometimes happens
with people. It happens to me, too. I think that something
is good that’s not so hot when I actually check
it out.

We now return to the first session. After some probing
by the therapist, Denise mentions that it sometimes
feels like cognitive therapy “is my last hope.” The therapist
uses this as an opportunity to explore her hopelessness
and suicidal thinking.

tHeraPist: What was going through your mind when
you said, “This is my last hope”? Did you have some
kind of vision in your mind?

Denise: Yeah, that if this doesn’t work, I feel like I
couldn’t take living like this the rest of my life.

tHeraPist: If it doesn’t work out, then what?

Denise: Well, I don’t really care what happens to
me . . .

tHeraPist: Did you have something more concrete in
mind?

Denise: Well, right this minute I don’t think I could
commit suicide, but if I keep feeling this way for a
long time, maybe I could. I don’t know, though—
I’ve thought about suicide before, but I have never
really thought about how I would do it. I know certain
things stop me, like my kids. I think it would
really hurt them and some other people, too, like my
mother. My mom is in good health now, but she may
need me someday. . . . Yeah, those are the two things
that stop me, my children, and my mother.

tHeraPist: Now those are the reasons for not committing
suicide. Now what are some of the reasons why
you might want to, do you think?

Denise: Because sometimes it just feels so empty and
hopeless. There’s nothing to look forward to—every
day is the same. My life is such a waste, so why not
just end it?


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

The therapist wanted Denise to feel as free as possible
to discuss suicidal thoughts; thus, he tried hard to
understand both the reasons for her hopelessness and
the deterrents to suicide. After determining that she
had no imminent plans to make an attempt, the therapist
said that he would work with her to make some
changes. He then asked her to select a small problem
that they could work on together.

tHeraPist: Now are there any small things that you
could do that would affect your life right away?

Denise: I don’t know. Well, I guess just calling my
friend Diane in Florida. She called about a month
ago and then again last week. Both times I told her I
was busy and would call her back, but I haven’t. I’ve
felt so down. I have nothing to say to her.

tHeraPist: Well, when she lived in the area, what
kinds of things did you talk about?

Denise: We have kids about the same age, so we would
talk about our kids. We both like to read and we
used to go to a book club together—so we would
talk about the books we were reading. Both of us
liked art. We used to attend lectures at the museum
during the week, so we would talk about art and the
lectures. We would spend time making plans to do
things together in our free time. It always was very
interesting when I spent time and with her. We had
so much in common. I do miss her.

tHeraPist: It sounds like you used to be involved in
a number of interesting activities. What about now?

Denise: After my husband got sick and then my friends
moved, I just stopped. I haven’t done any of those
things in quite a while.

tHeraPist: What do you think about attending a lecture
series now?

Denise: I don’t know.

tHeraPist: Well, what do you think about that idea?

Denise: It’s an OK idea, but it just seems like too much.
I don’t think I’ll enjoy it . . . the way I feel . . . I don’t
know.

tHeraPist: Would you be willing to test out that
thought that you won’t be able to enjoy it now?

Denise: I don’t know . . . I guess so.

tHeraPist: Is that a “yes”?

Denise: Yes, but I don’t see how I’m going to get myself
to do it.

tHeraPist: Well, how would you go about finding out
about a lecture series?

Denise: You look online at the museum’s website to
see what’s available.

tHeraPist: OK. Do you have a computer?

Denise: Yes.

tHeraPist: Is it working?

Denise: Yes.

tHeraPist: How do you feel about doing that?

Denise: I guess I could do that. . . . I’m so pathetic, I
know what to do. I don’t need you to spell it out for
me. Why didn’t I just do this before?

tHeraPist: Well, you probably had good reasons for
not doing it before. Probably you were just so caught
up in the hopelessness.

Denise: I guess so.

tHeraPist: When you are hopeless you tend to deny,
as it were, or cut off possible options or solutions.

Denise: Right.

tHeraPist: When you get caught up in hopelessness
then, there is nothing you can do. Is that what you
think?

Denise: Yeah.

tHeraPist: So, then, rather than be down on yourself
because you haven’t looked this up online before,
why don’t we carry you right through?

This excerpt illustrates the process of graded tasks
that is so important in the early stages of therapy with a
depressed patient. The therapist asked the patient a series
of questions to break down the process of attending
a lecture series into smaller steps. Denise realized that
she had known all along what to do, but, as the therapist
pointed out, her hopelessness prevented her from seeing
the options.

Denise: Taking this step is going to be hard for me.

tHeraPist: First steps are harder for everybody, but
that’s why there is an old expression: “A journey of a
thousand miles starts with the first step.”

Denise: That’s very true.

tHeraPist: It’s the first step that is so very important,
and then you can ready yourself for the second step,
and then the third step, and so on. Eventually, you
build up some momentum, and each step begins to


Cognitive Therapy for Depression

follow more naturally. But first, all you have to do
is take one small step. You don’t have to take giant
steps.

Denise: Well, yeah, I can see that. I guess I was thinking
every step was just as hard as the first. Maybe it
will get easier.

In the second session, Denise reported success.

Denise: I checked online about the lecture series and I
surprised myself. One actually sounded interesting,
and I’m thinking that I might just register for it online.
I really didn’t think any of those feelings were
still there. I’m kind of looking forward to that next
step.

At the end of the first session, the therapist helped
Denise fill out the Weekly Activity Schedule for the
coming week. The activities were quite simple, such as
getting up and taking a shower, fixing meals, going out
shopping, and checking out the lecture series online.
Finally, the therapist asked Denise for feedback about
the session and about her hopelessness.

tHeraPist: Do you have any reactions?

Denise: I’m still feeling down, but I’m also feeling a
little better. It’s interesting that just the idea of looking
at what lectures might be available is making me
feel a little lighter. I even had the thought of calling
Diane to talk over the options. . . . Is this a sign of
better things to come?

tHeraPist: What do you think?

Denise: Maybe.

Session 2

In the second session, the therapist began by collaborating
with Denise to set an agenda. Denise wanted to
discuss the fact that she had not been attending to her
bills or to her housework and was still spending a good
part of the day alone in front of the TV; the therapist
utilized this as an opportunity to discuss the issue of
activity versus inactivity on the agenda. They then reviewed
the previous homework. Denise had carried out
all the scheduled activities and had also listed some of
her negative thoughts in between sessions. Her BDI-II
score had dropped somewhat. (Patients routinely fill
out the BDI-II before each session, so that both patient
and therapist can monitor the progress of treatment.)

Denise then shared her list of negative thoughts with
the therapist. One concern was that she had expressed
angry feelings about her husband during the first session.


Denise: I don’t like revealing things about myself, but
you told me to write down my thoughts. So here it is.
When I went to bed the night after of our first session,
I thought about what I said to you, you know,
about being angry at my husband. I was thinking
that you probably think I am this really harsh and
cold person. I mean, here my husband died this horrible
death and I have this hard, insensitive reaction.
I started thinking that now you probably feel really
negatively toward me because of that statement and
that you don’t want to work with me.

tHeraPist: I’m really glad you’re telling me these
thoughts. Let me start by asking you who is having
these negative thoughts?

Denise: You? Well, no. Actually, it’s me.

tHeraPist: Right. Do you think that someone like me
might have another reaction to what you said?

Denise: I don’t know. I mean it is pretty harsh being
angry at someone who had no control over what was
happening.

The therapist then offered Denise an alternative perspective:


tHeraPist: Do you think that someone might react to
your statements with empathy?

Denise: How could they?

tHeraPist: I imagine it would be very upsetting and
annoying to have lost both your husband and your
friends—all around the same time. Even though you
love and care about all of them, feeling angry is understandable.
It sounds like a basic human reaction
to some very difficult life events.

Denise: Yeah, I guess that does make sense. Thanks.

This illustrates how a cognitive therapist can utilize
events during the session to teach a patient to identify
automatic thoughts and to consider alternative interpretations.
In addition, the therapist provided a summary
of a key theme he had identified from listening
to Denise’s automatic thoughts about her husband and
about therapy. The theme was her fear of being harshly
judged and potentially punished for her statement (pu



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

nitiveness schema). Cognitive therapists often identify

and begin to correct EMSs during the first phase of

treatment. More intensive work on changing schemas

in a later phase of treatment may be required to inocu


late against relapse. We elaborate on this process in the

next section of this chapter.
In the segment that follows, the therapist explained

how he arrived at the conclusion that punitiveness was

an important schema for Denise.

tHeraPist: When you said that you thought I would
have a negative opinion about you and not want to
work with you because you said you felt angry at
your husband, it sounded as though you were really
concerned that you would be harshly judged and
punished for your statements.

Denise: Yes, that’s right.

tHeraPist: I don’t want to make too much out of this at
the moment, but you also said that after your friends
had moved, you felt angry at them and judgmental
of their decision. Even though you knew that each
set of friends had to move for specific financial or
health reasons and had been in the process of completing
their moves over several years, part of you
still felt very angry with them. You mentioned that
you strongly believe that friends should be there for
each other, especially in times of great need, and if
a friend lets another friend down, that relationship
should end. Is that right?

Denise: Right.

tHeraPist: So here, you largely have withdrawn from
these important relationships and now you’re feeling
quite lonely. The thought of talking to these friends
again brings fears that they will now be angry and
punitive with you for your reaction to them. You’re
caught in a no-win situation. Is that right?

Denise: Yes, that sounds right.

tHeraPist: So one of the things that can really grab
hold of you—and make you feel terrible—is this notion
that people, including yourself, should behave
in specific ways, and if they or you don’t behave the
“right” way, then harsh punishment should result. Is
that correct?

Denise: Yes, that sounds right. But hearing you say it
makes me realize that it doesn’t really sound right.

tHeraPist: What do you mean?

Denise: It’s too extreme. It’s too harsh. People are

human and they have limitations, and they make
mistakes sometimes.

tHeraPist: It’s good that you are starting to notice
and evaluate these thoughts rather than just responding
to them automatically. What this tells us is that
you have to be alert for whenever you have the sense
that either you or others should be strongly punished
for not behaving in a specified way. The idea that
people should not be cut a break, even under very
difficult circumstances, may not work very well in
real life with real people. You mentioned that both
friends told you they felt terrible about leaving you
at this time, and both have called you regularly since
leaving the area. Do you think that if you begin to
respond to and return their calls, they might react
differently—in the same way that I reacted differently
from what you expected?

Denise: Yes, that is very likely.

About halfway through the session, the therapist
asked the patient for feedback thus far.

tHeraPist: Now, at this point, is there anything that
we have discussed today that bothered you?
Denise: That bothered me?

tHeraPist: Yeah.

Denise: I feel like I’m a bit of a freak.

tHeraPist: That is important. Can you . . .

Denise: Well, I’m trying not to feel that way, but I do.

tHeraPist: Well, if you are, you are. Why don’t you
just let yourself feel like a freak and tell me about it?

Denise: Well, I’m feeling like I’m just so different from
everyone else. Other people don’t seem to have my
problems. They’re still happily married and carrying
on with life. I just feel so different from everyone.

This comment led to identification of a third theme,
the social isolation/alienation schema. Denise had been
viewing herself as increasingly different for the past
couple of years. By this point, however, she was beginning
to catch on to the idea of answering her thoughts
more rationally. After the therapist pointed out the
negative thought in the preceding excerpt, the patient
volunteered:

Denise: I know what to do with the thought “I’m a
freak.”


Cognitive Therapy for Depression

tHeraPist: What are you going to do with it right this
minute?

Denise: I am going to say to myself, “I’m not so different
from other people. Other people have lost their
mates. I’m not the only one. I’m just the first one in
my group of friends. Eventually, they will all have
the same situation as me. It’s just a part of life.” Seeing
you for help doesn’t mean I’m a freak. You probably
see lots of people and help them with problems
like mine.

tHeraPist: Right.

The same automatic thoughts arose later in the session,
when Denise noticed the therapist’s wedding ring.
In the extended excerpt below, the therapist helped her
set up an experiment to test the thought “I’m so different
from him.”

tHeraPist: OK, now let’s just do an experiment and
see if you yourself can respond to the automatic
thought, and let’s see what happens to your feeling.
See if responding rationally makes you feel worse
or better.

Denise: OK.
tHeraPist: OK. “I’m so different from him.” What is
the rational answer to that? A realistic answer?
Denise: You are wearing a wedding ring and that is
different from me because I’m alone, without a mate.

tHeraPist: Yes. And?

Denise: And? . . . I don’t really know much about you,
other than you’re married. I guess from what I do
know, that information could also be viewed as a
similarity. We both have gotten married and know
what it’s like to be married. I assume that you’ve
never lost a mate, but maybe that is not true. You
may have lost a mate as well.

tHeraPist: So, is it that you’re different or that I’m different?
Or is it that we just have different situations
with respect to our mates at this point in time?

Denise: We just have different situations right now.

The preceding exchange demonstrates the use of reattribution.
At first, Denise interpreted the therapist’s
ring as evidence that they were very different. As a result
of the guided discovery approach, she reattributed
the difference to one of two factors: that either she or
the therapist was different or that the situation with re


spect to mates was different for each. At the end of the
experiment, Denise expressed satisfaction that she was
finally recognizing this tendency to distort her appraisals.


Denise: Right now I feel glad. I’m feeling a little better
that at least somebody is pointing these things out to
me. I never realized I was so judgmental of myself
and other people, and that I’m assuming I’m so different
from everyone.

tHeraPist: So you feel good that you have made this
observation about yourself?

Denise: Yes.

After summarizing the main points of the second
session, the therapist assigned homework for the coming
week: to fill out the Daily Record of Dysfunctional
Thoughts (see Figure 7.4) and the Weekly Activity
Schedule (with mastery and pleasure ratings; see Figure
7.3).

Session 3

By the beginning of the third session, Denise’s mood
had visibly improved. She had registered for a lecture
series at the museum and was looking forward
to attending the first lecture. She also had called her
friend Diane, with very positive results. She was catching
negative and punitive thoughts toward others and
herself and challenging these thoughts. The primary
agenda item Denise chose to work on was “how I back
away from other people,” an aspect of her unrelenting
standards, punitiveness, and social isolation/alienation
schemas.

Denise: I want to stop withdrawing from people. I want
to be more accepting and engaged with others.

tHeraPist: What holds you back?

Denise: I guess I believe that I have to be a bit removed
and strict in relation to others or they’ll just behave
in whatever way they want. People have to know my
rules and abide by them if they want to have a relationship
with me.

The therapist continued probing to understand why
Denise believed she had to have others adhere to such a
strict set of rules to have a relationship. As the discussion
progressed, it became obvious that, in the abstract,


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

she could see that such hard-and-fast rules were not
necessarily conducive to having a good relationship—
in fact, such rules sometimes put others off. But in reallife
situations, Denise never felt she was wrong.

The therapist’s next task was to help Denise bring
her rational thinking to bear on her distorted thinking
in the context of a concrete event. At the therapist’s
request, Denise then described a conversation with
her friend Diane, and how her intolerance for Diane’s
deviation from her rules created distance. Denise had
wanted Diane and her husband to come for a visit the
following summer. Diane, however, told her that their
dog had been quite sick, and that if the dog was still
alive she could not leave it. Denise thought this was
ridiculous. She believed a relationship with a pet should
never take precedence over a human relationship. This
occurred when Denise actually had wanted and hoped
to get closer to Diane again. The therapist helped her
use logic to evaluate her maladaptive schema.

tHeraPist: You had the thought “I’m right to set the
record straight with her. She can’t put me in second
place to her dog. She can’t do that without consequence.”
It seems likely that you believed that
thought, and that you believed the thought was right.
And since you believed that thought was right, you
then felt you had to withdraw your affection from her
if she didn’t abide by your wishes.

Denise: Right.

tHeraPist: Now, let’s look at it. Do you think that
thought is correct?

Denise: Well, yes, it’s insulting.

tHeraPist: What’s insulting?

Denise: She’s putting her dog in a higher priority position.


tHeraPist: Have you ever had a pet?

Denise: No.

tHeraPist: Do you think that maybe Diane feels like
her dog is a part of her family?
Denise: I never thought of it that way.

tHeraPist: If you look at the situation from that perspective,
how do you feel?

Denise: I feel like I’m being a little insensitive. . . .
That’s not right. I’m not allowing for any other perspective.
I’ve never had a pet, so I don’t really know
what it’s like to have a pet. It’s not right for me to be

so judgmental of Diane. I need to be more understanding.
I wasn’t very caring. I am actually behaving
in a way that goes directly against my deepest
values.

tHeraPist: So, according to your own values, was this
right?

Denise: No, it’s not right. I wasn’t respecting her feelings.
I was just demanding that she respect mine.
That wasn’t right.

tHeraPist: OK, now this is one of the problems. If you
want to get over this sense that you should never give
in or bend your rules for others, one of the things you
can do is look for this thought, “I’m right and you
should have a negative consequence for your ‘wrong’
decision”—and refer back to this conversation we are
having now and decide for yourself whether, indeed,
you were right. Now, if every time you approach a
conflict in a relationship and allow for the possibility
that you might not fully understand, but really think
underneath, “But I know I’m right,” you are going
to feel put out, and then you are not going to want to
engage with that person. Is that right?

Denise: Yeah, that sounds right.

tHeraPist: So we have to decide here and now. Do you
indeed think that you are right to suspend your initial
negative judgment to leave open the possibility of re


evaluating your reaction to her behavior?

Denise: Yes.

tHeraPist: Now, the next time you get the thought,
“I’m right and I’m going to make sure this other
person knows it,” how are you going to answer that
thought?

Denise: If I’m right? But I’m not necessarily right. I
need to consider the other person’s perspective. I
need to try to understand them and then see if what
I’m thinking fits.

tHeraPist: Now are you saying that because that is
the correct answer, or because you really believe it?

Denise: No, I really believe it.

The therapist followed this discussion with a technique
called “point–counterpoint” to help Denise
practice rational responses to her automatic thoughts
even more intensively. In this excerpt, the therapist expressed
Denise’s own negative thinking as Denise tried
to defend herself more rationally.


Cognitive Therapy for Depression

tHeraPist: Now I am going to be like the prosecuting
attorney, and I’ll say, “Now I understand you let your
friend violate one of your rules of friendship. Is that
true?”

Denise: Yes.

tHeraPist: “Now it seems to me that that was a very
bad thing for you to do.”

Denise: No, it wasn’t.

tHeraPist: “You don’t think it was?”

Denise: No, I should try to understand her perspective.

tHeraPist: “Well, you can sit there and say you should
be more understanding, but I thought you said before
that you wanted people to respect you.”

Denise: I do, but I also need to respect others.

tHeraPist: “I know, but now you are saying that you
are going to let her get away with this. What’s next?”

Denise: What’s next can only be a better understanding
of one another. We’ll feel closer.

tHeraPist: “But how can you feel closer if she’s not
respecting your rules of friendship?”

Denise: Maybe my rules are not appropriate in this
situation. I need to learn to be more understanding,
flexible, and tolerant of some deviations from my
rules.

tHeraPist: “But then you’ll lose control of the situation.”


Denise: No, that’s an exaggeration. I don’t need to control
the whole situation. I can still decide what makes
sense. I am still in control of what’s important.

tHeraPist: “How can that be?”

Denise: Because I can respect myself and respect my
friend as well. I don’t have to turn everything into
an either–or situation to try to make her see and do
it my way. That just makes it difficult for her to get
along with me, and I’ll lose out on the relationship in
the long run if I keep on insisting that she either do it
my way or we do nothing.

Finally, the therapist returned to the schema and

asked the patient how much she believed the new per


spective.

tHeraPist: If you’re flexible, you’ll lose control. Now
do you believe that?

Denise: No.

tHeraPist: Do you believe it partially?

Denise: No. In fact, I’m more likely to lose control of
any possibility of getting what I want if I’m so inflexible.
It’s like I lose sight of the importance of the
relationship when I get so stuck on thinking that I
have to be in control and that the other person has to
do it my way.

tHeraPist: OK, so right now, how much do you believe
that?

Denise: Completely.

tHeraPist: 100%?

Denise: Yes.

tHeraPist: You are sure 100%, not 90 or 80%?

Denise: No, 100%.

For the remainder of Session 3, Denise and the
therapist reviewed other instances in which she noticed
that her standards were not flexible and felt the urge to
be punitive when her rules were not met. The session
ended with a summary of the main issues raised in the
first three sessions.

Summary of Initial Sessions

In the first three sessions, the therapist laid the groundwork
for the remainder of treatment. He began immediately
by teaching Denise to identify her negative automatic
thoughts. By doing this, the therapist began to
understand her feelings of hopelessness and to explore
her isolation. By identifying her thoughts in a variety
of specific situations, he was able to deduce several key
schemas that later proved central to Denise’s thinking:
(1) unrelenting standards, (2) punitiveness, and

(3) social isolation/alienation. All appeared to be contributing
to Denise’s social isolation and depression.
The therapist made especially skillful use of Denise’s
thoughts during the second therapy session to help her
see that she was distorting evidence about the therapeutic
interaction and coming to the inaccurate conclusion
that the therapist would be judgmental and punitive
with her, and withdraw positive feelings for her, in the
same way that Denise tends to respond to others.
Beyond identifying thoughts and distortions, the
therapist guided Denise to take concrete steps to overcome
her inactivity and withdrawal. He asked her to
weigh the advantages and disadvantages of staying in
the house all day watching TV; he broke down the task


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

of attending a lecture series at the museum into small,
manageable steps; and he worked with her to develop
an activity schedule to follow during the week.

Finally, the therapist employed a variety of strategies
to demonstrate to Denise that she could test the validity
of her thoughts, develop rational responses, and feel
better. For example, during the course of the three sessions
the therapist set up an experiment, used reattribution,
offered alternative perspectives, and practiced the
point–counterpoint technique.

One final point we want to emphasize is that the primary
therapeutic mode was questioning. Most of the
therapist’s comments were in the form of questions.
This helped Denise to evaluate her own thoughts outside
of the session and prevented her from feeling attacked
by the therapist.

By the end of these initial sessions, Denise reported
being more optimistic that her life could change.

Later Sessions

Denise continued to fill out the Daily Record of Dysfunctional
Thoughts and gathered evidence that she
could relax her standards and be more tolerant of others’
viewpoints and foibles. She discovered that she felt
happier, both with herself and others, as a result.

The therapist set up several experiments with Denise
to test a series of beliefs: that her friends would become
punitive with her when she did not behave perfectly,
and that her relationships would become unpleasant
and undesirable if she relaxed any of her rigid standards
regarding how others should behave in relationships.

Through graded tasks, Denise counteracted her tendency
to withdraw by gradually approaching new and
sometimes unfamiliar situations. When she noticed
herself imposing her standards of behavior on others,
or noticed in herself the urge to become punitive, Denise
practiced more open and accepting behaviors (by
asking open-ended questions that reflected back her
understanding of others’ responses, and by inhibiting
harsh and judgmental statements). She practiced tolerating
the discomfort associated with these new behaviors
until they began to feel more comfortable and
natural.

When Denise terminated therapy, her BDI-II score
was in the normal range. The symptom reduction phase
of treatment was successfully completed in 20 sessions.

The next section describes and includes a case example
of ST for chronic depression.

st for chroNic DePressioN

ST, developed by Young (1990/1999; Young et al.,
2003), can be used with patients who present with recurrent
depressive episodes; dysthymic disorder; early age
onset of depression; early life trauma or adverse family
relations (e.g., the loss of a parent in childhood; sexual,
physical or verbal abuse, neglect, and overprotection);
comorbid personality disorders; or a large number of
EMSs (identified with the YSQ [Young, 2005]).Young
and Klosko (1994) have published a self-help book to
help patients better understand their schemas.

Beck and colleagues (1990, p. 10) have noted that

schemas are difficult to alter. They are held firmly in
place by behavioral, cognitive, and affective elements.
The therapeutic approach must take a tripartite approach.
To take a strictly cognitive approach and try
to argue patients out of their distortions will not work.
Having the patients abreact within the session to fantasies
or recollections will not be successful by itself.
A therapeutic program that addresses all three areas
is essential. A patient’s cognitive distortions serve as
signposts that point to the schema.

As a result, ST represents a significant expansion of
traditional CBT. It places more emphasis on early developmental
patterns and origins, long-term interpersonal
difficulties, the patient–therapist relationship, and
emotion-focused or experiential exercises.

Case Study of Barbara: Chronic Depression

The second case study demonstrates the use of ST with
a chronically depressed patient.

History and Presenting Problems

The patient “Barbara” was an extremely attractive,
46-year-old woman who had been married for the past
20 years to George, a functional alcoholic working on
Wall Street in investment banking. It was the first marriage
for both, but it had been extremely rocky throughout.
Barbara had wanted children in the marriage but
had been unable to conceive naturally. Although fertility
treatments and adoption had been discussed, Barbara
reported that George resisted following through
on these options because he questioned her ability to be
an adequate parent.

At the beginning of George and Barbara’s relationship,
Barbara reported extremely strong sexual chem



Cognitive Therapy for Depression

istry. However, she stated that the chemistry had been
erratic and often disappeared for long periods over the
course of their relationship. She said that she had only
felt real happiness with George in the first few months
of the relationship, when he was extremely generous
and attentive. Her decision to marry George was based
on a feeling that they were meant for each other. They
initially met at a high-end bar, where Barbara had
worked as a cocktail waitress. Once their relationship
was established, however, George continued to spend
most of his free time in cocktail lounges without her, as
she did not like to drink.

At the time she came in for her first interview, Barbara
was spending most of her time in bed or watching
TV. She rarely left the house except to go shopping.
Outings with her mom or friends “to lift her spirits”
often culminated in shopping sprees, followed by extended
verbal berating by George, drunk upon his return
home from the bar, because of what he perceived
as her lack of taste, judgment, and intelligence regarding
purchases. Barbara entered treatment because her
husband told her that she “was driving him crazy with
all her ridiculous behavior” and that she should “go get
fixed.” Barbara acknowledged feeling very depressed.
She stated that this latest episode of depression started
after a particularly upsetting fight with her husband
over adopting a child.

Barbara reported having mild to moderate depression
most of her life, interspersed with multiple episodes of
major depression. She first became aware of feeling
moderately depressed around age 11. An only child, she
initially described her childhood family as “fine.” Barbara
described her mother as extremely attentive and
devoted, a “very good mother who did everything for
me.” Barbara stated that her mother lived for her, but
she also remembered her mother occasionally falling
into depressions. As early as age 6, she recalled that her
mother was emotionally unavailable when depressed.

Barbara described her father as a workaholic who
was almost never home. When he did come home, he
was remote, preferring the solitude of his study over
interacting with her and her mother. If Barbara tried to
engage him as a child, he would upbraid her by calling
her “an annoying simpleton” and demand that she leave
him alone.

Barbara described her first major depressive episode,
which occurred around age 16, after a breakup with her
first serious boyfriend. Later episodes were triggered
by other breakups and the fertility problems.

Barbara scored 29 on the BDI-II, placing her in the

severe range of depression. She also completed the
third edition of the YSQ (Long Form; Young, 2005),
and received very high scores on the Emotional Deprivation,
Defectiveness, Abandonment, Dependence/
Incompetence, Entitlement, Failure, Subjugation, Approval
Seeking, and Negativity/Pessimism schemas.
Her Schema Mode Questionnaire (Young et al., 2008)
indicated that she primarily functioned in the following
modes: Detached Protector, Compliant Surrender,
Punitive Parent, and Vulnerable Child.

At Barbara’s initial consultation, the therapist conducted
additional assessment work through imagery
(a standard assessment procedure for ST). During this
assessment, Barbara was instructed: “Close your eyes
and let your mind float to your earliest memories of
your mother.” Barbara reported painful recollections
of being 6 years old with her mother in bed, depressed
and emotionally unavailable. She reported feeling very
scared and lost at these times. The same imagery exercise
was utilized in a subsequent session in which
Barbara was asked to retrieve an early memory of her
father. In this image, Barbara’s father displayed intolerant,
demeaning, and rejecting behavior toward her as a
child. During the exercise, she reported feeling unacceptable,
ashamed of herself, and unwanted by him.

On the Multimodal Life History Inventory (Lazarus
& Lazarus, 1991), a 15-page assessment tool covering
a wide range of issues dealing with feelings, thoughts,
behaviors, and a variety of other psychotherapeutic issues,
Barbara reported her main problems as depression,
being unhappy with herself, feeling empty and
unloved, and feeling unappreciated. She also listed
the following behaviors as applicable: procrastination,
withdrawal, concentration difficulties, sleep disturbance,
crying, and occasional outbursts of temper. She
further indicated that she often felt sad, depressed, unhappy,
hopeless, useless, and lonely. She endorsed the
following statements: “I don’t know what to do with my
life,” “Life is empty, a waste,” and “There is nothing to
look forward to.”

Based on the initial interview, Barbara was diagnosed
with major depressive disorder, recurrent episode
on Axis I, and dependent personality disorder on
Axis II.

Schema Mode Work

This section demonstrates the use of schema mode
work—an important component of the ST approach—
with Barbara.


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

The therapist shifted to ST because Barbara’s depression
was not lifting with standard cognitive therapy.
Although Barbara had learned how to challenge her
automatic thoughts, identified and challenged her core
beliefs with rational responses, and followed through
on graded behavioral assignments to test her thoughts
and beliefs, she never emotionally accepted the rational
viewpoint, despite much concrete evidence. Barbara
remained convinced that she was worthless, useless,
and hopeless. Her EMSs continued to be stubbornly entrenched.
The therapist decided that the next step would
be to introduce emotion-focused exercises to access
Barbara’s schemas on a deeper emotional level, utilizing
the schema mode approach.

There are seven general steps in schema mode work:

(1) Increase awareness of modes by identifying and labeling
modes with the patient; (2) explore the origins of
modes in childhood and adolescence, and discuss their
adaptive value; (3) link current problems and symptoms
to the patient’s maladaptive modes; (4) uncover
the advantages and disadvantages of each mode; (5) use
imagery to access the Vulnerable Child mode; (6) conduct
dialogues between modes; and (7) generalize the
results from mode work in session to the patient’s life
outside of sessions. The following sections illustrate
each step of mode work in helping Barbara.
Step 1: Increase Awareness of Modes by Identifying
and Labeling Modes with the Patient

This first step helps both therapist and patient conceptualize
the problems in terms of different parts of the
self or modes. From the Schema Mode Questionnaire,
the therapist already was aware that Barbara primarily
functioned in the Detached Protector, Compliant Surrenderer,
Punitive Parent, and Vulnerable Child modes.
The session reveals how the therapist queries the patient,
so that she can begin to recognize and differentiate
these parts within herself.

Throughout this section, the patient is encouraged
to label modes with terms that feel right—rather than
simply applying generic terms from the Schema Mode
Questionnaire. Patients are encouraged to find terms
that best capture the thoughts, emotions, and/or behaviors
associated with each mode. A primary goal
with this first step is to help the patient observe these
parts, and decenter him/herself from them. This step
begins the process of interrupting the automaticity of
the modes.

tHeraPist: I’m noticing in our sessions that sometimes
you seem very sad and upset and critical of
yourself, and other times you seem a bit distracted
from what you’re feeling, like when you were telling
me about the great pair of shoes that you found on
your shopping trip.

BarBara: Yeah, I guess that’s true. Talking about my
purchases makes me feel better.

tHeraPist: When you say “better,” what do you mean?

BarBara: I feel good.

tHeraPist: Like happy, peaceful, and content?

BarBara: I feel pleasure.

tHeraPist: In what way is it pleasurable?

BarBara: I feel pleasure when I look at pretty things
with my mom or my friends, and I like buying those
things. It takes my mind off of everything else.

tHeraPist: Like you’re temporarily distracted from
other feelings?

BarBara: Yeah, that’s right.

tHeraPist: What are those other feelings?

BarBara: Just feeling real bad. I can’t stand those feelings.


tHeraPist: So, sometimes there is this one part of you
that just wants distance from this other part of you
that feels bad?

BarBara: Yes.

tHeraPist: Are there other things you do besides

shopping that help you distance from bad feelings?

BarBara: Well, yeah, I sleep a lot.

tHeraPist: Anything else?

BarBara: I watch TV, but TV doesn’t always work.

tHeraPist: This part of you that wants distance from

feeling bad—what could we call that part of you?
BarBara: That part of me? I don’t know. I don’t know

what to call it.

tHeraPist: What does it feel like?

BarBara: It feels like I’m escaping.

tHeraPist: OK. So should we call that part “the Es


capist”?

BarBara: I guess so. . . . That sounds right.

tHeraPist: And the part of you that you’ve escaped

from—can you tell me more about that part of you?


Cognitive Therapy for Depression

BarBara: That part feels bad . . . really bad and terrible.


tHeraPist: Let me hear that part speak about those
feelings.

BarBara: I’m just a bad person (Starts to cry.) ... I’m
a useless good for nothing. I feel so hopeless. I don’t
know what to do. I can’t figure anything out. I’m
such a zero, such a failure. . . . Do we really have to
talk about this?

tHeraPist: Barbara, I know that it feels bad to be in
touch with this part of yourself, but if you can hang
in there for just a bit, it will help me to understand
why you’re feeling so bad. Do you know what this
part of you wants?

BarBara: I want to feel good.

tHeraPist: What do you think would help you feel
better?

BarBara: I don’t know. I really don’t know. I just want
you to fix me. My husband is right. I am a ridiculous
person.

tHeraPist: It sounds like there is one part of you that
feels really awful. It sounds like this part is listening
and taking in what your husband says about you—
that “you’re ridiculous.” I want you to hold back on
agreeing with your husband, and I want to hear more
about this part of you that feels awful—the part of
you who wants everything fixed. That part . . . do
you feel it?

BarBara: Yes, I feel it.

tHeraPist: Tell me more. What are the things you
want to fix?

BarBara: I don’t know. I just want to feel good about
myself, proud of myself, but I just don’t. I want to
have a child, but my husband doesn’t think I can
handle it. He’s probably right. I need so much help
with just everyday living. I don’t know how to handle
anything.

tHeraPist: So this part of you, this part that feels
awful and helpless but also wants to feel better, what
could we call this part?

BarBara: I don’t know. What do you think?

tHeraPist: Well, what does it feel like?

BarBara: It feels helpless—ashamed and helpless.

tHeraPist: How old do you feel when you’re in touch
with this part of yourself?

BarBara: I feel young, very young.

Therapist: Do you want to call that part “Ashamed
Little Barbara” [Vulnerable Child mode with associated
EMSs of Defectiveness, Dependence/Incompetence,
and Enmeshment/Undeveloped Self]?

BarBara: Sure.

tHeraPist: OK. And now this other part—the one that
is agreeing with your husband and calling yourself
ridiculous . . .

BarBara: Well, I am ridiculous and silly. I can’t cope
with anything.

tHeraPist: Before you agree with that part, I want you
to just notice how that part sounds. How does that
part sound to you? Does it sound critical?

BarBara: Yes, but I deserve it. I’m so useless.

tHeraPist: It sounds like you are having a hard time
just listening to that part without automatically
agreeing with it?

BarBara: Yeah, I guess that’s true.

tHeraPist: So, what do you want to call that part?

BarBara: I don’t know. . . . But . . . you’re not going to
tell me what to call it, are you?

tHeraPist: Right.

BarBara: OK. I guess “the Critic” [Punitive Parent
mode with associated EMSs of defectiveness and
subjugation].

In this part of the session, the therapist has helped
Barbara begin to recognize and label the modes: the Detached
Protector as “the Escapist,” the Punitive Parent
as “the Critic,” and the Vulnerable Child as “Ashamed
Little Barbara.” Although not fully illustrated here,
the therapist also used a similar sequence of questions
to help Barbara identify other modes. From this portion
of the session, it is clear that “the Critic” (Punitive
Parent mode) is generating a tremendous amount
of negative affect in Barbara. Barbara’s only apparent
way to cope with the onslaught of punitive statements
from this mode is “the Escapist” (Detached Protector
mode), in which she sleeps away much of her life. Otherwise,
Barbara’s primary experience of herself rests
with “Ashamed Little Barbara” (the Vulnerable Child
mode), where she feels defective, useless, hopeless, and
helpless.


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

Step 2: Explore Origins of Modes in Childhood
and/or Adolescence

This section illustrates how the therapist helps Barbara
recognize the origins of these modes. In addition, the
therapist assesses the strength of her Healthy Parent
mode.

tHeraPist: Does “the Critic” sound like anyone else
you know or have known in your life?

BarBara: Yes, it sounds like George.

tHeraPist: Anyone else?

BarBara: Yeah, it also sounds like my Dad . . . just
like my Dad.

tHeraPist: In what way?

BarBara: My Dad used to talk like that to me . . .
whenever I tried to get his attention.

tHeraPist: How old were you?

BarBara: Young, very young . . . 3 or 4 . . . as far back
as I remember.

tHeraPist: Can you close your eyes and try to let yourself
feel like that young child again with your dad?

BarBara: (Closes her eyes.)

tHeraPist: Tell me what’s happening.

BarBara: He’s yelling at me because I pulled on his
coat jacket.

tHeraPist: Let me hear what he’s saying to you.

BarBara: “Stop it, you little pest. You’re such a simpleton.
Can’t you find anything better to do than pull
on my coat? Get out of here!”

tHeraPist: And how are you feeling as he is yelling
these things at you?

BarBara: I feel stupid, like I’m a jerk. I’m nothing—a
useless pest, an annoyance.

tHeraPist: Does it feel like he’s right, or are you angry
at him?

BarBara: No. I don’t feel angry. I just feel bad (starts
to cry)—I’m just bad.

tHeraPist: So there is part of you agreeing with him,
punishing yourself—like your dad—thinking you’re
bad.

BarBara: Yeah.

tHeraPist: And where is your mom?

BarBara: She’s telling me to shush and leave him

alone. She says he’s tired from working so hard all
day.

tHeraPist: And what are you thinking and feeling
when she says this?

BarBara: I’m thinking that I’m a terrible person.

tHeraPist: So, you’re getting the message that you are
the problem from both of your parents. It feels like
both parents are saying you deserve this harsh treatment,
and there is a part of you that believes them—
you deserve to be punished because you’ve bothered
your father. Is that right?

BarBara: Yes, that’s right.

tHeraPist: So there is also this punishing part of you,
this part that accepts that message from your parents—
this punitive message that you’re bad and a

problem, a pest.

BarBara: Yes.

tHeraPist: What is your mom doing?

BarBara: After a while, she takes me out. She sees
I’m sad and wants me to feel better. She tries to make
me feel better by giving me something, like a toy,
or something to eat. A lot of times she takes me out
shopping and buys me something special.

tHeraPist: And how do you feel when she does this?

BarBara: I feel a little better while we are out . . . but
later, I feel bad. I still feel shame because I’m so bad
and useless.

tHeraPist: So there is still the “Ashamed Little Bar


bara” underneath?

BarBara: Yes. That is it.

tHeraPist: If you could have rewritten the script for

your family, a family with ideal parents, what would
you have happen?

BarBara: I have no idea. They weren’t bad. They were
doing their best.

tHeraPist: Yes, but what if you had had a daddy who
was excited to see you at the end of his work day . . .
a daddy who enjoyed coming home to his family . . .
who found pleasure in talking with you and getting
to know you, and played with you?

BarBara: You mean . . . a daddy who loved me?

tHeraPist: Yes. I mean a daddy who was able to show
you his love through all sorts of actions.

BarBara: Wow . . . that would have been so different.


Cognitive Therapy for Depression

tHeraPist: Do you feel any angry feelings at him now
as you think about how he spoke to you—this very
young child simply trying to get his attention?

BarBara: No, I was in his way. He worked hard. I had
to leave him alone.

tHeraPist: What you just said—does that sound like
anyone you know?

BarBara: Yes. It sounds like my mother.

tHeraPist: And what do you think of that now?

BarBara: Well. She was just trying to keep the peace
and fill in for him.

tHeraPist: But what about you, this sweet innocent
little child simply wanting what all children want—
love and attention from her father?

BarBara: It’s sad. I feel sad for me.

tHeraPist: Right. It is sad for you. You are a child
doing what all children do—children try to get their
parents’ attention; children want to know they are
loved, valued, appreciated. You were no different
from any other child, but what is happening here?

BarBara: (Cries.)

tHeraPist: No one’s calling your dad on his horrible
behavior toward you. Everyone’s accommodating
him and speaking to you as if you are the problem,
when all that you are doing is what every young child
does. And yet your father and your mother are responding
as if you are the problem.

BarBara: Yeah. You’re right. Why did they do that?

tHeraPist: Do you think there was something wrong
with you, or do you think there was something wrong
with the way they were behaving with you?

BarBara: The way they were behaving with me. . . .
It’s a problem with the way they treated me.

tHeraPist: Right. They are the ones who should feel
shame about their behavior. There was nothing
shameful about you or your behavior.

In the preceding section, the therapist helps Barbara
to realize the origin of “the Critic,” the part of herself
that has accepted her “Punitive Parent” message that
she was the problem. The therapist’s questions and
comments also help Barbara realize that the problem
was actually her parents’ behavior toward her rather
than an inherent defect in herself.

The therapist now turns Barbara’s attention to the
origin of “the Escapist” mode—the part that was seek


ing relief from these terrible feelings about herself as a
child. The therapist also helps Barbara become more
aware that “the Escapist” was only able to provide
short-term relief.

tHeraPist: Now when you had this bad feeling about
yourself as a child, the “Ashamed Little Barbara”
feeling, how did you cope with that feeling? What
did you do?

BarBara: A lot of the time, I did nothing. I just sat
on my bed in my room daydreaming, wishing everything
could be different. I would fantasize being
a star, a beautiful person that everyone adored. People
would dote on me and give me expensive gifts
and clothes that made me look even more beautiful.
Sometimes when my mom would take me out and
buy me things, it kind of felt like she was making
this dream come true.

tHeraPist: Is that “the Escapist” part of you trying to
help you feel better?

BarBara: Yes, it definitely is.

tHeraPist: And then what would happen?

BarBara: I would feel better, especially as I got older
and I got a lot of attention from the way I looked, but
eventually my dad always would start yelling again.
I remember him yelling at my mom for “spending
too much money” simply to turn me into “a pretty
Bimbo.”

tHeraPist: So the efforts to feel better eventually
backfired.
BarBara: Right. I never felt very good for long. I never
felt good inside.

Step 3: Link Current Problems and Symptoms
to Maladaptive Modes

In this section, the therapist asks Barbara questions that
help her to recognize how these modes that developed
in childhood are still operating in the present. Barbara
begins to connect these modes with why she is feeling
so depressed, and she begins to see the repetitive patterns
in her life.

tHeraPist: Let’s look at what is happening now in
your life. Do you recognize any relationship between
what we have been talking about—these different
parts of you—and how you are thinking and feeling
about yourself and coping with your life now?


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

BarBara: Yeah, I’m still trying to feel good—or
just not feel—by being “the Escapist.” When I go
on these shopping sprees and let my mom and my
friends dress me up, it still doesn’t work any better
than it ever did. And sleeping all the time doesn’t
work either.

tHeraPist: What do you mean?

BarBara: Well, I only feel good for a short while.
Then, instead of my dad coming home, now I’m
coming home to George or he’s coming home to me.
George is just as mean and unavailable as my Dad.

tHeraPist: And then what happens?

BarBara: I start to feel really bad again, really depressed.
I feel like I’m not worth spending time with,
like I’m boring and useless. I’m saying all sorts of
bad things about myself and I agree with everything
George says about me. I’m my worst “Critic.” In the
end, I still feel like the same old “Ashamed Little
Barbara” inside who never ever really feels better.
Then, I just want to go to sleep to get away from it
all. I’m finally starting to see it more clearly, going
around and around the same old circle—nothing has
changed and nothing changes. I’ve been miserable
my whole life.

tHeraPist: But there is one very important change.

BarBara: What is that?

tHeraPist: You’re starting to see and understand
what’s been happening for a long time instead of just
being on the treadmill without any awareness.

Step 4: Uncover Advantages and Disadvantages
of Each Mode

The therapist now begins to ask Barbara questions regarding
the advantages and disadvantages of listening
and acting on these different parts of herself. This helps
Barbara to gain more distance from the modes and increases
her awareness of a choice in how she responds.

tHeraPist: When these different parts of yourself or
modes developed, they served a purpose. Why don’t
we talk about each of them and explore their advantages
and disadvantages, both in the past and present?
Let’s start with “the Escapist.”

BarBara: Well, that part lets me feel good—or at least
not feel bad.

tHeraPist: For how long?

BarBara: For a while.

tHeraPist: And in the long run? Does that part help
you feel better?

BarBara: No, not really. I can’t really escape feeling
bad. I can’t say I feel any better in the long run.

tHeraPist: So, is there any advantage to this part of

you—“the Escapist”?

BarBara: I’m mixed about it.

tHeraPist: Sure. I can understand that. If you don’t

know of any other way to feel better, any relief is
better than no relief at all.

BarBara: Yeah.

tHeraPist: But sometimes it’s good to let yourself feel
bad because when you let yourself stay in touch with
your feelings, you often can begin to recognize what
feels better in the long run . . . like finding activities
that are truly interesting to you, or that give you a
sense of accomplishment and purpose, or that bring
out a feeling of deep enjoyment.

BarBara: That makes sense, but I have no idea how to
find those things.

tHeraPist: Well, that is something we can work on
together.

BarBara: That sounds good.

tHeraPist: And what about “the Critic”? Is there any
advantage to listening to “the Critic”?

BarBara: That part tells me what’s wrong with me.

tHeraPist: And what does “the Critic” say is wrong
with you?

BarBara: That I’m stupid and silly, useless and annoying.


tHeraPist: Do you think “the Critic” is right?

BarBara: Of course.

tHeraPist: But if you put the words of “the Critic”
back in your dad’s mouth and listen to him speak to
little 3-year-old Barbara as she excitedly greets him
coming home from work, what do you think?

BarBara: When you put it that way, I think he’s a jerk.
I mean, what does he think he is doing to this poor
little girl? What’s wrong with him?

tHeraPist: Right. So is there any advantage to listening
to these critical words?

BarBara: No . . . no, definitely not.


Cognitive Therapy for Depression

tHeraPist: Are there any disadvantages of listening
to “the Critic”?

BarBara: Yes. It’s getting clearer now why that part is
making me feel so bad. I have to stop listening to that
part. When I accept what my dad said as the truth, I
feel bad, really bad, about myself.

tHeraPist: You mean it brings up that “Ashamed Little
Barbara” feeling?

BarBara: Yes.

tHeraPist: And what about her? What does she need?

BarBara: She needs to feel good about herself. She
needs to hear good things about herself. She needs
someone to listen to her and pay attention to her—to
love her.

tHeraPist: I agree.

Step 5: Use Imagery to Access the Vulnerable
Child Mode

The therapist now begins to engage Barbara in the Vulnerable
Child mode. By accessing this mode, the therapist
and patient can begin to work on the core schemas
that are part of “Ashamed Little Barbara.”

tHeraPist: I know it’s sometimes unpleasant to let
yourself be in touch with “Ashamed Little Barbara,”
but would you be willing to go there, so that we can
get to know that part of you to find out what you need
to truly feel better and to find out what is getting in
the way?

BarBara: I guess . . . (Closes her eyes.)

tHeraPist: Tell me what you are feeling and thinking
right now.

BarBara: It’s the same old feelings—I feel bad . . . and
useless. (Visibly begins to look upset, then opens her
eyes.)

tHeraPist: Can you go back there to “Ashamed Little
Barbara,” can you let yourself feel her?

BarBara: OK. (Closes her eyes again.)

tHeraPist: Where are you? What are you doing?

BarBara: I’m sitting on my bed in my room. My
daddy just told me to go away.

tHeraPist: And how are you feeling?

BarBara: Awful.

tHeraPist: And what do you want?

BarBara: I want my mommy to come in and make me
feel better.

tHeraPist: Where is she?

BarBara: She’s in her room, lying on her bed. She
doesn’t feel good either.

tHeraPist: If you could bring in a healthy mommy to
be with you right now, what would she say to you?
Let me hear her speak to Little Barbara.

BarBara: You know he’s just tired from work. If you
just leave him alone, everything will be all right.

tHeraPist: Let me hear what Little Barbara thinks
about this?

BarBara: That doesn’t help much. I still feel upset and
bad.

tHeraPist: How about if I come in to help?

BarBara: OK.

tHeraPist: You are such a loving little girl. So many
fathers would relish coming home to such a greeting
from their little girl. Something is wrong with your
daddy. Why doesn’t he recognize that you’re offering
him something that is precious—so special? . . . How
does little Barbara feel as she hears this?

BarBara: Better.

tHeraPist: Let me talk to your father now.

BarBara: OK.

tHeraPist: How can you speak to your daughter that
way? She’s done nothing but welcome you home with
joy and love. And look at how you are responding.
Your response to her is completely inappropriate.
You are so closed off and removed from everything.
What is going on with you? Why can’t you see that
you have a beautiful, creative, and loving daughter?
Barbara does not deserve this type of treatment. I’m
not going to stand for this and let you hurt her anymore.
. . . How does little Barbara feel as she hears
this?

BarBara: A lot better. I wish my mom had spoken to
my dad that way. But you know, if you really tried
to say anything like that to him, he wouldn’t listen.
He never listened to my mom. He’d probably just say
something mean to you and then shut the door.

tHeraPist: OK. Well if that happened, what would
you want to happen next?

BarBara: I don’t know.

tHeraPist: Let me step in again and say this to him


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

through the door. Whether or not you choose to listen,
there is a limit, a limit as to how long we will
stay here for you. If you choose not to be here for us,
we will not stay here for you.

BarBara: I don’t think he’ll change.

tHeraPist: Then you and I, together, will leave him
and create a better life.

BarBara: Is that really possible?

tHeraPist: Do you want to make it happen?

BarBara: Yes, but what about him? He’ll be so lonely.

tHeraPist: Who will be lonely?

BarBara: He will, unless we stay.

tHeraPist: But if you stay, who will be lonely then?

BarBara: Me.

tHeraPist: Do you want to continue to be there for
someone who chooses not to be there for you?

BarBara: Well, no—no, that isn’t right.

tHeraPist: So what do you want to do?

BarBara: I want to leave.

In this part of the session, the therapist has taken on
the “Healthy Parent” mode for Barbara because she
does not have a strong template for this mode. This is
one example of what is meant by “limited reparenting.”
In this role, the therapist temporarily steps in to support
the client in relation to unmet basic needs for safety;
stability or predictability; love, nurturance, and attention;
acceptance and praise; empathy; realistic limits;
and validation of feelings and needs. The therapist also
counters and challenges any unreasonable messages
or beliefs that such needs should remain unfulfilled.
As she begins to feel safer and more protected by the
“Healthy Parent” through this work, “Little Barbara”
no longer feels so ashamed of herself.

Step 6: Conduct Dialogues between Modes

Once patients begin to internalize the Healthy Parent
mode demonstrated by the therapist, their own Healthy
Adult mode becomes stronger. The patient’s Healthy
Adult mode can now actively challenge and combat the
Punitive Parent mode, thereby supporting, protecting,
and healing the Vulnerable Child, with the help of the
therapist.

The therapist now addresses the Escapist, or Detached
Protector, mode. In the segment that follows,

the therapist sets up a dialogue between the Vulnerable
Child and Escapist modes.

tHeraPist: How about having “Little Barbara” talk
with “the Escapist” about things that she really enjoys?


BarBara: OK . . . but how do we do that?

tHeraPist: First, I want you to sit on this side of the
couch. When you’re on this side of the couch, I want
you to let yourself get in touch with and speak for
“Little Barbara.” Have “Little Barbara” talk about
all those things that interest her—those things that
interest and excite her and help her feel alive. And
then, I want you to get up and sit on the other side of
the couch. When you’re on this side of the couch, I
want you to let yourself get in touch with and speak
for “the Escapist.” We’ll go back and forth between
those two parts of yourself to see what comes out. I’ll
help out “Little Barbara” if she needs me.

BarBara: [as “Little Barbara”] You know, I once
made a dress at school, and I noticed that I really
liked sewing. It was a really simple pattern, nothing
special, but I had so much fun making it. I think I
might want to take a class to try sewing again.

[as “the Escapist”] Why do you want to do that? If it
doesn’t turn out, you’ll just feel bad about yourself.
People might think you’re ridiculous at this age, trying
to learn to sew. Why take the chance that you’ll
feel bad or stupid? Why don’t you just lie down and
forget about it?

[as “Little Barbara”] But I might like it. If I don’t start
trying the things that I think I might enjoy, I’ll never
know what I like or what makes me happy . . . If I
keep listening to you, I’ll do nothing but sleep away
the rest of my life. I want to have a life.

[as “the Escapist”] I don’t know if it’s worth the risk of
feeling bad.

[as “Little Barbara”] Even if I feel bad at first, it will
only be temporary. Either I’ll get good at sewing or I
can find something else that I’m good at. I’ll eventually
find something if I just keep at it.

[as “the Escapist”] Well OK, suit yourself.

[as “Little Barbara”] I will.


Cognitive Therapy for Depression

At this point, the therapist is focused on helping Barbara
discover what gives her an inner sense of joy and
accomplishment. This task is difficult for Barbara because
she spent so many of her early years dependent
on her mother, not developing any special skills or talents,
and surrendering to what others wanted her to be.
Nevertheless, as previous segment illustrates, Barbara
has begun to recognize the importance of trying out
new activities that interest her, in spite of the temporary
discomfort she may feel about the possibility of failing
and feeling stupid again. The final step in therapy is to
take these lessons she has learned in the sessions and
integrate them into her everyday life experiences.

Step 7: Generalize Results from Mode Work
to Real Life

Barbara decided to enroll in one sewing class and surprised
herself by doing quite well. She then decided to
take two more classes—a more advanced sewing class
and a course in costume design. Following these classes,
she started to volunteer for a local theater group,
working on costumes. Barbara received much attention,
praise, and appreciation from her teachers and theater
friends. At this point in treatment, Barbara commented
to her therapist, “You know, I think this is the first time
I have ever really felt good and proud of myself.”

As Barbara’s confidence and her network of friends
grew, she became less accepting and less tolerant of
George’s neglectful and demeaning behaviors toward
her. She also became increasingly annoyed with her
mother’s pattern of excusing George’s behavior for the
sake of “being financially comfortable.” This was in
stark contrast to Barbara’s unquestioning acceptance of
her relationship with George at the beginning of treatment.


As she began to see parallels between how she felt
with George and how she felt as a child with her parents,
Barbara began to question whether this was a healthy
marriage for her. She recognized that many of George’s
behaviors were damaging to her, just as her parents’
behaviors had been. Although Barbara still wanted to
adopt a child, she began questioning George’s ability to
be a good parent.

The following vignette from a later session in Barbara’s
treatment illustrates how much healthier and assertive
she has become in relation to George:

BarBara: I’m noticing that when George speaks to me
in such a condescending tone, I feel like a little girl

with my father again. I don’t want this. I want to be
treated with love and respect, and as an equal. It isn’t
right for me to accept his behavior—being ignored
and demeaned by someone who is supposed to love
me.

tHeraPist: So what do you want to do?

BarBara: I think I’m ready to confront George about
his drinking and abusive behavior. I can’t even imagine
adopting a child and bringing that child into our
home if he continues to behave this way.

tHeraPist: What do you want to happen?

BarBara: I want him to stop drinking and start treating
me with love and respect.

tHeraPist: And if he doesn’t? Then what?

BarBara: I guess I’ll leave him and seek a divorce.

tHeraPist: And how will that be for you—in the worst
case scenario you might imagine?

BarBara: In the worst case . . . you know, I think I’ll
be OK. I mean, I have my own life now. I have my
own friends. And I have you, if things really get
rough.

tHeraPist: I’ll be here for you whenever you need my
support.

BarBara: Yeah, I think I’ll be OK.

At this point in treatment, Barbara has fully incorporated
the Healthy Adult mode and has healed the most
damaging schemas that had been part of her Vulnerable
Child mode. Along with these changes, Barbara’s
depression went into full remission. Soon after this session,
Barbara confronted her husband. Despite couple
therapy, George refused to make any changes, and Barbara
filed for divorce.

Barbara did experience one relapse of major depression
as her divorce was finalized. “Ashamed Little Barbara”
and “the Escapist” temporarily returned during
this period. Barbara, however, was able to recognize
the reappearance of the Punitive Parent mode and successfully
overcame it with her now stronger Healthy
Adult mode. She was able to empathize with and forgive
herself, and to mourn the lost opportunity to have
her own family. She decided to go back to school and
succeeded in becoming a certified teacher at the high
school level, teaching costume design and drama in
the theater department. She also developed a lasting
relationship with a caring, emotionally available man
who shared her passion for theater. Barbara’s chronic


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

depression lifted, and she has, for the most part, been
symptom free since.

coNclusioN

Evidence demonstrating the efficacy of cognitive therapy
in the treatment of unipolar and bipolar depression
continues to mount. Adolescents, adults, and geriatric
patients have all been shown to benefit from cognitive
therapy.

Cognitive therapy helps patients understand the relationships
among their thoughts, behaviors, and feelings.
Cognitions are “put to the test” by examining
evidence, setting up in vivo experiments, weighing advantages
and disadvantages, trying graded tasks, and
employing other intervention strategies. Through this
process, patients begin to view themselves and their
problems more realistically, to feel better, to change
their maladaptive behavior patterns, and to take steps to
solve real-life difficulties. These changes take place as
a direct result of carefully planned, self-help homework
assignments—one of the hallmarks of cognitive treatment.
Cognitive therapy reduces symptoms by helping
patients to identify and modify automatic thoughts, and
the behaviors associated with them.

An expansion of cognitive therapy called schema
therapy has been developed to deal with the deeper
psychological structures that predispose patients to
chronic depression. After utilizing interventions aimed
at initial symptom reduction, a great deal of subsequent
attention and effort are directed toward identifying
and modifying the underlying schemas and modes that
often predispose individuals to chronic depression.

Following a thorough assessment, an extensive
change component is implemented. During this phase
of treatment, patients come to understand their own
schemas and modes, their developmental origins, and
how these dysfunctional schema patterns are triggered,
reinforced, and maintained.

Throughout the treatment, cognitive therapists maintain
a collaborative alliance with their patients. They
are very active in structuring sessions, yet go to considerable
lengths to help patients reach conclusions on
their own. Cognitive therapists serve as guides, helping
patients maneuver through a labyrinth of dysfunctional
cognitions and life patterns. As a result, patients develop
the psychological tools they need to become more
proactive in making the cognitive, affective, interper


sonal, and behavioral changes that serve to minimize
future episodes of depression.

notes

1. Some researchers have found it useful to differentiate between
“relapse” (the return of symptoms within 6 months
after termination of treatment) and “recurrence” (a whole
new episode of depression, occurring at least 12 months
after treatment has ended; Gelder, 1994; see also Overholser,
1998). However, this distinction has not been uniformly
incorporated into the literature.
2. Reported relapse rates for patients treated with medication
have varied depending on the definition of “relapse,” the
duration of the follow-up period, and the severity of depression
within the patient population (Williams, 1997).
Because of these differences, some of the estimates have
ranged from 34 to 92% (Frank, 1996; Overholser, 1998;
Versiani, 1998; Williams, 1997), though lower rates have
also been reported (Keller & Boland, 1998).
3. The book by Young (1990/1999) cited here and throughout
the chapter, Cognitive Therapy for Personality Disorders:
A Schema-Focused Approach, refers to the third edition.
However, the ideas expressed were developed in 1990, for
the original edition. Similarly, the Young Schema Questionnaire
was developed in 1990, then reprinted in the
third edition.
4. Currently, the concept of a schema domain is not a component
of schema theory. Although early factor-analytic research
supported the grouping of 18 EMSs into five broader
domains, later studies have been inconsistent regarding
how schemas cluster together, and some domains have not
been supported at all. Nevertheless, we have included research
studies that focus on these five domains because the
findings do shed light on the relationship between schemas
and other constructs. We are in the process of reviewing
all of the research available so that we can reexamine the
question of how schemas cluster together.
5. For the remainder of the chapter, we use the term “schema”
to refer specifically to Young’s “early maladaptive
schemas.”
6. Many cognitive therapists also focus on “underlying assumptions,”
which represent cognitions that are “deeper”
than automatic thoughts but less central than schemas or
core beliefs. Underlying assumptions are considered conditional
beliefs, whereas most schemas are unconditional.
In our own work, we have not found this distinction to
be necessary in working with most patients. Thus, conditional
and unconditional beliefs that are enduring and
pervasive can be merged into the broader construct of a
schema.

Cognitive Therapy for Depression

referenCes

Albon, J. S., & Jones, E. E. (2003). Validity of controlled
clinical trials of psychotherapy: Findings from the NIMH
Treatment of Depression Collaborative Research Program.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 159(5), 775–783.

American Psychiatric Association. (1987). Diagnostic and
statistical manual of mental disorders (3rd ed., rev.).
Washington, DC: Author.

American Psychiatric Association. (1994). Diagnostic and
statistical manual of mental disorders (4th ed.). Washington,
DC: Author.

American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and
statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.). Arlington,
VA: Author.

Antonuccio, D. O., Danton, W. G., & DeNelsky, G. Y. (1995).
Psychotherapy versus medication for depression: Challenging
the conventional wisdom with data. Professional
Psychology: Research and Practice, 26(6), 574–585.

Antonuccio, D. O., Thomas, M., & Danton, W. G. (1997). A
cost-effectiveness analysis of cognitive behavior therapy
and fluoxetine (Prozac) in the treatment of depression. Behavior
Therapy, 28, 187–210.

Arnow, B. A., Manber, R., Blasey, C., Klein, D. N., Blalock,

J. A., Markowitz, J. C., et al. (2003). Therapeutic reactance
as a predictor of outcome in the treatment of chronic depression.
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,
71(6), 1025–1035.
Bailleux, S., Romo, L., Kindynis, S., Radtchenko, A., &
Debray, Q. (2008). Study of the bonds between early maladaptive
schemas and strategies of coping (among alcoholdependent
patients and depressed patients). Journal de
Therapie Comportementale et Cognitive, 18(1), 19–25.

Ball, J. R., Mitchell, P. B., Corry, J. C., Skillecorn, A., Smith,
M., & Malhi, G. S. (2006). A randomized controlled trial
of cognitive therapy for bipolar disorder: Focus on longterm
change. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 67, 277–286.

Barber, J. P., & DeRubeis, R. J. (1989). On second thought:
Where the action is in cognitive therapy for depression.
Cognitive Therapy and Research, 13(5), 441–457.

Barlow, D. H., & Hofmann, S. G. (1997). Efficacy and dissemination
of psychological treatments. In D. M. Clark &

C. G. Fairburn (Eds.), Science and practice of cognitive
behaviour therapy (pp. 95–117). Oxford, UK: Oxford University
Press.
Barnhofer, T., Crane, C., Hargus, E., Amarasinghe, M.,
Winer, R., & Williams, J. M. (2009). Mindfulness-based
cognitive therapy as a treatment for chronic depression:
A preliminary study, Behaviour Research and Therapy,
47(5), 366–373.

Basco, M. R., & Rush, A. J. (1996). Cognitive-behavioral
therapy for bipolar disorder. New York: Guilford Press.
Beck, A. T. (1967). Depression: Causes and treatment. Phil


adelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.

Beck, A. T. (1976). Cognitive therapy and the emotional disorders.
New York: International Universities Press.

Beck, A. T. (1988). Love is never enough. New York: Harper
& Row.

Beck, A. T., & Alford, B. A. (2009). Depression: Causes and
treatment. Philadephia: University of Pennsylvania Press.

Beck, A. T., Freeman, A., & Associates. (1990). Cognitive
therapy of personality disorders. New York: Guilford
Press.

Beck, A. T., Rush, A. J., Shaw, B. F., & Emery, G. (1979).
Cognitive therapy of depression. New York: Guilford
Press.

Beck, J. S. (2011). Cognitive therapy: Basics and beyond
(2nd ed.). New York: Guilford Press.

Bellino, S., Zizza, M., Rinaldi, C., & Bogetto, F. (2007).
Combined therapy of major depression with concomitant
borderline personality disorder: Comparison of interpersonal
and cognitive psychotherapy. Canadian Journal of
Psychiatry, 52(11), 718–725.

Berger, T., Hammerli, K., Gubser, N., Andersson, G., & Caspar,
F. (2011). Internet-based treatment of depression: A
randonmized controlled trial comparing guided with unguided
self-help. Cognitive Behavioral Therapy, 40(4),
251–266.

Berndt, E. R., Koran, L. M., Finkelstein, S. N., Gelenberg, A.
J., Kornstein, S. G., Miller, I. M., et al. (2000). Lost human
capital from early-onset chronic depression. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 157, 940–947.

Beutler, L. E., Scogin, F., Kirkish, P., Schretlen, D., Corbishley,
A., Hamblin, D., et al. (1987). Group cognitive therapy
and alprazolam in the treatment of depression in older
adults. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,
55(4), 550–556.

Bhar, S. S., Gelfand, L. A., Schmid, S. P., Gallop, R., DeRubeis,
R. J., Hollon, S. D., et al. (2008). Sequence of improvement
in depressive symptoms across cognitive therapy
and pharmacotherapy. Journal of Affective Disorders,
110 (1–2), 161–166.

Biggs, M. M., & Rush, A. J. (1999). Cognitive and behavioral
therapies alone or combined with antidepressant medication
in the treatment of depression. In D. S. Janowsky
(Ed.), Psychotherapy indications and outcomes (pp.121–
172). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press.

Blackburn, I. M., Bishop, S., Glen, A. I. M., Whalley, L. J., &
Christie, J. E. (1981). The efficacy of cognitive therapy in
depression: A treatment trial using cognitive therapy and
pharmacotherapy, each alone and in combination. British
Journal of Psychiatry, 139, 181–189.

Bledsoe, S. E., & Grote, N. K. (2006). Treating depression
during pregnancy and the postpartum: A preliminary
meta-analysis. Research on Social Work Practice, 16(2),
109–120.

Bockting, C. L. H., Schene, A. H., Spinhoven, P., Koeter, M.

W. J., Wouters, L. F., Huyser, J., et al. (2005). Preventing

CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

relapse/recurrence in recurrent depression with cognitive
therapy: A randomized controlled trial. Journal of Consulting
and Clinical Psychology, 73, 647–657.

Bowers, W. A. (1990). Treatment of depressed in-patients:
Cognitive therapy plus medication, and medication alone.
British Journal of Psychiatry, 156, 73–58.

Bromet, E., Andrade, L. H., Hwang, I., Sampson, N. A.,
Alonso, J., de Girolamo, G., et al. (2011). Cross-national
epidemiology of DSM-IV major depressive episode. BMC
Medicine, 9, 90.

Burns, D. D., & Spangler, D. L. (2000). Does psychotherapy
homework lead to improvements in depression in
cognitive-behavioral therapy or does improvement lead to
increased homework compliance? Journal of Consulting
and Clinical Psychology, 68(1), 46–56.

Castonguay, L. G., Goldfried, M. R., Wiser, S., Raue, P. J.,
& Hayes, A. M. (1996). Predicting the effect of cognitive
therapy for depression: A study of unique and common
factors. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,
64(3), 497–504.

Castonguay, L. G., Schut, A. J., Aikens, D., Constantino, M.
J., Laurenceau, J. P., Bolough, L., et al. (2004). Integrative
cognitive therapy: A preliminary investigation. Journal of
Psychotherapy Integration, 14(1), 4–20.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). (2010).
Current depression among adults—United States, 2006
and 2008. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report,
59(38), 1229–1235.

Chapman, D. P., Perry, G. S., & Strine, T. W. (2005). The
vital link between chronic disease and depressive disorders.
Preventing Chronic Disease, 2, A14. Retrieved from
www.csc.gov/pdc/issues/jan/04_0066.htm.

Chapman, D. P., Whitfield, C. L., Felitti, V. J., Dube, S. R.,
Edwards, V. J., & Anda, R. F. (2004). Adverse childhood
experiences and the risk of depressive disorders
in adulthood. Journal of Affective Disorders, 82(2), 217–
225.

Cipriani, A., Santilli, C., Furukawa, T. A., Signoretti, A., Nakagawa,
A., McGuire, H., et al. (2009). Escitalopram versus
other antidepressant agents for depression. Cochrane
Database of Systematic Reviews, 2, CD006532.

Clark, D. A., & Beck, A. T. (2010). Cognitive therapy of anxiety
disorders: Science and practice. New York: Guilford
Press,

Colom, F., Vieta, E., Martinez, A., Jorquera, A., & Gastó, C.
(1998). What is the role of psychotherapy in the treatment
of bipolar disorder? Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics,
67, 3–9.

Cong, E., Li, Y., Shao, C., Chen, J., Wu, W., Shang, X., et al.
(2012). Childhood sexual abuse and the risk of recurrent
major depression in Chinese women. Psychological Medicine,
42, 409–417.

Connolly, K. R., & Thase, M. E. (2012). Emerging drugs for
major depressive disorder. Expert Opinion on Emerging
Drugs, 17(1), 105–126.

Conte, H. R., Plutchik, R., Wild, K. V., & Karasu, T. B. (1986).
Combined psychotherapy and pharmacotherapy for depression.
Archives of General Psychiatry, 43, 471–479.

Craighead, W. E., Miklowitz, D. J., Vajk, F. C., & Frank, E.
(1998). Psychological treatments for bipolar disorder. In P.

E. Nathan & J. M. Gorman (Eds.), A guide to treatments
that work (pp. 240–248). New York: Oxford University
Press.
Crews, W. D., Jr., & Harrison, D. W. (1995). The neuropsychology
of depression and its implications for cognitive
therapy. Neuropsychology Review, 5(2), 81–123.

Curry, J. F. (2001). Specific psychotherapies for childhood
and adolescent depression. Biological Psychiatry, 49,
1091–1100.

de Oliveira, I. R. (1998). The treatment of unipolar major depression:
Pharmacotherapy, cognitive behaviour therapy
or both? Journal of Clinical Pharmacy and Therapeutics,
23, 467–475.

DeRubeis, R. J., & Feeley, M. (1990). Determinants of change
in cognitive therapy for depression. Cognitive Therapy
and Research, 14(5), 469–482.

DeRubeis, R. J., Gelfand, L. A., Tang, T. Z., & Simons, A.

D. (1999). Medications versus cognitive behavior therapy
for severely depressed outpatients: Mega-analysis of four
randomized comparisons. American Journal of Psychiatry,
156(7), 1007–1013.
DeRubeis, R. J., Hollon, S. D., Amsterdam, J. D., Shelton,

R. C., Young, P. R., Salomon, R. M., et al. (2005). Cognitive
therapy vs. medications in the treatment of moderate
to severe depression. Archives of General Psychiatry, 62,
409–416.
DeRubeis, R. J., Hollon, S. D., Grove, W. M., Evans, M. D.,
Garvey, M. J., & Tuason, V. B. (1990). How does cognitive
therapy work?: Cognitive change and symptom change in
cognitive therapy and pharmacotherapy for depression.
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 58(6),
862–869.

Dobson, K. S., Hollon, S. D., Dimidjian, S., Schmaling, K.
B., Kohlenberg, R. J., Gallon, R., et al. (2008). Randomized
trial of behavioral activation, cognitive therapy, and
antidepressant medication in the prevention of relapse and
recurrence in major depression. Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 76(3), 468–477.

Dobson, K. S., & Pusch, D. (1993). Towards a definition of
the conceptual and empirical boundaries of cognitive therapy.
Australian Psychologist, 28(3), 137–144.

Dougherty, L. R., Klein, D. N., & Davila, J. (2004). A growth
curve analysis of the course of dysthymic disorder: The effects
of chronic stress and moderation by adverse parent–
child relationships and family history. Journal of Consulting
and Clinical Psychology, 72(6), 1012–1021.

Dube, S. R., Anda, R. F., Felitti, V. J., Chapman, D. P., Williamson,
D. F., & Giles, W. H. (2001). Childhood abuse,
household dysfunction, and the risk of attempted suicide
throughout the life span: Findings from the adverse child



Cognitive Therapy for Depression

hood experiences study. Journal of the American Medical
Association, 286, 3089–3096.

Eberhart, N. K., Auerbach, R. P., Bigda-Peyton, J., & Abela,

J. R. Z. (2011). Maladaptive schemas and depression: Tests
of stress generation and diathesis–stress models. Journal
of Social and Clinical Psychology, 30(1), 75–104.
Eifert, G. H., Beach, B. K., & Wilson, P. H. (1998). Depression:
Behavioral principles and implications for treatment
and relapse prevention. In J. J. Plaud & G. H. Eifers (Eds.),
From behavior theory to behavior therapy (pp. 68–97).
Boston: Allyn & Bacon.

Eisendrath, S., Chartier, M., & McLane, M. (2011). Adapting
mindfulness-based cognitive therapy for treatmentresistant
depression: A clinical case study. Cognitive Behavioral
Practice, 18(3), 362–370.

Elkin, I., Gibbons, R. D., Shea, M. T., & Shaw, B. F. (1996).
Science is not a trial (but it can sometimes be a tribulation).
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,
64(1), 92–103.

Elkin, I., Shea, M. T., Watkins, J. T., Imber, S. D., Sotsky, S.
M., Collins, J. F., et al. (1989). National Institute of Mental
Health Treatment of Depression Collaborative Research
Program: General effectiveness of treatments. Archives of
General Psychiatry, 46, 971–982.

Evans, M. D., Hollon, S. D., DeRubeis, R. J., Piaseki, J. M.,
Grove, W. M., Garvey, M. J., et al. (1992). Differential relapse
following cognitive therapy and pharmacotherapy
for depression. In D. S. Janowsky (Ed.), Psychotherapy
indication and outcomes (pp. 802–808). Washington, DC:
American Psychiatric Press.

Farrell, J., & Shaw, I. A. (2012). Group schema therapy for
borderline personality disorder: A step-by-step treatment
manual with patient workbook. Malden, MA: Wiley-
Blackwell.

Farrell, J., Shaw, I. A., & Webber, M. (2009). A schemafocused
approach to group psychotherapy for outpatients
with borderline personality disorder: A randomized control
trial. Journal of Behavior Therapy and Experimental
Psychiatry, 40, 317–328.

Fava, G. A., Rafanelli, C., Grandi, S., Canestrari, R., & Morphy,
M. A. (1998). Six-year outcome for cognitive behavioral
treatment of residual symptoms in major depression.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 155(10), 1443–1445.

Fava, G. A., Rafanelli, C., Grandi, S., Conti, S., & Belluardo,

P. (1998). Prevention of recurrent depression with cognitive
behavioral therapy: Preliminary findings. Archives of
General Psychiatry, 55(9), 816–820.
Feldman, G., Harley, R., Kerrigan, M., Jacobo, M., & Fava,

M. (2009). Change in emotional processing during a dialectical
behavior based skills group for major depressive
disorder. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 47(4), 316–
321.
Feng, C. Y., Chu, H., Chen, C. H., Chang, Y. S., Chen, T. H.
Chou, Y. H., et al. (2012). The effect of cognitive behav


ioral group therapy for depression: A meta-analysis 2000–
2010. Worldviews Evidence Based Nursing, 9(1), 2–17.

Floyd, M., Scogin, F., McKendree-Smith, N. L., Floyd, D. L.,
& Rokke, P. D. (2004). Cognitive therapy for depression:
A comparison of individual psychotherapy and bibliotherapy
for depressed older adults. Behavior Modification,
28(2), 297–318.

Fournier, J. C., De Rubeis, R. J., Shelton, R. C., Gallop, R.,
Amsterdam, J. D., & Hollon, S. D. (2008). Antidepressant
medications versus cognitive therapy in depressed patients
with or without personality disorder. British Journal of
Psychiatry, 192(2), 124–129.

Frank, E. (1996). Long-term treatment of depression: Interpersonal
psychotherapy with and without medication.
In C. Mundt & M. J. Goldstein (Eds.), Interpersonal
factors in the origin and course of affective disorders
(pp. 303–315). London: Gaskell/Royal College of Psychiatrists.


Frank, E., & Thase, M. E. (1999). Natural history and preventative
treatment of recurrent mood disorders. Annual
Review of Medicine, 50, 453–468.

Free, M. L., Oei, T. P. S., & Appleton, C. (1998). Biological
and psychological processes in recovery from depression
during cognitive therapy. Journal of Behavior Therapy
and Experimental Psychiatry, 29, 213–226.

Freeman, A., & Davison, M. R. (1997). Short-term therapy
for the long-term patient. In L. Vandecreek, S. Knapp, &

T. L. Jackson (Eds.), Innovations in clinical practice: A
source book (pp. 5–24). Sarasota, FL: Professional Resource
Press.
Futterman, A., Thompson, L., Gallagher-Thompson, D., &
Ferris, R. (1995). Depression in later life: Epidemiology,
assessment, etiology, and treatment. In E. E. Beckham
& W. R. Leber (Eds.), Handbook of depression (2nd ed.,
pp. 494–525). New York: Guilford Press.

Gallagher-Thompson, D., Hanley-Peterson, P., & Thompson,

L. W. (1990). Maintenance of gains versus relapse following
brief psychotherapy for depression. Journal of Consulting
and Clinical Psychology, 58(3), 371–374.
Garyfallos, G., Adarnopoulo, A., Karastergiou, A., Voikli,
M., Sotiropoulo, A., Donias, S., et al. (1999). Personality
disorders in dysthymia and major depression. Acta Psychiatrica
Scandinavica, 99(5), 332–340.

Geddes, J. R., Carney, S. M., Davies, C., Furukawa, T. A.,
Kupfer, D. J., Frank, E., et al. (2003). Relapse prevention
with antidepressant drug treatment in depressive disorders:
A systematic review. Lancet, 361, 653–661.

Gelder, M. G. (1994). Cognitive therapy for depression. In

H. Hippius & C. N. Stefanis (Eds.), Research in mood
disorders: An update (Vol. 1, pp. 115–124). Goettingen,
Germany: Hogrefe & Huber.
Giesen-Bloo, J., van Dyck, R., Spinhoven, P., van Tilburg,
W., Dirksen, C., van Asselt, T., et al. (2006). Outpatient
psychotherapy for borderline personality disorder: A randomized
trial of schema-focused therapy vs. transference



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

focused therapy. Archives of General Psychiatry, 63,
649–658.

Gilson, M., Freeman, A. M., Yates, J., & Freeman, S. M.
(2009). Overcoming depression: A cognitive therapy approach
(2nd ed.). New York: Oxford University Press.

Gloaguen, V., Cottraux, J., Cucherat, M., & Blackburn, I. M.
(1998). A meta-analysis of the effects of cognitive therapy
in depressed patients. Journal of Affective Disorders, 49,
59–72.

Halvorsen, M., Wang, C. E., Eisemann, M., & Waterloo, K.
(2010). Dysfunctional attitudes and early maladaptive
schemas as predictors of depression: A 9-year follow-up
study. Cognitive Therapy Research, 34, 368–379.

Halvorsen, M., Wang, C. F., Richter, J., Myrland, I., Pedersen,
S. K., Eisemann, M, et al. (2009). Early maladaptive
schemas, temperament and character traits in clinically
depressed and previously depressed subjects. Clinical Psychology
and Psychotherapy, 16(5), 394–407.

Hardeveld, F., Spijker, J., de Graaf, R., Nolen, W. A., & Beekman,
A. T. F. (2010). Prevalence and predictors of recurrence
of major depressive disorder in the adult population.
Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavia, 122,184–191.

Harley, R., Sprich, S., Safren, S., Jacob, M., & Fava, M.
(2008). Adaptation of dialectical behavior therapy skills
training group for treatment-resistant depression, Journal
of Nervous and Mental Diseases, 196(2), 136–143.

Harrington, R., Wood, A., & Verduyn, C. (1998). Clinically
depressed adolescents. In P. J. Graham (Ed.), Cognitivebehaviour
therapy for children and families (pp. 156–
193). New York: Cambridge University Press.

Hawke, L. D., & Provencher, M. D. (2011). Schema theory
and schema therapy in mood and anxiety disorders: A
review. Journal of Cognitive Psychotherapy: An International
Quarterly, 25(4), 257–276.

Hayden, E. P., & Klein, D. N. (2001). Predicting outcome
of dysthymic disorder at a 5-year follow-up: The impact
of familial psychopathology, early adversity, personality,
comorbidity, and chronic stress. American Journal of Psychiatry,
158, 1864–1870.

Hayes, A. M., & Strauss, J. L. (1998). Dynamic systems theory
as a paradigm for the study of change in psychotherapy:
An application to cognitive therapy for depression. Journal
of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 66(6), 939–947.

Heim, C., & Nemeroff, C. B. (2001). The role of childhood
trauma in the neurobiology of mood and anxiety disorders:
Preclinical and clinical studies. Biological Psychiatry, 49,
1023–1039.

Henry, W. P., Strupp, H. H., Butler, S. F., Schacht, T. E., &
Binder, J. L. (1993). The effects of training in time-limited
dynamic psychotherapy: Changes in therapist behavior.
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 61, 434–
440.

Hollon, S. D. (1998). What is cognitive behavioural therapy
and does it work? Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 8,
289–292.

Hollon, S. D., DeRubeis, R. J., & Evans, M. D. (1996). Cognitive
therapy in the treatment and prevention of depression.
In P. M. Salkovskis (Ed.), Frontiers of cognitive therapy
(pp. 293–317). New York: Guilford Press.

Hollon, S. D., DeRubeis, R. J., Evans, M. D., Weimer, M.
J., Garvey, M. J., Grove, W. M., et al. (1992). Cognitive
therapy and pharmacotherapy: Singly and in combination.
Archives of General Psychiatry, 49, 774–781.

Hollon, S. D., DeRubeis, R. J., Shelton, R. C., Amsterdam, J.
D., Salomon, R. M., O’Reardon, J. P., et al. (2005). Prevention
of relapse following cognitive therapy vs. medications
in moderate to severe depression. Archives of General Psychiatry,
62, 417–422.

Hollon, S. D., & Shelton, R. C. (2001). Treatment guidelines
for major depressive disorder. Behavior Therapy, 32, 235–
258.

Hollon, S. D., Shelton, R. C., & Loosen, P. T. (1991). Cognitive
therapy and pharmacotherapy for depression. Journal
of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 59(1), 88–99.

Hollon, S. D., Thase, M. E., & Markowitz, J. C. (2002). Treatment
and prevention of depression. Psychological Science
in the Public Interest, 3, 39–77.

Howland, R. H. (1993). Chronic depression. Hospital and
Community Psychiatry, 44, 633–639.

Ingram, R. E., & Holle, C. (1992). Cognitive science of depression.
In D. J. Stein & J. E. Young (Eds.), Cognitive
science and clinical disorders (pp. 187–209). San Diego,
CA: Academic Press.

Jacobson, N. S., & Hollon, S. D. (1996). Cognitive-behavior
therapy versus pharmacotherapy: Now that the jury’s returned
its verdict, it’s time to present the rest of the evidence.
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,
64(1), 74–80.

Jarrett, R. B. (1995). Comparing and combining short-term
psychotherapy and pharmacotherapy for depression. In E.

E. Beckham & W. R. Leber (Eds.), Handbook of depression
(2nd ed., pp. 435–464). New York: Guilford Press.
Jarrett, R. B., Kraft, D., Doyle, J., Foster, B. M., Eaves, G.
G., & Silver, P. C. (2001). Preventing recurrent depression
using cognitive therapy with and without continuation
phase. Archives of General Psychiatry, 58(4), 381–388.

Jarrett, R. B., & Nelson, R. O. (1987). Mechanisms of change
in cognitive therapy of depression. Behavior Therapy, 18,
227–241.

Jarrett, R. B., Schaffer, M., McIntire, D., Witt-Browder, A.,
Kraft, D., & Risser, R. C. (1999). Treatment of atypical
depression with cognitive therapy or phenelzine: A double-
blind, placebo-controlled trial. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 56, 431–437.

Jarrett, R. B., & Thase, M. E. (2010). Comparative efficacy
and durability of continuation phase cognitive therapy
for preventing recurrent depression: Design of a doubleblinded,
fluoxetine-and pill-placebo-contolled, randomized
trial with 2-year follow-up. Contemporary Clinical
Trials, 31(4), 355–377.


Cognitive Therapy for Depression

Jarrett, R. B., Vittengl, J. R., & Clark, L. A. (2008). How
much cognitive therapy, for which patients, will prevent
depressive relapse. Journal of Affective Disorders, 111(2–
3), 185–192.

Joffe, R., Segal, Z., & Singer, W. (1996). Change in thyroid
hormone levels following response to cognitive therapy
for major depression. American Journal of Psychiatry,
153(3), 411–413.

Johansson, R., & Andersson, G. (2012). Internet-based psychological
treatments for depression. Expert Review of
Neurotherapeutics, 12 (7), 861–870.

Joyce, P. R., McKenzie, J. M., Carter, J. D., Rae, A. M., Luty,

S. E., Frampton, C. M. A., et al. (2007). Temperament,
character and personality disorders as predictors of response
to interpersonal psychotherapy and cognitivebehavioural
therapy for depression. British Journal of
Psychiatry, 190, 503–508.
Keller, M. B., & Bolland, R. J. (1998). Implications of failing
to achieve successful long-term maintenance treatment of
recurrent unipolar major depression. Biological Psychiatry,
44(5), 348–360.

Keller, M. B., & Hanks, D. L. (1995). Course and natural history
of chronic depression. In J. H. Kocsis & D. N. Klein
(Eds.), Diagnosis and treatment of chronic depression
(pp. 58–72). New York: Guilford Press.

Keller, M. B., McCullough, J. P., Klein, D. F., Arnow, B.,
Dunner, D. L., Gelenberg, A. J., et al. (2000). A comparison
of nefazodone, the cognitive behavioral-analysis
system of psychotherapy, and their combination for the
treatment of chronic depression. New England Journal of
Medicine, 342, 1462–1470.

Kendler, K. S., Kessler, R. C., Walters, E. E., MacLean, C.,
Neale, M. C., Heath, A. C., et al. (1995). Stressful life
events, genetic liability, and onset of an episode of major
depression in women. American Journal of Psychiatry,
152, 833–842.

Kessler, R. C., Akiskal, H. S., Ames, M., Birnbaum, H.,
Greenberg, P. A., Jin, R., et al. (2006). Prevalence and
effects of mood disorders on work performance in a nationally
representative sample of U.S. workers. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 163(9), 1561–1568.

Kessler, R. C., Petukhova, M., Sampson, N. A., Zaslavsky, A.
M., & Wittchen, H. U. (2012). Twelve-month and lifetime
prevalence and lifetime morbid risk of anxiety and mood
disorders in the United States. Internal Journal of Methods
in Psychiatric Research, 21(3), 169–184.

Klein, D. N., Santiago, N. J., Vivian, D., Blalock, J. A., Kocsis,

J. H., Markowitz, J. C., et al. (2004). Cognitive-behavioral
analysis system of psychotherapy as a maintenance treatment
for chronic depression. Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 72, 681–688.
Kocsis, J. H., Gelenberg, A. J., Rothbaum, B. O., Klein, D.
N., Trivedi, M. H., Manber, R., et al. (2009). Cognitive
behavioral analysis system of psychotherapy and brief supportive
psychotherapy for augmentation of antidepressant

nonresponse in chronic depression: the REVAMP Trial.
Archives of General Psychiatry, 66(11), 1178–1188.

Koder, D. A., Brodaty, H., & Anstey, K. J. (1996). Cognitive
therapy for depression in elderly. International Journal of
Geriatric Psychiatry, 11(2), 97–107.

Kupfer, D. J., Frank, E., & Wamhoff, J. (1996). Mood disorders:
Update on prevention of recurrence. In C. Mundt, M.

M. Goldstein, K. Hahlweg, & P. Fiedler (Eds.), Interpersonal
factors in the origin and course of affective disorders
(pp. 289–302). London: Gaskell.
Lam, D. H., Hayward, P., Watkins, E. R., Wright, K., & Sham,

P. (2005). Relapse prevention in patients with bipolar disorder:
Cognitive therapy outcome after 2 years. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 162(2), 324–329.
Lazarus, A. A., & Lazarus, C. N. (1991). Multimodal Life
History Inventory (2nd ed.). Champaign, IL: Research
Press.

Leahy, R. L. (2010). Beat the blues before they beat you. New
York: Hay House.

Lee, C. W., Taylor, G., & Dunn, J. (1999). Factor structure of
the Schema Questionnaire in a large clinical sample. Cognitive
Therapy and Research, 23(4), 441–451.

Levendusky, P. G., & Hufford, M. R. (1997). The application
of cognitive-behavior therapy to the treatment of depression
and related disorders in the elderly. Journal of Geriatric
Psychiatry, 30(2), 227–238.

Linehan, M. M. (1993a). Cognitive-behavioral treatment
of borderline personality disorder. New York: Guilford
Press.

Linehan, M. M. (1993b). Skills training manual for treating
borderline personality disorder. New York: Guilford
Press.

Lizardi, H., Klein, D. N., Ouimette, P. C., Riso, L. P., Anderson,
R. L., & Donaldson, S. K. (1995). Reports of the
childhood home environment in early onset dysthymia and
episodic major depression. Journal of Abnormal Psychology,
104, 132–139.

Luoma, J. B., Hayes, S. C., & Walser R. D. (2007). Learning
ACT: An acceptance and commitment therapy skillstraining
manual for therapists. Richmond, BC, Canada:
Raincoast Books.

Luty S. E., Carter, J. D., McKenzie, J. M., Rae, A. M.,
Frampton, C. M. A., Mulder, R. T. et al. (2007). Randomized
controlled trial of interpersonal psychotherapy
and cognitive-behavioural therapy for depression. British
Journal of Psychiatry, 190, 496–502.

Ma, S. H., & Teasdale, J. D. (2004). Mindfulness-based cognitive
therapy for depression: Replication and exploration
of differential relapse prevention effects. Journal of Consulting
and Clinical Psychology, 72(1), 31–40.

Manicavasagar, V., Perich, T., & Parker, G. (2012). Cognitive
predictors of change in cognitive behavior therapy
and mindfulness-based cognitive therapy for depression.
Behavioural and Cognitive Psychotherapy, 40, 227–232.

Mathew, K. L., & Whitford, H. S. (2010). The long-term ef



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

fects of mindfulness-based cognitive therapy as a relapse
prevention treatment for major depressive disorder. Behavioural
and Cognitive Psychotherapy, 38, 561–576.

Mathys, M., & Mitchell, B. G. (2011). Targeting treatmentresistant
depression. Journal of Pharmacological Practice,
24(6), 520–533.

Matthew, K. L., Whitford, H. S., Kenny, M. A., & Denson,

L. A. (2010). The long-term effects of mindfulness-bassed
cognitive therapy as a relapse prevention treatment for
major depressive disorder. Behavioural and Cognitive
Psychotherapy, 38, 561–576.
McCullough, J. P., Jr. (2000). Treatment for chronic depression:
Cognitive behavioral analysis system of psychotherapy
(CBASP). New York: Guilford Press.

McCullough, J. P., Jr. (2003). Treatment for chronic depression:
Cognitive behavioral-analysis system of psychotherapy.
Journal of Psychotherapy Integration, 13(3/4), 241–263.

McGinn, L. K., & Young, J. E. (1996). Schema-focused
therapy. In P. M. Salkovskis (Ed.), Frontiers of cognitive
therapy (pp. 182–207). New York: Guilford Press.

Meterissian, G. B., & Bradwejn, J. (1989). Comparative studies
on the efficacy of psychotherapy, pharmacotherapy,
and their combination in depression: Was adequate pharmacotherapy
provided? Journal of Clinical Psychopharmacology,
9, 334–339.

Miller, I. W., Norman, W. H., Keitner, G. I., Bishop, S., &
Dow, M. G. (1989). Cognitive-behavioral treatment of depressed
inpatients. Behavior Therapy, 20, 25–47.

Mohr, D. C. (1995). Negative outcome in psychotherapy: A
critical review. Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice,
2, 1–27.

Murphy, G. E., Simmons, A. D., Wetzel, R. D., & Lustman, P.

J. (1984). Cognitive therapy and pharmacotherapy, singly
and together, in the treatment of depression. Archives of
General Psychiatry, 41, 33–41.
National Institute of Mental Health. (2006). The numbers
count: Mental disorders in America (Publication No. 064584).
Retrieved April 6, 2007, from www.nimh.nih.gov/
publicat/numbers.

Newman, C. F., Leahy, R. L., Beck, A. T., Reilly-Harrington,

N. A., & Gyulai, L. (2002). Bipolar disorder: A cognitive
therapy approach. Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association.
Nierenberg, A. A., Keefe, B. R., Leslie, V. C., Alpert, J. E.,
Pava, J. A., Worthington, J. J., III, et al. (1999). Residual
symptoms in depressed patients who respond acutely to
fluoxetine. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 60(4), 221–225.

Oei, T. P. S., & Free, M. L. (1995). Do cognitive behavior
therapies validate cognitive models of mood disorders?: A
review of the empirical evidence. International Journal of
Psychology, 30(2), 145–180.

Oei, T. P. S., & Shuttlewood, G. J. (1996). Specific and nonspecific
factors in psychotherapy: A case of cognitive therapy
for depression. Clinical Psychology Review, 16(2),
83–103.

O’Leary, K. D., & Beach, S. R. H. (1990). Marital therapy: A
viable treatment for depression and marital discord. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 147(2), 183–186.

Olfson, M., Marcus, S. C., Druss, B., Elinson, L., Tanielian,
T., & Pincus, H. A. (2002). National trends in the outpatient
treatment of depression. Journal of the American
Medical Association, 287, 203–209.

Overholser, J. C. (1998). Cognitive-behavioral treatment of
depression, part X: Reducing the risk of relapse. Journal
of Contemporary Psychotherapy, 28(4), 381–396.

Padesky, C. A., with Greenberger, D. (1995). A clinician’s
guide to mind over mood. New York: Guilford Press.

Paykel, E. S. (2007). Cognitive therapy in relapse prevention
in depression. International Journal of Neuropsychopharmacology,
10, 131–136.

Paykel, E. S., Scott, J., Teasdale, J. D., Johnson, A. L., Garland,
A., Moore, R., et al. (1999). Prevention of relapse in
residual depression by cognitive therapy. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 56, 829–835.

Peeters, F., Huibers, M., Roelofs, J., van Breulkelen, G., Hollon,
S. D., Markowitz, J. C., et al. (2013). The clinical
effectiveness of evidence-based interventions for depression:
A pragmatic trial in routine practice. Journal of Affective
Disorders, 145(3), 349–355.

Pepper, C. M., Klein, D. N., Anderson, R. L., Riso, L. P.,
Ouimette, P. C., & Lizardi, H. (1995). DSM-III-R axis II
comorbidity in dysthymia and major depression. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 152(2), 239–247.

Persons, J. B., Burns, D. D., & Perloff, J. M. (1988). Predictors
of dropout and outcome in cognitive therapy for depression
in a private practice setting. Cognitive Therapy
and Research, 12(6), 557–575.

Piper, W. E., Ogrodniczuk, J. S., Joyce, A. S., McCallum,
M., Rosie, J. S., O’Kelly, J. G., et al. (1999). Prediction of
dropping out in time-limited, interpretive psychotherapy.
Psychotherapy, 36, 114–122.

Quilty, L. C., McBride, C., & Bagby, R. M. (2008). Evidence
for the cognitive mediational model of cognitive behavioral
therapy for depression. Psychological Medicine, 38(11),
1531–1541.

Randolph, J. J., & Dykman, B. M. (1998). Perceptions of
parenting and depression-proneness in the offspring: Dysfunctional
attitudes as a mediating mechanism. Cognitive
Depressive Disorders, 21, 401–449.

Rehm, L. P. (1990). Cognitive and behavioral theories. In B.

B. Wolman & G. Stricker (Eds.), Depressive disorders:
Facts, theories, and treatment methods (pp. 64–91). New
York: Wiley.
Reinecke, M. A., Ryan, N. E., & DuBois, D. L. (1998).
Cognitive-behavioral therapy of depression and depressive
symptoms during adolescence: A review and metaanalysis.
Journal of the American Academy of Child and
Adolescent Psychiatry, 37(1), 26–34.

Renner, F., Lobbestael, J., Peeters, F., Arntz, A., & Huibers,

M. (2012). Early maladaptive schemas in depressed pa

Cognitive Therapy for Depression

tients: Stability and relation with depressive symptoms
over the course of treatment. Journal of Affective Disorders,
136, 581–590.

Riso, L. P., du Toit, P. L., Blandino, J. A., Penna, S., Dacey, S.,
Duin, J. S., et al. (2003). Cognitive aspects of chronic depression.
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 112(1), 72–80.

Riso, L. P., Froman, S. E., Raouf, M., Gable, P., Maddux, R.
E., Turini-Santorelli, N., et al. (2006). The long-term stability
of early maladaptive schemas. Cognitive Therapy
and Research, 30(4), 515–529.

Roberts, J. E., & Hartlage, S. (1996). Cognitive rehabilitation
interventions for depressed patients. In P. W. Corrigan &

S. C. Yudofsky (Eds.), Cognitive rehabilitation for neuropsychiatric
disorders (pp. 371–392). Washington, DC:
American Psychiatric Press.
Rush, A. J., Beck, A. T., Kovacs, M., & Hollon, S. (1977).
Comparative efficacy of cognitive therapy and imipramine
in the treatment of depressed outpatients. Cognitive Therapy
and Research, 1, 17–37.

Rush, A. J., Trivedi, M. H., Wisniewski, S. R., Nierenberg,

A. A., Stewart, J. W., Warden, D., et al. (2006). Acute and
longer-term outcomes in depressed outpatients requiring
one of several treatment steps: A STAR*D report. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 163, 1905–1917.
Sacco, W. P., & Beck, A. T. (1995). Cognitive theory and therapy.
In E. E. Beckham & W. R. Leber (Eds.), Handbook
of depression (2nd ed., pp. 329–351). New York: Guilford
Press.

Sachs-Ericsson, N., Verona, E., Joiner, T., & Preacher, K. J.
(2006). Parental abuse and mediating role of self-criticism
in adult internalizing disorders. Journal of Affective Disorders,
93(1–3), 71–78.

Safran, J. D., Muran, J. C., Samstag, L. W., & Stevens, C.
(2002). Repairing alliance ruptures. In J. C. Norcross
(Ed.), Psychotherapy relationships that work: Therapists
contributions and responsiveness to patients (pp. 235–
254). New York: Oxford University Press.

Safran, J. D., & Segal, Z. V. (1990). Interpersonal processes
in cognitive therapy. New York: Basic Books.

Safran, J. D., Segal, Z. V., Vallis, T. M., Shaw, B. F., & Samstag,
L. W. (1993). Assessing patient suitability for shortterm
cognitive therapy with an interpersonal focus. Cognitive
Therapy and Research, 17(1), 23–38.

Salkovskis, P. M. (Ed.). (1996). Frontiers of cognitive therapy:
The state of the art and beyond. New York: Guilford
Press.

Sava, F. A., Yates, B. T., Lupu, V., Szentagotai, A., & David,

D. (2009). Cost-effectiveness and cost-utility of cognitive
therapy, rational emotive behavioral therapy, and fluoxetine
(Prozac) in treating depression: A randomized clinical
trial. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 65 (1), 36–52.
Schmidt, N. B. (1994). The Schema Questionnaire and the
Schema Avoidance Questionnaire. Behavior Therapist,
17(4), 90–92.

Schmidt, N. B., Joiner, T. E., Young, J. E., & Telch, M. J.

(1995). The Schema Questionnaire: Investigation of psychometric
properties and the hierarchical structure of a
measure of maladaptive schemata. Cognitive Therapy and
Research, 19(3), 295–321.

Schramm, E., Zobel, I., Dykierek, P., Kech, S., Brakemeier,
E., Kutz, A., et al. (2011). Cognitive behavioral analysis
system of psychotherapy versus interpersonal psychotherapy
for early-onset chronic depression: A randomized
pilot study. Journal of Affective Disorders, 129,
109–116.

Scott, J. (1996a). Cognitive therapy of affective disorders: A
review. Journal of Affective Disorders, 37, 1–11.

Scott, J. (1996b). The role of cognitive behaviour therapy in
bipolar disorders. Behavioural and Cognitive Psychotherapy,
24(3), 195–208.

Scott, J. (2000). New evidence in the treatment of chronic
depression. New England Journal of Medicine, 342, 1518–
1520.

Scott, J., Palmer, S., Paykel, E., Teasdale, J., & Hayhurst, H.
(2003). Use of cognitive therapy for relapse prevention in
chronic depression. British Journal of Psychiatry, 182,
221–227.

Segal, Z. V., Williams, J. M. G., & Teasdale, J. D. (2002).
Mindfulness-based cognitive therapy for depression: A
new approach to preventing relapse. New York: Guilford
Press.

Shaw, B. F., & Segal, Z. V. (1999). Efficacy, indications, and
mechanisms of action of cognitive therapy of depression.
In D. S. Janowsky (Ed.), Psychotherapy indications and
outcomes (pp. 173–196). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric
Press.

Shea, M. T., & Elkin, I. (1996). The NIMH Treatment of Depression
Collaborative Research Program. In C. Mundt,

M. J. Goldstein, K. Hahlweg, & P. Fiedler (Eds.), Interpersonal
factors in the origin and course of affective disorders
(pp. 316–328). London: Gaskell/Royal College of
Psychiatrists.
Shea, M. T., Elkin, I., Imber, S. D., Sotsky, S. M., Watkins, J.
T., Collins, J. F., et al. (1992). Course of depressive symptoms
over follow-up: Findings from the National Institute
of Mental Health Treatment of Depression Collaborative
Research Program. Archives of General Psychiatry,
49(10), 782–787.

Shea, M. T., Pilkonis, P. A., Beckham, E., Collins, J. F., Elkin,
I., Sotsky, S. M., et al. (1990). Personality disorders and
treatment outcome in the NIMH Treatment of Depression
Collaborative Research Program. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 147(6), 711–718.

Simons, A. D., Murphy, G. D., Levine, J. L., & Wetzel, R.

D. (1986). Cognitive therapy and pharmacotherapy for depression:
Sustained improvement over 1 year. Archives of
General Psychiatry, 43, 43–48.
Spanier, C. A., Frank, E., McEachran, A. B., Grochocinski,

V. J., & Kupfer, D. J. (1999). Maintenance interpersonal
psychotherapy for recurrent depression: Biological and

CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

clinical correlates and future directions. In D. S. Janowsky
(Ed.), Psychotherapy indications and outcomes (pp. 249–
273). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press.

Spirito, A., Esposito-Smythers, C., Wolff, J., & Uhl, K.
(2011). Cognitive-behavioral therapy for adolescent depression
and suicidality. Child and Adolescent Psychiatric
Clinics of North America, 20(2), 191–204.

Stein, D. J., & Young, J. E. (1992). Schema approach to personality
disorders. In Cognitive science and clinical disorders
(pp. 271–288). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.

Stirman, S. W., Miller, C. J., Toder, K., Calloway, A., Beck,

A. J., Evans, A. C., et al. (in press). Perspectives on cognitive
therapy training within community mental health settings:
Implications for clinical satisfaction and skill development.
Depression Research and Treatment.
Strine, T. W., Mokdad, A. H., Balluz, L. S., Gonzalez, O.,
Crider, R., Berry, J. T., et al. (2008). Depression and anxiety
in the United States: Findings from the 2006 Behavioral
Risk Factor Surveillance System. Psychiatric Services,
59(12), 1383–1309.

Stuart, S., & Bowers, W. A. (1995). Cognitive therapy with
inpatients: Review and meta-analysis. Journal of Cognitive
Psychotherapy, 9(2), 85–92.

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration
(SAMHSA). (2008). Results from 2007 National Survey
on Drug Use and Health: National Findings (Office of Applied
Studies, NSDUH Series H-34, DHHS Publication
No. SMA 08-4343). Rockville, MD: U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services.

Sullivan, M. J. L., & Conway, M. (1991). Dysphoria and valence
of attributions for others’ behavior. Cognitive Therapy
and Research, 15(4), 273–282.

Teasdale, J. D. (1997a). Assessing cognitive mediation of
relapse prevention in recurrent mood disorders. Clinical
Psychology and Psychotherapy, 4, 145–156.

Teasdale, J. D. (1997b). The relationship between cognition
and emotion: The mind-in-place in mood disorders. In D.

M. Clark & C. G. Fairburn (Eds.), Science and practice
of cognitive behavior therapy (pp. 67–93). Oxford, UK:
Oxford University Press.
Teasdale, J. D., Moore, R. G., Hayhurst, H., Pope, M., Williams,
S., & Segal, Z. V. (2002). Metacognitive awareness
and prevention of relapse in depression: Empirical
evidence. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,
70(2), 275–287.

Teasdale, J. D., Segal, Z. V., & Williams, J. M. G. (1995).
How does cognitive therapy prevent depressive relapse
and why should attentional control (mindfulness) training
help? Behaviour Research and Therapy, 33, 25–39.

Teasdale, J. D., Segal, Z. V., Williams, J. M. G., Ridgeway,

V. A., Soulsby, J. M., & Lau, M. A. (2000). Prevention
of relapse/recurrence in major depression by mindfulnessbased
cognitive therapy. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 68(4), 615–623.
Thase, M. E. (1992). Long-term treatments of recurrent
depressive disorders. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry,
53(Suppl. 9), 32–44.

Thase, M. E. (1999). How should efficacy be evaluated in randomized
clinical trials of treatments for depression? Journal
of Clinical Psychiatry, 60(Suppl. 4), 23–32.

Thase, M. E. (2011). Antidepressant combinations: Widely
used, but far from empirically validated. Canadian Journal
of Psychiatry, 56(6), 317–323.

Thase, M. E., Bowler, K., & Harden, T. (1991). Cognitive
behavior therapy of endogenous depression: Part 2. Preliminary
findings in 16 unmedicated inpatients. Behavior
Therapy, 22, 469–477.

Tolin, D. F. (2010). Is cognitive-behavioral therapy more effective
than other therapies? A meta-analytic review. Clinical
Psychology Review, 30(6), 710–720.

Treatment for Adolescents with Depression Study (TADS)
Team. (2004). Fluoxetine, cognitive-behavioral therapy,
and their combination for adolescents with depression:
Treatment for adolescents with depression study (TADS)
randomized controlled trial. Journal of the American
Medical Association, 292(7), 807–820.

Treatment for Adolescents with Depression Study (TADS)
Team. (2007). Long term effectiveness and safety outcomes.
Archives of General Psychiatry, 64, 1132–1144.

Trivedi, M. H., Fava, M., Wisniewski, S. R., Thase, M. E.,
Quitkin, F., Warden, D., et al. (2006). Medication augmentation
after the failure of SSRIs for depression. New England
Journal of Medicine, 354, 1243–1252.

Truax, C. B., & Mitchell, K. M. (1971). Research on certain
therapist interpersonal skills in relation to process and outcome.
In A. E. Bergin & S. L. Garfield (Eds.), Handbook
of psychotherapy and behavior change: An empirical
analysis (pp. 299–344). New York: Wiley.

van Aalderen, J. R., Donders, A. R. T., Giommi, F., Spinhoven,
P., Barendregt, H. P., & Speckens, A. E. M. (2012).
The efficacy of mindfulness-based cognitive therapy in
recurrent depressed patients with and without a current
depressive episode: A randomized controlled trial. Psychological
Medicine, 42, 989–1001.

Versiani, M. (1998). Pharmacotherapy of dysthymic and
chronic depressive disorders: Overview with focus on moclobemide.
Journal of Affective Disorders, 51(3), 323–332.

Vittengl, J. R., Clark, L. A., Dunn, T. D., & Jarrett, R. B.
(2007). Reducing relapse and recurrence in unipolar
depression: A comparative meta-analysis of cognitivebehavioral
therapy’s effects. Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 75(3), 475–488.

Vittengl, J. R., Clark, L. A., & Jarrett, R. B. (2009). Continuation-
phase cognitive therapy’s effect on remission
and recovery from depression. Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 77(2), 367–371.

Vocisano, C., Klein, D., Arnow, B., Rivera, C., Blalock, J. A.,
Rothbaum, B., et al. (2004). Therapist variables that pre



Cognitive Therapy for Depression

dict symptom change in psychotherapy with chronically
depressed outpatients. Psychotherapy: Theory, Research,
Practice and Training, 41(3), 255–265.

Vos, T., Corry, J., Haby, M. M., Carter, R., & Andrews,

G. (2005). Cost-effectiveness of cognitive-behavioural
therapy and drug interventions for major depression. Australian
and New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry, 39(8),
683–692.
Wang, C. E., Halvorsen, M., Eisemann, M., & Waterloo, K.
(2010). Stability of dysfunctional attitudes and early maladaptive
schemas: A 9-year follow-up study of clinically
depressed subjects. Journal of Behavior Therapy and Experimental
Psychiatry, 41(4), 389–396.

Wang, J. (2004). A longitudinal population-based study of
treated and untreated major depression. Medical Care,
42(6), 543–550.

Wang, J., Patten, S. D., William, J. V., Currie, S., Beck, C.
A., Maxwell, C. J., et al. (2005). Help seeking behaviors
of individuals with mood disorders. Canadian Journal of
Psychiatry, 50(10), 652–659.

Wells, A., Fisher, P., Myers, S., Wheatley, J., Patel, T., &
Brewin, C. R. (2012). Metacognitive therapy in treatmentresistant
depression: A platform trial. Behaviour Research
and Therapy, 50(6), 367–373.

Whisman, M. A. (1993). Mediators and moderators of change
in cognitive therapy of depression. Psychological Bulletin,
114, 248–265.

Wiersma, J. E., van Schaik, D. J. F., van Oppen, P., Mc-
Cullough, J. P., Schoevers, R. A., Dekker, J. J., et al. (2008).
Treatment of chronically depressed patients: A multisite
randomized controlled trial testing the effectiveness of
“cognitive behavioral analysis system of psychotherapy”
(CBASP) for chronic depression versus usual secondary
care. BMC Psychiatry, 8, 18.

Wierzbicki, M., & Bartlett, T. S. (1987). The efficacy of group
and individual cognitive therapy for mild depression. Cognitive
Therapy and Research, 11(3), 337–342.

Williams, J. M. G. (1997). Depression. In D. M. Clark & C.

G. Fairburn (Eds.), Science and practice of cognitive behaviour
therapy (pp. 259–283). Oxford, UK: Oxford University
Press.

Wolpe, J. (1993). Commentary: The cognitivist oversell and
comments on symposium contributions. Journal of Behavior
Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry, 24(2), 141–147.

World Health Organization (WHO). (2004). The Global
Burden on Disease 2004 update. Retrieved from www.
who.int /healthinfo /global_ burden_ disease / GBD_
report_2004update_full.pdf.

Wright, J. H. (1996). Inpatient cognitive therapy. In P. M.
Salkovskis (Ed.), Frontiers of cognitive therapy (pp. 208–
225). New York: Guilford Press.

Wright, J. H., & McCray, L. W. (2011). Breaking free from
depression: Pathways to wellness. New York: Guilford
Press.

Wright, J. H., Wright, A. S., Albano, A. M., Basco, M. R.,
Goldsmith, L. J., Raffield, T., et al. (2005). Computerassisted
cognitive therapy for depression: Maintaining efficacy
while reducing therapist time. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 162, 1158–1164.

Young, J. E. (1999). Cognitive therapy for personality disorders:
A schema-focused approach (3rd ed.). Sarasota,
FL: Professional Resource Exchange. (Original work published
1990)

Young, J. E. (2005). Young Schema Questionnaire (3rd ed.).
New York: Cognitive Therapy Center of New York.

Young, J. E., Arntz, A., Atkinson, T., Lobbestael, J., Weishaar,
E., van Vreeswijk, M., et al. (2008). Schema Mode Questionnaire
(Version 1.1). New York: Cognitive Therapy
Center of New York.

Young, J. E., & Klosko, J. S. (1994). Reinventing your life:
How to break free of negative life patterns. New York:
Plume.

Young, J. E., Klosko, J. S., & Weishaar, M. E. (2003). Schema
therapy: A practitioner’s guide. New York: Guilford
Press.

Zettle, R. (2007). ACT for depression: A clinician’s guide to
using acceptance and commitment therapy in treating depression.
Richmond, BC, Canada: Raincoat Books.


CHaPter

8
interpersonal Psychotherapy
for Depression

kathryN l. BleiBerG
JohN c. Markowitz

Much evidence has emerged over the past decade supporting the clinical effectiveness of
interpersonal psychotherapy (iPT) for a variety of problems, particularly depression. A
substantial advantage of iPT is the relative ease with which clinicians can learn to administer
this protocol with integrity. in this chapter, the process of iPT is illustrated in some
detail in the context of the treatment of “sara,” who was suffering from a major depressive
episode associated with grief following the death of her baby girl in utero at 27 weeks’
gestation, some 2 months earlier. The first author, kathryn l. Bleiberg, an international
authority on training in iPT, was the therapist. Although iPT is relatively easy to comprehend,
the twists and turns encountered in the administration of iPT (or any therapeutic
approach) are particularly evident in this chapter. Here the therapist skillfully focuses on
resolving grief, as well as on the patient’s social isolation and conflicts with her husband
over emotional reactions to the loss. Also notable about iPT is the finding that the treatment
is more successful when administered with fidelity to the goals of iPT and adherence
to the protocol. The power of a therapist and patient working well together and
staying on task provides some good evidence for the specific effects of an interpersonal
focus to psychotherapy.—D. H. B.

interpersonal psychotherapy (IPT), a time-limited,
diagnosis-targeted, pragmatic, empirically supported
treatment, was originally developed to treat outpatients
with major depression. IPT focuses on current or recent
life events, interpersonal difficulties, and symptoms.
Through use of the medical model and by linking mood
symptoms to recent life events, the IPT therapist helps
the patient to feel understood. IPT aids recovery from
depression by relieving depressive symptoms, by helping
the patient to develop more effective strategies for
dealing with current interpersonal problems related to
the onset of symptoms, and by mobilizing social support
(Bleiberg & Markowitz, 2007). IPT’s success as

an individual treatment for major depression has led to
its adaptation for subpopulations of patients with mood
disorders, including depressed older patients (Reynolds
et al., 2006, 2010; Sholomskas, Chevron, Prusoff, &
Berry, 1983), depressed adolescents (Mufson, Moreau,
& Weissman, 1993; Mufson, Weissman, Moreau, &
Garfinkel, 1999; Mufson et al., 2004), and depressed
HIV-positive patients (Markowitz, Klerman, Perry,
Clougherty, & Mayers, 1992; Markowitz, Kocsis, et al.,
1998; Ransom et al., 2008), and patients with antepartum
(Spinelli & Endicott, 2003) and postpartum depression
(O’Hara, Stuart, Gorman, & Wenzel, 2000),
dysthymic disorder (Markowitz, 1998), and bipolar dis


332


Interpersonal Psychotherapy for Depression

order (Frank, 2005). IPT has been adapted for anxiety
disorders, including social phobia (Lipsitz, Fyer, Markowitz,
& Cherry, 1999), posttraumatic stress disorder
(Bleiberg & Markowitz, 2005; Markowitz, Milrod,
Bleiberg, & Marshall, 2009), bulimia nervosa (Fairburn,
Jones, Peveler, Hope, & O’Connor, 1993; Fairburn
et al., 1995) and binge-eating disorder (Wilfley,
2008; Wilson, Wilfley, Agras, & Bryson, 2010), and
borderline personality disorder (Markowitz, Skodol, &
Bleiberg, 2006). In addition to its adaptation to treat
patients with different diagnoses, IPT has been increasingly
practiced and studied among patients from different
cultures (Markowitz & Weissman, 2012a). Furthermore,
IPT’s demonstrated efficacy in the treatment
of major depression has led to its incorporation into
national treatment guidelines (American Psychiatric
Association, 2010; Cuijpers et al., 2011).

This chapter describes the principles, characteristics,
and techniques of individual IPT for major depression
and illustrates how a clinician implements IPT techniques
with an actual patient.

MaJor DePressioN

Major depressive disorder (MDD), the most common
depressive illness, affects millions of Americans each
year. The Global Burden of Disease Study, initiated
by the World Health Organization (Murray & Lopez,
1996), estimated that depression is the fourth leading
cause of disability and will become the second leading
cause worldwide by the year 2020. Epidemiological
studies of mood disorders have provided estimates of
the prevalence and correlates of MDD. The National
Comorbidity Survey Replication (NCS-R; Kessler et
al., 2003) found a 16.2% lifetime and 6.6% annual prevalence
of MDD in the United States, with the majority
of cases of MDD associated with substantial symptom
severity and impairment in functioning. National and
international studies have consistently found higher
prevalence of MDD in women than in men; women
are twice as likely as men to experience an episode of
MDD. The average age of onset of MDD is between
ages 20 and 40 years (Blazer, 2000).

The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders, fifth edition (DSM-5; American Psychiatric
Association, 2013) defines MDD as a mood disorder
characterized by one or more major depressive
episodes. A major depressive episode entails a period
of at least 2 weeks during which a person experiences

depressed mood or loss of interest or pleasure in nearly
all activities most of the day, nearly every day, accompanied
by at least four additional symptoms of depression
present nearly every day. Symptoms of depression
include the following:

••
Significant weight loss (not related to dieting), or

weight gain or decrease or increase in appetite.

••
Insomnia or hypersomnia.

••
Psychomotor agitation or retardation severe

enough to be observable by others.

••
Fatigue or loss of energy.

••
Feelings of worthlessness, or excessive or inappro


priate or excessive guilt.

••
Diminished ability to think or concentrate, or in


decisiveness.

••
Recurrent thoughts of death, recurrent suicidal

ideation without a specific plan, or a suicide at


tempt or a specific plan to commit suicide.

To meet full criteria for a major depressive episode, the
patient’s symptoms must cause clinically significant
distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other
important areas of functioning. Depression is associated
with social withdrawal and difficulty in social and
occupational functioning. In some cases, a major depressive
episode will be accompanied by symptoms of
a manic episode, which is classified in DSM-5 using the
specifier with mixed features. The symptoms may not
be due to the direct physiological effects of a substance
or a general medical condition.

the DeveloPMeNt of iPt

Klerman, Weissman, and colleagues developed IPT in
the 1970s as a treatment arm for a pharmacotherapy study
of depression (Markowitz & Weissman, 2012b). Being
researchers, they developed a psychotherapy based on research
data. Post–World War II research on psychosocial
life events and the development of mental disorders had
shown relationships between depression and complicated
bereavement, role disputes (i.e., bad relationships), role
transitions (e.g., losing or getting a new job, or any meaningful
life change), and interpersonal deficits. Stressful
life events can trigger depressive episodes in vulnerable
individuals, and depressive episodes compromise interpersonal
functioning, making it difficult to manage
stressful life events, and often triggering further negative
life events (Bleiberg & Markowitz, 2007).


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

IPT was also built on the interpersonal theory of
Adolph Meyer (1957) and Harry Stack Sullivan (1953),
and on the attachment theory of John Bowlby (1973).
The interpersonalists broadened the scope of psychiatry
by emphasizing social, cultural, and interpersonal
factors. Sullivan stressed the role of interpersonal relationships
in the development of mental illness and the
use of interpersonal relationships to understand, assess,
and treat mental illness. Sullivan also indicated that life
events and relationships occurring after early childhood
influenced psychopathology, in contradistinction
to the then current focus on pre-Oedipal life events.

Bowlby (1973) posited that the disruption of secure
attachments can contribute to the onset of depression,
and that psychiatric disorders result from difficulties in
forming and maintaining secure attachments. Indeed,
social supports protect against depression. In psychiatry,
the idea that mental illness was influenced by
current life events and not (simply) due to early childhood
experiences was novel in an era divided between
psychoanalytic and biological approaches (Klerman,
Weissman, Rounsaville, & Chevron, 1984).

PriNciPles of iPt: the iPt MoDel
of DePressioN

Two basic principles of IPT explain the patient’s depression
and situation. These principles are simple enough
to grasp, even for a very depressed patient with poor
concentration. First, the IPT therapist defines depression
as a medical illness and explains that the patient
has a common illness that comprises a discrete and predictable
set of symptoms, thus making the symptoms
seem less overwhelming and more manageable. The
IPT therapist assumes that the etiology of depression
is complex and multidetermined: The etiology may
comprise biology, life experiences, and family history,
among other factors. The IPT therapist emphasizes that

depression is a medical illness that is treatable and
not the patient’s fault. Explaining that depression is
treatable inspires in patients the hope that they can feel
better. Hopelessness, a potentially deadly depressive
symptom, distorts the generally good prognosis of the
illness. Depressed patients often see their symptoms
and consequent difficulties in functioning as reflections
of a personal failure, character flaw, or weakness.

Defining depression as a blameless illness helps to
combat the depressed patient’s guilt and self-criticism.
The therapist diagnoses depression using DSM-5 or

International Classification of Diseases (ICD-10;
World Health Organization, 1992) criteria and assesses
symptoms using rating scales such as the Hamilton Depression
Rating Scale (HDRS; Hamilton, 1960) or the
Beck Depression Inventory–II (BDI-II; Beck, Steer, &
Brown, 1996). IPT’s use of the medical model to define
depression distinguishes it from other psychotherapies
and makes it highly compatible with antidepressant
medication in combination treatment.

The second IPT principle is that the patient’s depression
is connected to a current or recent life event. Stressful
life events can precipitate depressive episodes in
vulnerable individuals and, conversely, depression can
make it difficult for individuals to manage stressful life
events. IPT focuses on solving an interpersonal problem
in the patient’s life, a problem area—complicated
bereavement, a role dispute, a role transition, or interpersonal
deficits—connected to the patient’s current
depressive episode. By solving an interpersonal crisis,
the patient can improve her1 life situation and simultaneously
relieve depressive symptoms.

characteristics of iPt

Several characteristics define IPT, sometimes distinguishing
it from other psychotherapies.

••
IPT is time-limited and focused. Acute treatment
at the start is set at 12 or 16 weekly sessions. Some studies
have included continuation and maintenance phases,
which involve biweekly and monthly sessions. IPT’s
time limit provides hope for patients that their symptoms
and life situation can rapidly improve; the time
limit encourages patients to stay focused in treatment.
It also pressures both patient and therapist to work hard
and efficiently within the therapeutic window of opportunity.
Therapist and patient agree to focus on one, or at
most two, problem areas at the beginning of treatment.

••
IPT is empirically grounded. Because IPT has
shown repeated efficacy in research studies, therapists
can offer and deliver the treatment with confidence and
optimism, and patients can feel hopeful about the treatment
they are receiving.

••
IPT is diagnosis-targeted. IPT focuses on a specific
diagnosis, its symptoms, and how symptoms interfere
and interact with social functioning. IPT is not intended
for all patients, but it has been tested in a series of randomized
controlled trials to determine its efficacy.


Interpersonal Psychotherapy for Depression

••
IPT has a “here-and-now” focus. IPT focuses
on the present and on improving the patient’s situation
for the future—not on what happened in the patient’s
past. The IPT therapist relates current symptoms and
interpersonal difficulties to recent or current life events.
Although past depressive episodes and relationships are
reviewed and relationship patterns are identified, treatment
focuses on current relationships—building social
supports and resolving disputes—and social functioning.


••
IPT focuses on interpersonal problems. The IPT
therapist may recognize intrapsychic defenses but does
not see the patient’s current difficulties as a function of
internal conflict. Instead, the therapist focuses on interpersonal
relationships and functioning.

••
IPT focuses on the interrelationship between
mood and current life events. The IPT therapist emphasizes
that stressful life events can trigger episodes
of major depression and, reciprocally, that depression
compromises psychosocial functioning. This makes
it difficult to manage life stressors, leading to further
negative life events.

••
IPT emphasizes eliciting affect. Depressed patients
often have difficulty understanding, identifying,
and articulating what they are feeling. Whereas
patients with depression tend to report feeling “bad,”
they often have difficulty identifying negative feelings
more specifically, such as anger, hurt, shame, rejection,
disappointment. Furthermore, depressed patients who
do recognize such negative affects tend to feel ashamed
of having such “bad” emotions. The IPT therapist helps
the patient to better identify what she is feeling, validates
emotions such as anger and disappointment as
normal and useful interpersonal signals, and helps the
patient to use such emotion as a guide (Markowitz &
Milrod, 2011). Patients in IPT learn to manage their
feelings better and to use them in deciding how to behave
and what to say in interpersonal encounters.

iPt coMPareD
with other PsychotheraPies

Although IPT has a distinct rationale and is distinguishable
from other psychotherapies (Hill, O’Grady,
& Elkin, 1992; Weissman, Markowitz, & Klerman,
2000), it is an eclectic psychotherapy that uses techniques
seen in other treatment approaches. IPT includes
the so-called “common” factors of psycho


therapy (Frank, 1971). IPT shares the “here and now”
diagnostic focus, time limit, and active approach with
cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT). IPT and CBT both
include role playing and skills building. However, IPT
is much less structured and assigns no formal homework,
although the IPT therapist does encourage activity
between sessions to improve mood and as it relates
to resolving the interpersonal problem area. Whereas
the CBT therapist defines depression as a consequence
of dysfunctional thought patterns and attributes the patient’s
difficulties to them, the IPT therapist emphasizes
that depression is a medical illness and relates difficulties
to feeling depressed and to recent life events. IPT
emphasizes eliciting affect rather than (“hot,” affectively
charged) automatic thoughts. IPT addresses interpersonal
issues in a manner similar to that in marital
therapy. Much like a supportive therapist, IPT therapists
provide support and encouragement (Bleiberg &
Markowitz, 2007).

IPT has been termed a “psychodynamic” psychotherapy
on occasion, but it is not (Markowitz, Svartberg,
& Swartz, 1998). IPT employs the medical model
of depressive illness, whereas psychodynamic psychotherapy
uses a conflict-based approach. The IPT therapist
does not address unconscious processes, or explore
or interpret the transference, but instead focuses on current
relationships outside of the treatment room. Childhood
experiences are recognized but not emphasized.
The IPT therapist relates current symptoms and interpersonal
problems to recent life events, not to childhood
experiences. IPT acknowledges the influence of
past experiences on present difficulties, but only to
identify patterns of interpersonal behavior and to empathize
with the patient’s struggle. Unlike psychodynamic
treatment, the goal in IPT is to reduce symptoms
and improve social functioning, not to change character
or personality. Like the psychodynamic psychotherapist,
however, the IPT therapist emphasizes facilitating
affect in the treatment room and helping patients become
aware of feelings they may not have been aware
of previously (Markowitz & Milrod, 2011; Weissman
et al., 2000).

the iPt theraPist

The IPT therapist conducts treatment in an office in
an academic, hospital, or private practice setting. The
therapist typically does not consult with the patient’s
family or friends.


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

The IPT therapist takes a non-neutral, active stance,
providing psychoeducation about depression, emphasizing
the IPT rationale, teaching social skills, and
instilling hope. A somewhat directive approach is essential
for adhering to the time limit in IPT and keeping
the treatment focused on the interpersonal problem
area. Taking an active stance may be challenging for
therapists with psychodynamic orientations who are
used to taking a neutral stance and offering little guidance
in the session.

On the other hand, the IPT therapist does not want to
reinforce the passivity and dependency that are characteristic
of depression. A therapist who solves all problems
may reinforce the patient’s sense of inadequacy.
Hence, the IPT therapist encourages the patient to
come up with ideas, explore options, and test them out
between sessions. Hence, the patient deserves (and is
given) credit for making the life changes that lead to
improvement in treatment.

The IPT therapist needs to be supportive, enthusiastic,
and optimistic to instill hope that the depression
will improve and changes will be forthcoming, and to
encourage and inspire the patient to make changes. The
structure of the IPT manual (Weissman et al., 2000;
Weissman, Markowitz, & Klerman, 2007) and the
empirical validation of IPT in randomized controlled
studies help to bolster therapist confidence. The IPT
therapist frequently congratulates the patient on her
progress in treatment and efforts to make changes.

Given the emphasis on helping the patient to identify
and express feelings, the IPT therapist needs to feel
comfortable encouraging expression of affect and tolerating
intense negative affects. The therapist can show
by example that feelings are indeed potent, but they are
only feelings, and can be understood in an interpersonal
context and will pass, if tolerated.

the iPt PatieNt

Research has demonstrated that a wide range of patients
with major depression are good candidates for
IPT. IPT has been validated with minor modifications
as a treatment for adolescent, adult, peripartum, and
geriatric depression. The patient should ideally report
some recent life stressor and have some social contacts.
Patients with depression who report no recent life
events and lack basic social skills tend to do least well
in IPT. IPT is not intended for patients with delusional
depression, which requires antidepressant and antipsychotic
pharmacotherapy or electroconvulsive therapy.

Patients with comorbid moderate or severe personality
disorder may be less likely to respond to short-term
psychotherapy (Weissman et al., 2000). Accordingly,
the recent adaptation of IPT for borderline personality
disorder allows up to 32 weeks of treatment (Markowitz
et al., 2006).

the four iNterPersoNal
ProBleM areas

Treatment with IPT focuses on solving one of the following
four interpersonal problem areas related to the
onset or maintenance of the patient’s current depressive
episode. The IPT therapist follows strategies specific to
each problem area.

Grief

This problem area addresses a patient’s complicated
bereavement following the death of a significant other.
The therapist facilitates the mourning process, encourages
catharsis, and ultimately helps the patient to form
new relationships and find new activities to compensate
for the loss. The therapist explores the relationship and
the associated feelings the patient had with the loved
one. Patients with complicated bereavement often have
had a conflicted relationship with the deceased, reporting
unresolved feelings about and anger toward the person,
and feeling guilty or uncomfortable with such feelings.
Patients may feel guilty about what they did or did
not say to or do for the person who died. The therapist
encourages exploration of these feelings and validates
and normalizes negative feelings, allowing the patient
to let go of the guilt she experiences.

The release of negative affects in the therapy office
can help to diminish the intensity of such feelings. The
therapist also explores positive feelings the patient had
for the person she lost and empathizes with the loss. Finally,
the therapist helps the patient explore options for
forming new relationships and finding new activities to
help to substitute for the lost relationship and give the
patient a new sense of direction. The loss may provide
opportunities to meet people and engage in activities
the patient might not otherwise have encountered.

Role Disputes

A “role dispute” is a conflict with a significant other:
a spouse, friend, parent, relative, employer, coworker,
or close friend. The therapist and patient explore the


Interpersonal Psychotherapy for Depression

relationship, the nature of the dispute, and options to
resolve it. Patients with depression tend to put other
people’s needs ahead of their own. They have difficulty
asserting themselves, confronting others, and getting
angry effectively, which makes it difficult for them to
manage interpersonal conflicts. The therapist discusses
these depressive tendencies with patients and explains:
“It’s not your fault. You can learn how to assert yourself.”


The therapist validates the patient’s feelings in the
relationship: recognizing anger as a natural response
to someone bothering her, for example. The next question
is how to express such feelings. The therapist helps
the patient to conceive ways to communicate thoughts
and feelings more effectively and role-plays potential
interactions with her. If, after exploring and attempting
to implement options to resolve the dispute, the conflict
has reached an impasse, the therapist helps the patient
to consider ways either to live with the impasse or end
the relationship.

Role Transitions

A “role transition” is a change in life status, such as
beginning or ending a relationship, starting or losing a
job, a geographic move, graduation or retirement, becoming
a parent, or receiving the diagnosis of a medical
illness. The therapist helps the patient to mourn the
loss of the old role, to explore positive and negative
aspects of the new role, and to determine what positive
aspects of the old role, if any, she can retain. Ultimately,
the therapist helps the patient adjust to and gain
a sense of mastery over the new role. Even if a new role
is wanted or positive, the role may be accompanied by
unanticipated loss. For example, getting married may
involve having to spend less time with one’s family of
origin due to having to spend time with the spouse’s
family. Moving to a new, larger house in a better neighborhood
may disrupt relationships with friends in the
old neighborhood. If a new role is undesired, a patient
may discover unseen benefits in therapy. A patient who
has lost a job may come to see the loss as an opportunity
to pursue a better job.

Interpersonal Deficits

Interpersonal deficits, the least developed of the four
problem areas, are the focus of IPT for major depression
only when a patient reports no recent life events
and, therefore, lacks any of the first three problem
areas. Patients in this category tend to be socially iso


lated, and to have few social supports and a history of
difficulty forming and sustaining relationships or finding
relationships unfulfilling. The goal of treatment in
this problem area is to reduce the patient’s isolation. Because
the patient lacks current relationships, treatment
focuses on patterns in past relationships and starting to
form new ones. The therapist reviews past significant
relationships, exploring positive and negative aspects
and identifying recurrent problems. The therapist helps
the patient to explore options for meeting people and
participating in activities that she used to enjoy.

Unlike treatment for the other problem areas, treatment
for interpersonal deficits may focus on the relationship
with the therapist. In the absence of other relationships,
and with the understanding that the patient is
likely to feel uncomfortable in the therapeutic situation,
the therapist encourages the patient to discuss her feelings
about the therapist and work on interpersonal problems
that arise in their relationship. Ideally, the relationship
with the therapist serves as model for the patient to
form other relationships. Given that IPT usually focuses
on a life event, it is not surprising that patients who lack
such life events have been shown to respond least well
to IPT. It is important to identify patients who have underlying
dysthymic disorder because such patients often
describe few recent life events. There is an IPT protocol
adapted to the treatment of patients who are dysthymic
(Markowitz, 1998; Weissman et al., 2000).

the Process of iPt treatMeNt

Acute IPT treatment for major depression comprises
initial, middle, and termination phases. IPT techniques
help the patient to pursue the goals of treatment for
each interpersonal problem area. This section leads
into a case example illustrating the implementation of
these techniques.

The Initial Phase (Sessions 1–3)

Tasks of the initial sessions of IPT for major depression
include eliciting the patient’s chief complaint; reviewing
her symptoms and establishing a diagnosis;
determining the interpersonal context for the current
depressive episode; forming a therapeutic alliance;
and setting the frame of the treatment, including the
treatment goals and strategies. Although these tasks
are common to other psychotherapeutic interventions,
the techniques and process for accomplishing them are
specific to IPT.


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

Diagnosing Major Depression

To diagnosis MDD, the therapist reviews current symptoms
of depression using either DSM-5 or ICD-10 criteria,
inquiring about each symptom and about any past
history of depression. The therapist may administer a
symptom severity scale such as the HDRS (Hamilton,
1960) or the BDI-II (Beck et al., 1996) and repeat the
instrument every few weeks to monitor the patient’s
progress. The therapist rules out other diagnoses, such
as bipolar illness, depression due to general medical
condition or substance, and other psychiatric disorders.
If the patient meets criteria for MDD, the therapist tells
her, describing explicitly each of the symptoms she reported:


“You have an illness called major depression. The
symptoms you describe having had for the past
couple of months—feeling down most of the time,
having difficulty enjoying things, feeling like you
have to push yourself to get things done, difficulty
sleeping, loss of appetite, trouble concentrating, and
feeling very self-critical and down on yourself and
pessimistic about your future—are all symptoms of
depression. Depression is a treatable illness. It is not
your fault that you feel this way and have had difficulty
functioning, any more than it would be your
fault if you had asthma or high blood pressure, or
any other medical problem. And although you’re
feeling hopeless, that’s just a depressive symptom.
Your prognosis with treatment is quite good. You can
feel better.”

In the initial phase, and as needed throughout the
treatment, the therapist provides psychoeducation
about depression and how it affects social functioning.
The therapist helps the patient to identify and understand
her depressive symptoms and how better to manage
them, and to distinguish between the illness and
premorbid strengths and capabilities. The therapist determines
the need for medication based on symptom
severity, past response to medications, and patient preference.


The “Sick Role”

The IPT therapist gives the patient the “sick role”
(Parsons, 1951), a temporary role intended to help the
patient recognize that she suffers from an illness that
comprises a distinct set of symptoms that compromise

functioning. Assuming the sick role relieves the patient
of self-blame and exempts her from responsibilities that
the depression compromises until she recovers. The
therapist educates the patient about how depression can
impair social functioning and how to explain the illness
to family and friends to gain support. The sick role
also gives the patient the responsibility of working on
improving her symptoms in treatment.

The Interpersonal Inventory

In IPT the psychiatric history includes the “interpersonal
inventory,” a thorough review of the patient’s
past and current social functioning, close relationships,
relationship patterns, expectations of others within
relationships, and the perceived expectations that others
have of the patient. The interpersonal inventory
should give the therapist a sense of how the patient
interacts with other people. It should also illuminate
how relationships may have contributed to the current
depressive episode and, conversely, how depressive
symptoms may be affecting current relationships. Furthermore,
the interpersonal inventory assesses actual
and potential social support. To glean this information,
the IPT therapist asks detailed questions about the patient’s
past and current relationships. An inquiry about
current relationships might include the following questions:


“Who is in your life currently? . . . Do you have a significant
other? . . . Girlfriend/boyfriend? . . . What is
your relationship like with him/her? . . . What do you
like about him/her? . . . What don’t you like? . . . Do
you and your spouse argue? . . . What do you argue
about? . . . What happens when you argue—what do
you do/say? . . . What do you expect of him/her? . . .
What do you think he/she expects of you?”

Identification of Interpersonal Problem Areas

The primary goal of the interpersonal inventory is
to determine which interpersonal issues are most related
to the patient’s current depressive episode. The
therapist should identify major interpersonal problem
areas that can become the treatment focus. The therapist
inquires about any changes in the patient’s life
that occurred around the onset of current depressive
symptoms: “What was going on in your life when you
became depressed?” The therapist explores different
areas in the patient’s life: home, work, relationships


Interpersonal Psychotherapy for Depression

with significant others, family members, and friends.
The therapist should pick one problem area on which to
focus, or at most two; too many treatment foci yield an
unfocused treatment. The therapist relates the depression
to a problem area and presents this to the patient
in a formulation:

“It seems from what you have been telling me that
the main problem has been your difficulty in getting
along with your husband. Although the causes
of depression are complex and not fully known, we
do know that conflicts with significant others can be
related to depression. Furthermore, depression can
make it difficult to handle conflicts with other people.
I suggest that we meet for the next 12 weeks to
figure out how you can better deal with the problems
with your husband you’ve described. In IPT, we call
that conflict a ‘role dispute.’ As you solve your role
dispute, both your life and your depression should
improve. Does this make sense to you?”

Only with the patient’s explicit agreement to work on
the chosen interpersonal problem area does the therapist
proceed to the middle phase of treatment. The patient’s
agreement on the focus allows the therapist to
bring her back to this theme thereafter, maintaining a
thematic flow for the treatment.

Explanation of the Treatment Contract
and the IPT Approach

In addition to agreeing on a treatment focus in the initial
sessions, the therapist and patient discuss and come to
an understanding about other aspects of the treatment.
The therapist discusses practical issues, including the
time limit, the length and frequency of sessions, termination
date, appointment time, fee, and so forth. The
therapist explains that IPT is one of several empirically
supported antidepressant treatments and describes the
basic IPT principles. The therapist emphasizes the
“here and now,” and the social and interpersonal focus
of the treatment, explaining:

“We’ll work together to try to understand how current
stresses and relationships may be affecting your
mood. We will work on helping you to better manage
these stresses and the problems you may be having in
relationships. We’ll explore what you want and need
in your relationships and help you figure out how to
get what you want and need.

“I’ll be interested in hearing each week about
what’s going on in your relationships with other
people, how those interactions make you feel, and
also how your feelings influence what happens with
other people.”

The therapist encourages the patient to bring up any
discomforts she has about the sessions.

“If anything bothers you, please bring it up. I do not
intend to do anything to make you uncomfortable,
but if you feel that way, please tell me, so that we can
address the issue. It’s just the sort of interpersonal
tension that we need to focus on in your outside life
as well.”

The Middle Phase (Sessions 4–9)

Having made the treatment contract and chosen an interpersonal
problem area as the focus of treatment, the
therapist can proceed to the middle phase of sessions,
in which the goal is to work on resolving the focal problem
area.

Each session begins with the question, “How have
you been feeling since we last met?” This question
elicits an interval history of mood, events, and interpersonal
interactions that transpired between sessions.
It also keeps the patient focused on current mood and
situation. The patient is likely to respond by describing
a mood (“I felt really down”) or an event (“My husband
and I had a huge fight”). After further inquiry, the
therapist links the patient’s mood to a recent event, or
an event to her mood (“No wonder you felt depressed
after the fight you had with your husband!”).

Inquiring about emotionally laden interpersonal interactions,
the therapist uses “communication analysis”—
the reconstruction and evaluation of affectively
charged interactions—to help the patient understand
how she felt in the situation and what she might have
done to communicate more effectively. The therapist
explores the patient’s wishes and options, helping her
to decide what she wants and exploring the options for
achieving it.

“What did you want to happen in that situation? . . .
What could you have done to get what you wanted
in that situation? What other options do you have?”

Depressed patients often have difficulty seeing that
they have options, and their tendency to deem their


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

own needs to be less important than others’ contributes
to difficulty in asserting themselves. The therapist explains
this to the patient and offers empathy, blaming
the depressive syndrome for the patient’s difficulties
where appropriate. To help the patient choose which
options to pursue, the therapist uses decision analysis.
The case example presented later in this chapter elaborates
these techniques.

The therapist role-plays potential interactions with
the patient to prepare her for interpersonal interactions
in real life. Rather than supplying words for the patient
during role play, the therapist instead encourages her
to come up with her own words. This empowers the
patient, fostering her independence from the therapist.
The therapist points out that the patient is able to figure
out what to say and do in interpersonal interactions, despite
depression making her feel unable to do so. The
therapist asks the patient how she felt during role play,
whether the content and tone of voice felt comfortable,
and how she imagines it will feel to say the words in
reality. When a patient communicates effectively during
role play—and, ultimately, in real life—the therapist
reinforces the adaptive behavior with congratulations
and encouragement. Real-life successes not only
improve mood but also inspire patients to try to assert
themselves in subsequent situations.

Depressed patients withdraw socially and to lose
interest in activities they previously found pleasurable.
The therapist encourages the patient to resume social
activity and to explore options for new activities and opportunities
to form new relationships, if applicable. The
therapist empathizes with difficulty the patient feels
in pushing herself to engage with others, but stresses
that, once engaged, she will likely feel better. Indeed,
the IPT therapist asks the patient to take risks—both
in asserting herself with others and in pushing herself
to reengage in social activities. The therapist explicitly
acknowledges that he/she is asking the patient to take
risks, yet assures her that these risks will likely lead to
improvement of her mood and life situation. The therapist
will be there to discuss anything that goes right or
wrong.

The Termination Phase (Sessions 10–12)

In the final sessions, the therapist reviews the patient’s
progress in symptom improvement, as well as the extent
to which the patient has resolved the focal problem
area. By reviewing why the patient is better, through
the actions she has taken to resolve the interpersonal

focus, the therapist reinforces the patient’s growing
self-esteem by pointing out that the patient’s actions
have led to her gains. The therapist congratulates the
patient on her progress and hard work, and expresses
optimism that the patient can maintain that progress
independent of the therapist.

The therapist addresses nonresponse in patients
whose moods and life situations do not improve, or
only partially improve. The therapist should explain
that it is the treatment that failed—not the patient. The
therapist gives the patient hope by emphasizing that
depression is treatable and many other effective treatments
exist, and by encouraging her to explore alternative
treatments.

The therapist explores the patient’s feelings about the
treatment and termination, acknowledging not only his/
her own sadness to be ending their relationship but also
happiness about the patient’s improvement and confidence
that she will be able to maintain the progress she
made in treatment. Should symptoms recur, the patient
has gained tools to manage symptoms of depression on
her own. Furthermore, the patient can return to IPT for
“booster” sessions as needed.

Using the IPT medical model, the therapist provides
psychoeducation about relapse and recurrence of major
depression and prepares the patient about potential for
relapse. Patients who have experienced one or more episodes
of major depression unfortunately remain vulnerable
to future episodes. The therapist explains this and
advises that given the link between stressful life events
and mood, the patient can anticipate that she may have
difficulty with future, stressful life events. Fortunately,
the patient can use the coping skills gained in treatment
to ward off a worsening of symptoms. If the patient
has improved in IPT but has either significant residual
symptoms or a history of multiple episodes, therapist
and patient may contract for continuation or maintenance
IPT, which has also demonstrated efficacy in
forestalling relapse (Frank et al., 2007).

case stuDy

The following case demonstrates how a clinician (K. L.
B.) implemented IPT for major depression in a 12-week
acute treatment and illustrates how one works with the
problem area of grief. In IPT, grief (complicated bereavement)
is considered as a focal problem area when
the onset of depression is related to the death of a significant
other and the patient is experiencing an abnor



Interpersonal Psychotherapy for Depression

mal grief reaction (Weissman et al., 2000). Although
cases that focus on the grief problem area usually address
complicated bereavement related to the death of
a person who has actually lived, the following case involves
complicated bereavement related to a stillbirth
(Bleiberg, 2012). Indeed, the IPT problem areas can
apply to a wide range of cases. IPT treatment goals and
techniques specific to working with the grief problem
area are demonstrated.

Background Information

Sara, a 35-year-old, married, childless woman, was
referred for treatment of major depression 2 months
after the death of her baby girl in utero at 27 weeks’
gestation. Her doctor considered a bacterial infection
the most likely cause of the stillbirth. Sara’s chief complaint
was “I feel like I should be over it.”

At 27 weeks, after not having felt the baby move for
several hours, Sara called her doctor, who told her to
come to the hospital. The doctor found no heartbeat
and told Sara that he needed to deliver the fetus. Sara
recalled feeling shocked, numb, and unable to cry at
first. She was given medication to induce labor and an
epidural, and delivered the baby vaginally. Despite efforts
to revive her, the baby girl was pronounced dead
shortly after delivery. Sara said that she wanted to
hold her and was given the baby to hold, swaddled in
a white-and-pink blanket. She recalled that she and her
husband had cried uncontrollably while they took turns
holding the baby, and for a long time after giving the
baby back to the doctor. She remembered that the baby
was “very cute” and looked like her husband. She was
given pictures of the baby and footprints to take home.
Sara and her husband decided not to have a funeral or
memorial service for the baby.

Sara reported that since the stillbirth 2 months earlier,
she had been feeling sad and irritable most of the
day, nearly every day, and unable to enjoy previous pleasures
such as reading fiction, cooking, going to the movies,
and exercise. She worked as a nurse on an inpatient
medical floor in a New York City hospital, and prior to
the stillbirth had very much enjoyed her work. She now
felt unable to enjoy work because of her mood, and she
feared having to talk about her loss with coworkers who
knew she had been pregnant. She was crying frequently,
socially withdrawn, had low energy and difficulty
concentrating, experienced decreased appetite, and felt
very bad about herself. She denied ever having thoughts
of suicide or feeling that life was not worth living.

Sara reported that despite trying not to think about
the baby’s death, she nonetheless was frequently bothered
by thoughts about the baby, often wondering what
her life would have been like had she survived. Sara
had returned to work 3 weeks after the stillbirth, hoping
that work would distract her and help her “get over”
her loss. She reported feeling very angry at and avoiding
other pregnant women, including close friends and
women with newborns, in addition to other reminders
of her pregnancy. She felt angry at having had to go
through pregnancy, labor, and delivery without gaining
the pleasure of having a child.

Sara was plagued by inappropriate guilt. She felt
guilty because she feared that she had done something
to cause her loss, despite the doctor telling her that she
could have done nothing to prevent it. He explained that
when bacterial infections cause fetal death, they often
cause no symptoms in the mother and go undiagnosed
until they cause serious complications. Nevertheless,
Sara felt that she should have recognized the infection,
and she felt guilty about having waited until age 35 to
try to conceive. She felt like a failure for having had a
stillbirth. Sara felt guilty that she had disappointed and
upset her husband by losing the baby, and she did not
want to burden him with her feelings about the loss.

Sara had never sought treatment prior to her current
evaluation. She described one prior episode of major
depression in her late 20s, lasting 4–6 weeks, precipitated
by a breakup with a boyfriend of several years, but
reported feeling much worse since losing the baby. She
reported that her mother had been treated for depression
with antidepressant medication with good results.

Sara was an attractive woman of average height and
weight who looked her stated age. She was casually
but neatly dressed in jeans and a large sweater. Sara’s
movements were slightly slowed; her speech was fluent.
Her mood was depressed and anxious, and her affect,
congruent and tearful. She denied current or past
suicidal ideation and any history of substance abuse or
psychotic symptoms. She denied current or past medical
conditions, including thyroid dysfunction. She reported
no known prior pregnancies, pregnancy losses,
or fertility issues prior to the stillbirth. In fact, she had
conceived after just a couple of months of trying to get
pregnant.

Sara was good candidate for IPT: She met criteria
for major depression and had experienced a recent life
event proximate to the onset of her symptoms. Furthermore,
IPT could address the interpersonal problems
she was experiencing related to the onset of her


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

symptoms. Sara was also a potential candidate for CBT,
pharmacotherapy, or (evidence-based antidepressant)
psychotherapy combined with medication. She was uninterested
in doing written homework and resistant to
taking medication because she was hoping to conceive
again in the near future.

IPT Treatment with Sara

Acute Phase (Sessions 1–3)

Treatment with Sara followed the IPT format for acute
treatment. In the first three sessions, the therapist obtained
a thorough psychiatric history and set the treatment
framework. In the first session, she obtained a
chief complaint and a history of Sara’s present illness.
Because treatment occurred prior to the release of
DSM-5, the therapist used DSM-IV criteria to determine
that Sara met criteria for major depressive disorder.
She administered the HDRS to assess the severity
of Sara’s symptoms.

The therapist offered Sara empathy for her pregnancy
loss, saying: “I am so sorry. You’ve suffered a
terrible loss. No wonder you have been feeling so badly
and having such a difficult time.” The therapist gave
Sara her diagnosis of major depression, reviewed her
specific symptoms, and gave her the “sick role,” and
offered her hope:

“The symptoms you’ve described having in the past
couple of months—depressed mood, not being
able to enjoy things and your loss of interest in
things, feeling very badly about yourself and guilty,
your difficulty eating and sleeping, and difficulty
concentrating—are all symptoms of major depression.
Major depression is an illness that is treatable.
It is not your fault that you have been feeling this
way. And you have a very good chance of recovering.”


The therapist explained that Sara’s HDRS score of
24 indicated moderately severe depression and that she
would readminister the HDRS at regular intervals to
monitor Sara’s progress. Given the severity of Sara’s
symptoms, her willingness to participate in psychotherapy,
and her reluctance to take medication in anticipation
of trying to conceive again, the therapist did not
think medication was needed.

The therapist described IPT and the treatment rationale:


tHeraPist: I am trained in interpersonal psychotherapy,
which I think could be helpful to you. Interpersonal
psychotherapy—often called IPT—is a timelimited
treatment that focuses on how recent life
events and stresses—such as losing a baby—affect
your mood, and how mood symptoms make it difficult
to current life events and stresses, particularly
problems in relationships. Although we will take the
first few sessions to review your history, our sessions
will focus on the here and now, on your current difficulties
and relationships, not on the past. Does this
make sense to you?

sara: Yes.

tHeraPist: Often, people respond to treatment with
IPT in 12 weekly sessions. I propose that we meet
once a week for a 50-minute session for the next 12
weeks. If it’s helpful, at the end of the 12 sessions,
we can discuss whether it might be useful to have
additional sessions to work on issues and maintain
your progress. How does that sound to you?

sara: It sounds good. I hope I can feel better in 12
weeks.

tHeraPist: You can feel better in 12 weeks. IPT has
been shown in numerous research studies to effectively
treat symptoms like the ones you have described.


After the first session Sara felt somewhat more hopeful
but stated that she did not like the idea that she had
a diagnosis of major depression. Although she could
understand that there was a relationship between her
stillbirth and her mood, Sara still felt she should be
feeling better after 2 months and did not want to think
of herself as depressed, like her mother, and in need of
help. Sara stated that she was always the “strong one”
and was used to functioning at a very high level. The
therapist was not surprised by Sara’s initial skepticism,
as it can take time for patients to accept the medical
model. Furthermore, patients with depression often
feel uncomfortable about seeking help because they
fear burdening others. Nevertheless, therapist and patient
agreed to work together for 12 weeks, then decide
whether further sessions were needed.

In obtaining Sara’s psychiatric history, the therapist
conducted an interpersonal inventory, carefully reviewing
Sara’s past and current social functioning and
close relationships. She started the inventory by asking
about Sara’s family.


Interpersonal Psychotherapy for Depression

“Where did you grow up? . . . Who was in your family?
. . . How would you describe your relationship
with your mother? . . . With your brother?”

Sara had grown up in Canada with her parents, now
in their early 60s, and her younger brother, now age
33, all of whom still lived near Toronto where she had
been raised. Her father had worked a lot while Sara was
growing up, and although she was fond of him, she did
not feel so close to him. Sara felt closer to her mother
and spoke with her weekly but was easily irritated by
her. It bothered Sara that her mother was not assertive
and was intermittently depressed. She spoke weekly
with her brother, who lived with his wife and 2-yearold
son. She described her relationship with her brother
as fairly close. She reported speaking to her brother less
often since the stillbirth because she felt jealous that he
had a child. When they did speak, Sara avoided asking
about her nephew.

After exploring Sara’s relationships with family
members, the therapist asked about other important
people in her life and about her relationship with her
husband. At age 33, Sara met her husband, Steve, who
was 1 year her junior. She described Steve as warm and
charming, and reported that he took great care of her.
She felt she did not “deserve him” because he was “such
a good guy.” She described her previous boyfriends as
less emotionally available and “not very nice.” Both
Sara and Steve had originally came from Canada but
met in New York City, where mutual friends introduced
them. Sara had moved to New York in her early 20s,
whereas her husband had moved there 2 years before
they met.

Since the stillbirth, Sara felt distant from Steve and
argued with him about “little things.” She reported
feeling guilty that she had let him down by losing the
baby and feared that he blamed her for the baby’s death.
She did not want to burden him further by sharing her
own distress about the loss. She also felt that Steve
would not be able to understand her fears about trying
to conceive again.

Sara reported having a few close girlfriends who
lived in the tristate area and, until the pregnancy
loss, had spoken with them about once per week. She
had several friends at work with whom she had chatted
almost daily until the loss. She described herself
as “independent,” “outgoing,” and “not one to lean on
other people” prior to becoming depressed. Rather, her
friends turned to her when they had problems. Sara said

that before the depression, her friends would describe
her as hardworking and energetic. She rarely argued
with friends because she felt “uncomfortable” with
conflict. She avoided confronting friends and coworkers
when she disagreed or felt angry with them.

The therapist asked Sara if there was anyone to whom
she had turned for comfort after her loss because it is
important to have someone in whom to confide after
such a terrible loss or any stressful experience. Sara
replied that she had been avoiding her friends and family
since the loss. She had felt uncomfortable talking
to friends, family, and coworkers about her pregnancy
when she was pregnant because she did not like being
the center of attention and felt guilty that she did not
enjoy the first trimester of her pregnancy. She felt even
more uncomfortable discussing her pregnancy loss.
Her parents and in-laws came to see Sara and her husband
after the loss, but she felt unable to talk with them
about what had happened and how she was feeling. Her
coworkers knew that she had been pregnant, and Sara
felt obligated to say something to them about what had
happened. The therapist noted that it sounded like Sara
could trust no one with her feelings about the stillbirth.
Sara did not want to reach out to family or friends, or
let them know how bad she felt; she explained: “I don’t
want to bother people with my problems. I don’t want
to be weak.”

The therapist reframed Sara’s difficulty in reaching
out to others, using the medical model to explain how
depression affects social functioning:

tHeraPist: You are not weak—you are depressed—
and that’s not your fault. People with depression
tend to minimize their own needs and avoid seeking
help from their friends, as you have, because they
fear being a burden. However, it is not only appropriate
to seek support from others but it also can be
really helpful to get their support. In fact, support
from others has been shown to help in recovery from
depression. I appreciate your dilemma. Your depression
makes you feel uncomfortable seeking support,
yet support from others has been shown to reduce
depression and protect people from becoming depressed.
Does this make sense to you?

sara: Yes, but I also don’t want to hear what they have
to say. It just makes me more upset. They don’t understand
what I have been through.

tHeraPist: What kinds of things have people said to
you?


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

Sara replied that it bothered her when people said
things like “You’ll get pregnant again” or “I know
someone who also lost a baby.” These statements made
her feel angry. She felt that others could not understand
what she had experienced. One close friend had recently
given birth to her first child, and Sara had avoided
calling and seeing her. It felt unfair that her friend had
a baby when she did not. A coworker had been pregnant
at the same time but had a relatively easy pregnancy.
Sara felt that her coworker was not sympathetic to her
physical discomfort during pregnancy.

By the end of the first phase of treatment, the therapist
had connected Sara’s major depressive episode to
her interpersonal situation in a formulation centered
on an IPT focal problem area. Sara’s chief complaint
reflected that she was still grieving the loss of her
baby and unable to resume her normal level of functioning.
Her situation was a clear example of the grief
problem area: Sara was suffering from complicated
bereavement. While it is normal to grieve for months
after losing a loved one, the severity of Sara’s depressive
symptoms—especially the excessive guilt, low
self-esteem, and social isolation—and her avoidance
of thoughts, feelings, and reminders of the baby and
the baby’s death, reflected an abnormal grief reaction.
She had not sought emotional support after the stillbirth
and had not really mourned the loss of her baby.
In fact, people often develop complicated bereavement
when they lack or have not used their social network to
help them mourn the loss of their loved one.

The therapist presented this formulation to Sara:

tHeraPist: From what you are telling me, it’s clear
that the loss of your baby triggered your current depression.
You have suffered a terrible loss and you
are having trouble grieving. No wonder you are having
such a hard time. This is not your fault. Furthermore,
your loss and your depression have affected
your relationships with people in your life, like your
husband, your friends and coworkers, and you’re
having difficulty expressing your feelings to them. I
suggest that we focus our sessions on handling your
grief over this terrible event. Grief is one of the problem
areas that IPT has been shown to treat. I suggest
we work on helping you to mourn the loss and to
improve your relationships that have been affected
by your loss. How does this sound to you?

sara: It sounds good.

With Sara’s explicit agreement about the treatment
focus, the therapist began the middle phase of treatment.


Middle Phase (Sessions 4–9)

During the middle phase, therapist and patient worked
on resolving Sara’s interpersonal problem area. In IPT,
the strategy for working with grief is to help the patient
to tolerate and manage the affect of loss, and to gather
social support to help the patient through mourning. In
addition, the therapist helps the patient to use existing
social supports, to reestablish interests and relationships,
and to form new relationships and explore new
activities to compensate for the loss (Weissman et al.,
2000, 2007).

The therapist continued providing psychoeducation
about complicated bereavement and how depression affects
social functioning, and repeatedly linked Sara’s
depression to the identified problem area. She began
each session with the opening question, “How have
things been since we last met?” This question elicited
affect and a history of Sara’s mood and events between
sessions, and kept Sara focused on her current mood
and life events.

To facilitate the mourning process, the therapist encouraged
Sara to think about the loss. In fact, this process
had begun during the initial phase, while the therapist
took a history of the events related to the onset of
Sara’s depression. The therapist asked Sara to describe
the events prior, during, and after the baby’s death—
often a source of patient guilt—and explored Sara’s
feelings associated with these events. In helping a patient
mourn the loss of a loved one, the IPT therapist
asks the patient to describe her feelings about the death
and about the person who died. The therapist explores
what the patient and the deceased did together, what
the patient liked and did not like about the person, and
what the patient wished they had done together but did
not have a chance to do. The therapist asks the patient
to describe how the deceased died and how she learned
about the death, and explores the patient’s related feelings.
Because Sara’s baby died in utero, the therapist
modified this inquiry somewhat by encouraging Sara to
talk about her experience of being pregnant, about the
baby, and what she imagined the baby would be like.
The therapist asked Sara what she liked about carrying
the baby, what she did not like, and what she had hoped
to do with the baby.


Interpersonal Psychotherapy for Depression

Sara tearfully described having had mixed feelings
about her pregnancy. She reported that she and
Steve started trying to conceive 6 months after getting
married and, to her surprise, she got pregnant after 2
months. When she discovered she was pregnant, Sara
felt really happy but scared about becoming a parent.
She questioned whether she was “ready.” Sara reported
that she made a great effort to practice good prenatal
care: She ate healthy, pregnancy-safe foods, took prenatal
vitamins, and started prenatal yoga classes. Practicing
good prenatal care made her feel good, “as if I
was already a mom taking care of my baby.”

Sara quickly began to experience terrible fatigue and
unrelenting nausea, which lasted for the first 12 weeks
of the pregnancy. She described feeling as if she had
been “taken over” by the pregnancy. She complained
that she loved to cook but did not want to cook because
she felt so sick. Despite the nausea, she ensured that she
got the nutrients the baby needed. The fatigue and nausea
were so debilitating that Sara could no longer meet
the physical demands of her job as a nurse. As a result,
she was unable to hide her pregnancy from her coworkers;
she told her supervisor, who was happy to accommodate
Sara by giving her more administrative responsibilities
in lieu of patient care until she felt better. Sara
resented having to give up clinical work with patients,
which was the part of her job she enjoyed. She felt selfconscious
about her symptoms and very guilty that her
coworkers had to absorb her patient load, despite their
being very supportive. It bothered her that others idealized
pregnancy, whereas she found it so unpleasant.
At the same time, she felt guilty and selfish that she
had complained about the pregnancy: Sara felt that she
should have just been grateful she was pregnant.

The therapist empathized with Sara’s discomfort
during her first trimester and validated her need to
complain:

tHeraPist: The first trimester of pregnancy can be really
difficult and disruptive. Give yourself a break! It
can be hard to appreciate being pregnant when you
are feeling so terrible. It sounds like you did appreciate
being pregnant—you made a great effort to take
care of yourself. You watched your diet carefully and
rearranged your work situation.

sara: I don’t know . . . I guess that’s true.

When the exhaustion and nausea subsided in her second
trimester, Sara began to feel more optimistic and

excited about having a child. Seeing sonograms made
the baby seem “more real” and helped Sara feel connected
to the baby. At Week 16, Sara learned that the
baby was a girl. Excited, she immediately began considering
names and envisioning what the baby would
look like. Sara imagined her as a combination of herself
and her husband, with blue eyes and blond, curly hair.
She thought the baby would be a kind person, like her
husband. She imagined walking the baby to the park in
a stroller and playing with her. At Week 20, Sara began
to feel the baby move, which she very much enjoyed.
When the baby moved, Sara would stop whatever she
was doing to watch and feel her abdomen. She described
feeling the movements as “some of the happiest
moments in my life.” Neither she nor her husband had
thought of a name for the baby, but referred to her as
“Sweetie” in utero.

For weeks after the stillbirth, Sara struggled with
physical reminders of the baby. After the delivery, she
had leaky breasts for a few days and vaginal bleeding for
several weeks. She reported that she still looked pregnant
for weeks after delivering the baby, as her uterus
slowly returned to its prepregnancy size. At the time of
her initial evaluation, Sara reported that she still had to
lose 5 pounds to return to her prepregnancy weight. Sara
missed being pregnant and described feeling “empty”
and “alone” without the baby inside her. She was eager
and ready to be a parent, yet felt frightened about conceiving
again because she feared losing another baby.

A couple of weeks after the stillbirth, Sara’s doctor
determined that an undetected bacterial infection
caused the stillbirth. The doctor explained that there
was nothing Sara or her husband could have done to
prevent the loss, and that this kind of loss was very rare.
Despite her doctor’s explanation, Sara blamed herself
for her baby’s death and feared that her husband blamed
her too, although he repeatedly denied this. The therapist
explored Sara’s guilt further:

tHeraPist: What could you have done to prevent your

baby’s death?
sara: (tearfully) I don’t know. . . . I should have been

able to do something.

The therapist offered Sara empathy and support, and
related her guilt to depression:

tHeraPist: It would be great if there were something
you could have done to prevent this tragedy, but there


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

is generally nothing parents can do to prevent a pregnancy
loss. It sounds like you did everything you
could—you took very good care of yourself. You are
struggling with inappropriate and excessive guilt—
a symptom of depression. You are blaming yourself
for something you didn’t do. Perhaps when you find
yourself feeling guilty, you can try to label this as a
symptom of depression.

sara: Yes. I guess I can try.

Talking about the pregnancy, the baby, and the baby’s
death, and exploring related feelings enabled Sara to
develop a more balanced and realistic perception of her
relationship with the baby and her role in the baby’s
death. She realized that she had not taken her pregnancy
for granted. In fact, she had done everything she
could to manage a difficult first trimester and take care
of her baby. In addition, her experience with the pregnancy
and the baby made Sara realize that, despite her
initial anxiety, she was ready and excited to become
a parent. By the end of the first month of treatment,
Sara’s mood was somewhat improved and her HDRS
score had fallen to 18. She was less self-critical and
more hopeful.

An important part of treating grief is facilitating
the expression of affect related to the loss of the loved
one. The therapist explored Sara’s feelings as she spoke
about the baby and her loss, giving Sara time to articulate
what she was feeling and to cry. Although IPT
therapists generally take an active stance, when facilitating
the expression of painful feelings, it is important
to allow for silences. By listening silently, the therapist
showed that she could tolerate Sara’s painful feelings,
and that catharsis was an important part of mourning
her loss. Sara was able to express not only feelings she
had been avoiding but also feelings of which she had
previously been unaware.

Sara had avoided looking at the pictures and footprints
of the baby from the hospital, which had been
stored in a box under her bed. She and the therapist
explored what it would be like for her to look at these
items. Sara feared it would be scary, and that she would
feel really bad. The therapist gently encouraged Sara
to take a risk and look because it might make her feel
better to experience the feelings she had been avoiding:

“Your feelings are not going to hurt you. You might
actually feel better if you allow yourself to let out
some of the feelings you have been trying to keep

inside. I know I am asking you to take a risk, but you
might be pleasantly surprised.”

Between sessions, Sara looked at the pictures and the
footprints. The therapist asked what it was like for her.

sara: I cried a lot. She was so cute. It wasn’t as hard
as I thought it would be. It felt like a release. I was
surprised that I felt a little better afterwards.

tHeraPist: I am so glad you took a risk and looked. It
sounds like it made you feel better.

In fact, every few weeks before the end of treatment,
Sara looked at the pictures and the footprints. She explained
that the pictures were sort of comforting because
they made her feel a connection to her baby.

In addition to encouraging catharsis, the therapist
encouraged Sara to work on her interpersonal interactions,
to reconnect with the people in her life, and to
consider opportunities to form new relationships and
start new activities to compensate for the loss. The
therapist explained that people with depression tend
to isolate themselves and stop engaging in previously
pleasurable activities, both of which can perpetuate depression.
Sara reported not wanting to talk to people
because she feared that she would have to talk about
the loss, or that things people said would make her feel
worse. In fact, as Sara and the therapist discussed, she
could guide the conversation in a way that made her
feel comfortable. They explored and role-played options
for maintaining control of such conversations.
Furthermore, Sara could tell people what would be
helpful to her. The therapist explained:

“People with depression often have difficulty asserting
their needs. If you communicate your needs to
others—like your husband, friends, coworkers, and
your family—you might improve those relationships
and your mood. The people in your life may
not know what you need. If you tell them, you might
not only get support from them, but you might enjoy
their company again and feel better.”

Using communication analysis, the therapist asked
Sara to recount arguments and unpleasant interactions
with others: what she was feeling during the interaction,
what she said or did, and what the other person
said or did. They explored what Sara wished other people
would say or do, what options she had for asking


Interpersonal Psychotherapy for Depression

them to do these things, and they role-played Sara asking
for what she wanted. Sara reported that she hated
running into people who knew she had been pregnant
but did not know about the stillbirth. In fact, she avoided
going places because she feared having to answer
questions about the stillbirth. Sara and the therapist
explored these interactions and how Sara could handle
them more effectively:

tHeraPist: What kinds of things have people asked, or
what are you afraid they will ask?

sara: People have asked “How’s your baby?” or
“Weren’t you pregnant?”

tHeraPist: How does that make you feel?

sara: Awful!

tHeraPist: How do you handle it?

sara: I don’t know. . . . Sometimes I say “It didn’t work
out” or “My baby died.”

tHeraPist: That sounds good. How does it feel for you
to say that?

sara: It feels OK, but then they want to know what
happened and say stupid things like “At least you
know you can get pregnant” or “You can have another
one.”

tHeraPist: What would you like them to say or do?

sara: I would like them to just say “I’m sorry,” and not
ask any questions. I don’t want to talk about what
happened.

tHeraPist: How could you convey that?

sara: I guess I could say, “I’m sorry, but I’d rather not
talk about it.”

tHeraPist: How does that sound? How did it feel to
say that?
sara: It felt OK. Don’t you think that is rude to say
that?

tHeraPist: No. You said it politely and it’s appropriate
for you to assert your needs. It is an uncomfortable
situation for both you and the person who asked the
question. If you are polite and direct with people,
they are likely to understand. But why not try it and
see?

Sara reported that she had avoided returning calls
from old friends. She explained that she felt uncomfortable
seeing her friends who had babies because it would

remind her of the baby she had lost. Sara also did not
want to have to talk about the loss. She did not want to
tell them how she felt because she feared hurting their
feelings. Sara and the therapist role-played Sara telling
her friends about her discomfort and explaining that
she did not want to offend them. Role play helped Sara
feel prepared and less anxious about going to work,
walking around her neighborhood, and talking to old
friends. As a result, she gradually starting going out
more and began returning phone calls. She returned to
the yoga studio where she had taken prenatal yoga and
started taking regular yoga classes, which helped her
mood and provided an opportunity to be among other
people. By midtreatment Sara’s HDRS had fallen to 13,
consistent with mild depression.

Since the stillbirth, Sara had been bickering with
her husband Steve “over stupid things” and felt “distant
from him.” The therapist asked her to describe a
recent incident. Sara said that Steve came home from
work and told her that his friend’s wife had just had
a baby. She felt it was insensitive for him to tell her
about other people’s positive pregnancy experiences. It
bothered her that Steve did not seem as uncomfortable
as she was with this information, and that he no longer
seemed as upset as she about the loss. The interaction
made her feel “alone.” She had responded to him by
saying, “That’s nice,” then leaving the room and ruminating
for the rest of the evening about his insensitivity.

Sara reported that they often had similar interactions.
The therapist once again related Sara’s difficulty
in asserting herself with her husband to depression, and
noted that keeping her feelings inside might actually be
making Sara feel worse. They explored interpersonal
options for handling this situation in a way that might
make Sara feel better. The therapist helped Sara to explore
what her husband’s intentions might have been in
the situation she described. She wondered whether he
was trying to make her feel better because his friend’s
wife had experienced several miscarriages. They roleplayed
Sara telling her husband how she felt. Subsequently,
when Sara was able to express her feelings to
him, she learned that Steve was, in fact, telling her these
stories to give her hope. Furthermore, her husband revealed
that he was still upset about the loss of their baby
but did not want to upset her by sharing his feelings.
Sara was relieved that she and Steve were “on the same
page” and felt good that she was able to feel close to
him again. They subsequently were able to share more
of their mixed feelings about the pregnancy experience.


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

Termination Phase (Sessions 10–12)

During the final sessions, the therapist and Sara reviewed
the progress Sara had made. She reported her
mood was much improved. Her HDRS was now a 5,
consistent with euthymia and remission. Sara’s affect
was brighter, and she was less preoccupied with the loss
of her baby: “I still get upset when I think about my
baby, but I don’t get as upset. It doesn’t ruin my entire
day. I am actually able to enjoy things again.” Furthermore,
Sara no longer blamed herself for her baby’s
death. She felt good about her ability to communicate
her feelings more effectively with her husband, friends,
and others, and to enjoy socializing and other activities
again.

The therapist congratulated Sara on her hard work
and achievements, and told her how happy she was that
Sara felt so much better. They discussed the potential
for relapse and how Sara could maintain her progress.
Given Sara’s history of depression, the therapist
explained that Sara was, unfortunately, vulnerable to
future episodes; however, Sara could anticipate that
she would be vulnerable in the setting of stressful life
events—role disputes, role transitions, deaths—and use
the coping skills she had learned during their work together.
Sara anticipated trying to conceive again, and,
she hoped, getting pregnant again—both role transitions.
The therapist explored with Sara ways that she
could take care of herself during this potentially stressful
time. They discussed Sara’s reaching out to others
for support, communicating with her husband about
how she was feeling, and forgiving herself if she found
herself having a hard time.

In the final session, Sara told the therapist that she
had reread her diary entries from the days before beginning
treatment and could not believe how far she had
come, that her pregnancy loss had forced her to seek
treatment for depression that she now realized had been
a lifelong problem; in retrospect, she had suffered numerous
episodes of mild to moderate depression. Sara
admitted that she initially had felt very resistant to the
medical model. Defining depression as a medical illness
ultimately relieved Sara of her shame and guilt
about her difficulty in functioning. Furthermore, being
able to see depression as a set of discrete symptoms
made it seem more manageable. Sara reported that she
was getting along better with her mother; now that she
understood depression, she felt more sympathy for her
mother’s struggle with depression. She was grateful
for the opportunity to learn coping skills that she felt

confident about maintaining. In addition, Sara said that
she would not hesitate to seek treatment in the future
should she find herself becoming depressed again.

The therapist’s frequent encouragement, the time
limit, and the brief duration of IPT helped keep Sara
motivated. Sara said that she appreciated the opportunity
to talk about her feelings about her pregnancy, her
baby, and her baby’s death, and that she felt the therapist
understood and supported her. She recognized that
her feelings, while powerful, made sense in context and
had subsided with discussion. Sara confessed that she
appreciated the therapist’s “pushing” her to reconnect
with others. She had not thought she could handle socializing
with others but was pleasantly surprised.

Although each patient is unique, Sara’s therapy resembled
other IPT treatments for major depression and
is a good example of working with the problem area
of grief. The exploration and normalization of affect,
communication analysis, exploration of options, use of
role play, encouragement to take social risks, and other
techniques employed in Sara’s treatment are characteristic
of working with interpersonal difficulties related
to any of the four IPT problem areas.

coMMoN ProBleMs that arise
DuriNG treatMeNt

The problems that typically arise during IPT treatment
for major depression are (1) those inherent to working
with depressed patients and (2) those related to the therapeutic
frame. Although these problems are not unique
to IPT, how the therapist views and treats these issues
distinguishes IPT from other psychotherapies. In keeping
with important IPT themes, the therapist attributes
problems to depression, and to the patient’s difficulties
handling interpersonal interactions and communicating
effectively outside of the treatment. The therapist
continues to maintain an optimistic, supportive, and
nonjudgmental stance and avoids transference interpretations.


For example, patients with major depression superimposed
on dysthymic disorder (“double depression”)
and their therapists are often discouraged by the chronicity
of their depression. In these cases, the therapist
should remain hopeful and optimistic. Some depressed
patients feel that their depression is incurable despite
reassurances from the therapist. In these cases, the
IPT therapist employs the medical model, labeling the
hopelessness as a symptom of depression, and empha



Interpersonal Psychotherapy for Depression

sizes that patients need not feel hopeless since depression
is treatable. Depressed patients often view seeking
treatment as a personal failure. The IPT therapist
frames seeking treatment as the appropriate and smart
way to treat a medical illness, and a positive step toward
gaining mastery over their problems (Weissman
et al., 2000, 2007).

The most serious problem to arise in any treatment
for depression is when a patient expresses suicidal ideation.
As in any treatment, the therapist determines
whether hospitalization is necessary, based on the seriousness
of the intent and the availability of the patient’s
social supports. The therapist is as available as possible
to the patient and schedules extra sessions as needed.
The therapist assesses the circumstances in which the
suicidal ideation developed, what the patient hoped to
accomplish by ending her life, and reviews how the patient
imagines others would react to her suicide. The
therapist helps the patient explore alternative ways of
expressing what she intended to communicate by committing
suicide. The therapist provides psychoeducation
about suicide, explaining that it is the most deadly
symptom of depression, and that therapist and patient
have to work together to keep the patient alive long
enough to get through successful treatment—at which
point the patient will again want to live. Augmenting
the therapy with medication treatment should be considered
for severely suicidal patients. The therapist
remains optimistic that the patient’s depression will
improve, and that she will no longer feel that life is not
worth living (Weissman et al., 2000, 2007).

Problems may arise in the relationship with the
therapist. For example, a patient who has poor social
supports may come to view the therapeutic relationship
as a substitute for relationships outside of the therapy.
Because IPT focuses on relationships outside of the
treatment, the therapist gently refocuses the patient to
outside relationships. Whereas the therapist notes that
the patient’s ability to connect within the treatment relationship
reflects her ability to form intimate relationships,
he/she clarifies that they are not friends or family
and emphasizes the importance of the patient’s life outside
of the treatment. The therapist helps the patient explore
options for connecting with others in ways similar
to the way she connected with the therapist (Weissman
et al., 2000, 2007).

Missed and late sessions are also considered to be
symptomatic of depression. The therapist calls attention
to and empathizes with the fact that the patient has
missed or is late to a session, and notes that difficulty

getting to sessions may reflect functioning that is characteristic
of depression. It is likely that the patient is
late to appointments outside of the therapy. The therapist
can remind the patient of the time limit of IPT to
motivate her to come to sessions. In the event that the
patient misses or comes late to sessions because she
is uncomfortable with the material being discussed in
session, or because she has some other negative feeling
about the treatment or the therapist, the therapist
empathizes with the patient’s feelings and helps her to
explore ways to express these feelings directly.

When a patient is silent to the extent that it seems
she refrains from sharing thoughts and feelings, or
when she changes or avoids subjects, or has problems
with self-disclosure, the therapist notes this behavior
and explores the patient’s feelings related to the behavior.
These behaviors are particularly problematic in a
time-limited, focused treatment such as IPT because
they make it difficult to work on the chosen problem
area. The patient may feel uncomfortable and ashamed
to share her thoughts and feelings with the therapist.
The therapist assures the patient that there is little that
can surprise him/her, and that she does not have to talk
about everything.

PreDictors of resPoNse

Although there is strong evidence that IPT is an efficacious
treatment for major depression and other
disorders, there are fewer data on factors that predict
response to IPT. Data from comparative treatment
studies involving IPT suggest some clinical predictors
of response. In the multisite National Institute of
Mental Health Treatment of Depression Collaborative
Research Program (NIMH TDCRP; Elkin et al., 1989),
250 outpatients with major depression were randomly
assigned to 16 weeks of imipramine (IMI), IPT, CBT,
or placebo. The TDCRP dataset has been examined for
predictors of response by several researchers. Sotsky
and colleagues (1991) found that TDCRP subjects with
low-baseline-level social dysfunction responded well to
IPT, whereas those with interpersonal deficits responded
less well. These findings support the discussion earlier
in this chapter that IPT works least well for patients
with few or no social contacts, who report no recent life
events, and whose treatment, therefore, focuses on the
IPT problem area of interpersonal deficits. High initial
symptom severity and impaired functioning predicted
superior response to IPT and to IMI compared to CBT


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

(Sotsky et al., 1991; Weissman et al., 2000). In another
analysis, TDCRP subjects with symptoms of atypical
depression, such as mood reactivity and reversed neurovegetative
symptoms, responded better to IPT and
CBT than to IMI or to placebo (Stewart, Garfinkel,
Nunes, Donovan, & Klein, 1998).

Barber and Muenz (1996) found that among patients
who completed treatment in the TDCRP study, IPT had
greater efficacy than CBT for patients with obsessive–
compulsive personality disorder, whereas CBT was
better for patients with avoidant personality disorder,
as measured by the HDRS. However, another study
examining the relationship between personality traits
and outcome in the same dataset found no significant
differences among personality traits (Blatt, Quinlan,
Pilkonis, & Shea, 1995; Weissman et al., 2000).

In another study, Thase and colleagues (1997) found
that among 91 patients with depression, patients who
had abnormal electroencephalographic (EEG) sleep
profiles had significantly poorer response to IPT than
did patients with normal profiles. In this study, unlike
the Sotsky and colleagues (1991) study, symptom
severity did not significantly predict response to IPT
(Weissman et al., 2000). Additional potential predictors
of response appear in the earlier section in this
chapter describing the IPT patient Sara.

coNclusioN

IPT is a time-limited, diagnosis-targeted treatment
with demonstrated efficacy for patients with major depression
and other mood disorders. It has been adapted
for the treatment of anxiety disorders, eating disorders,
and, most recently, personality disorders. Although
there is substantial evidence of IPT’s efficacy for the
treatment major depression and other mood and psychiatric
disorders, further evidence of predictors of response
to IPT is warranted. This chapter has focused
on the original IPT protocol: IPT as an individual treatment
for major depression.

IPT employs the medical model and focuses on current
or recent life events, interpersonal difficulties,
and symptoms. IPT emphasizes the interrelationship
between mood and life events: Negative or stressful
life events affect mood and, conversely, mood symptoms
affect how people manage negative or stressful
life events. Treatment with IPT focuses on one of four
interpersonal problem areas—grief, role disputes, role
transitions, and interpersonal deficits. The therapist

helps patients recover from depression by relieving depressive
symptoms and by helping them to resolve the
chosen interpersonal problem area. The IPT therapist
takes an active, optimistic, and supportive stance.

The case of Sara demonstrates the techniques used
and the process of treatment with IPT. IPT is an eclectic
treatment with proven efficacy that uses techniques
employed by other psychotherapies. The combination
of IPT’s main principles, techniques, strategies, and
therapist and patient characteristics distinguishes it
from other antidepressant treatments.

For further information about IPT and its adaptations,
readers may consult the Comprehensive Guide
to Interpersonal Psychotherapy by Weissman and colleagues
(2000), the Clinician’s Quick Guide to Interpersonal
Psychotherapy (2007), and the Casebook of
Interpersonal Psychotherapy (Markowitz & Weissman,
2012a).

note

1. For stylistic simplicity, patients are referred to in the feminine.
Indeed, most depressed patients are women.
referenCes

American Psychiatric Association. (2000). Diagnostic and
statistical manual of mental disorders (4th ed., text rev.).
Washington, DC: Author.

American Psychiatric Association. (2010). Practice guideline
for the treatment of patients with major depressive
disorder, third edition. American Journal of Psychiatry,
167(Suppl.), S1–152.

American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and
Statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.). Arlington,
VA: Author.

Barber, J. P., & Muenz, L. R. (1996). The role of avoidance
and obsessiveness in matching patients to cognitive and
interpersonal psychotherapy: Empirical findings from the
Treatment for Depression Collaborative Research Program.
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 64,
951–958.

Beck, A. T., Steer, R. A., & Brown, G. K. (1996). Beck Depression
Inventory manual (2nd ed.). San Antonio, TX:
Psychological Corporation.

Blatt, S. J., Quinlan, D. M., Pilkonis, P. A., & Shea, M. T.
(1995). Impact of perfectionism and need for approval on
the brief treatment of depression: The National Institute
of Mental Health Collaborative Research Program revisited.
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 63,
125–132.


Interpersonal Psychotherapy for Depression

Blazer, D. G., II. (2000). Mood disorders epidemiology. In B. J.
Sadock & V. A. Sadock (Eds.), Kaplan and Sadock’s comprehensive
textbook of psychiatry (7th ed., Vol. 1, pp. 1298–
1308). Philadelphia: Lippincott/Williams & Wilkins.

Bleiberg, K. L. (2012). Interpersonal psychotherapy for peripartum
depression. In J. C. Markowitz & M. M. Weissman
(Eds.), Casebook of interpersonal therapy (pp. 224–242).
New York: Oxford University Press.

Bleiberg, K. L., & Markowitz, J. C. (2005). Interpersonal
psychotherapy for posttraumatic stress disorder. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 162, 181–183.

Bleiberg, K. L., & Markowitz, J. C. (2007). Interpersonal
psychotherapy and depression. In C. Freeman & M. Power
(Eds.), Handbook of evidence-based psychotherapies: A
guide for research and practice (pp. 41–60). Oxford, UK:
Oxford University Press.

Bowlby, J. (1973). Attachment and loss. New York: Basic
Books.

Cuijpers, P., Geraedts, A. S., van Oppen, P., Andersson, G.,
Markowitz, J. C., & van Straten, A. (2011). Interpersonal
psychotherapy of depression: A meta-analysis. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 168, 581–592.

Elkin, I., Shea, M. T., Watkins, J. T., Imber, S. D., Sotsky, S.
M., Collins, J. F., et al. (1989). National Institute of Mental
Health Treatment of Depression Collaborative Research
Program: General effectiveness of treatments. Archives of
General of Psychiatry, 46, 971–982.

Fairburn, C. G., Jones, R., Peveler, R. C., Hope, R. A., &
O’Connor, M. (1993). Psychotherapy and bulimia nervosa:
Longer-term effects of interpersonal psychotherapy, behavior
therapy, and cognitive behavior therapy. Archives
of General Psychiatry, 50, 419–428.

Fairburn, C. G., Norman, P. A., Welch, S. L., O’Connor, M.
E., Doll, H. A., & Peveler, R. C. (1995). A prospective
study of outcome in bulimia nervosa and the long-term effects
of three psychological treatments. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 52, 304–312.

Frank, E. (2005). Treating bipolar disorder: A clinician’s
guide to interpersonal and social rhythm therapy. New
York: Guilford Press.

Frank, E., Kupfer, D. J., Buysse, D. J., Swartz, H. A., Pilkonis,
P. A., Houck, P. R., et al. (2007). Randomized trial
of weekly, twice-monthly, and monthly interpersonal psychotherapy
as maintenance treatment for women with recurrent
depression. American Journal of Psychiatry, 164,
761–767.

Frank, J. (1971). Therapeutic factors in psychotherapy. American
Journal of Psychotherapy, 25, 350–361.

Hamilton, M. (1960). A rating scale for depression. Journal
of Neurology, Neurosurgery, and Psychiatry, 2, 56–62.

Hill, C. E., O’Grady, K. E., & Elkin, I. (1992). Applying the
Collaborative Study Psychotherapy Rating Scale to rate
therapist adherence in cognitive-behavior therapy, interpersonal
therapy, and clinical management. Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 60, 73–79.

Kessler, R. C., Berglund, P., Demler, O., Koretz, D., Merikangas,
K. R., Rush, A. J., et al. (2003). The epidemiology
of major depressive disorder: Results of the National
Comorbidity Survey Replication (NCS-R). Journal of the
American Medical Association, 289, 3095–3105.

Klerman, G. L., Weissman, M. M., Rounsaville, B. J., &
Chevron, E. S. (1984). Interpersonal psychotherapy of depression.
New York: Basic Books.

Lipsitz, J. D., Fyer, A. J., Markowitz, J. C., & Cherry, S.
(1999). An open trial of interpersonal psychotherapy
for social phobia. American Journal of Psychiatry, 156,
1814–1816.

Markowitz, J. C. (1998). Interpersonal psychotherapy for
dysthymic disorder. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric
Press.

Markowitz, J. C., Klerman, G. L., Perry, S. W., Clougherty,

K. F., & Mayers, A. (1992). Interpersonal therapy of depressed
HIV-seropositive patients. Hospital and Community
Psychiatry, 43, 885–890.
Markowitz, J. C., Kocsis, J. H., Fishman, B., Spielman, L.
A., Jacobsberg, L. B., Frances, A. J., et al. (1998). Treatment
of HIV-positive patients with depressive symptoms.
Archives of General Psychiatry, 55, 452–457.

Markowitz, J. C., & Milrod, B. (2011). The importance of responding
to negative affect in psychotherapies. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 168, 124–128.

Markowitz, J. C., Milrod, B., Bleiberg, K. L., & Marshall,

R. D. (2009). Interpersonal factors in understanding and
treating posttraumatic stress disorder. Journal of Psychiatric
Practice, 15, 133–140.
Markowitz, J. C., Skodol, A. E., & Bleiberg, K. (2006). Interpersonal
psychotherapy for borderline personality disorder:
Possible mechanisms of change. Journal of Clinical
Psychology, 62, 431–444.

Markowitz, J. C., Svartberg, M., & Swartz, H. A. (1998). Is
IPT time-limited psychodynamic psychotherapy? Journal
of Psychotherapy Practice and Research, 7, 185–195.

Markowitz, J. C., & Weissman, M. M. (Eds.). (2012a). Casebook
of interpersonal psychotherapy. New York: Oxford
University Press.

Markowitz, J. C., & Weissman, M. M. (2012b). IPT: Past,
present, and future. Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy,
19, 99–105.

Meyer, A. (1957). Psychobiology: A science of man. Springfield,
IL: Thomas.

Mufson, L., Dorta, K. P., Wickramaratne, P., Nomura, Y.,
Olfson, M., & Weissman, M. M. (2004). A randomized
effectiveness trial of interpersonal psychotherapy for depressed
adolescents. Archives of General Psychiatry, 61,
577–584.

Mufson, L., Moreau, D., & Weissman, M. M. (1993). Interpersonal
psychotherapy for depressed adolescents. New
York: Guilford Press.

Mufson, L., Weissman, M. M., Moreau, D., & Garfinkel, R.
(1999). Efficacy of interpersonal psychotherapy for de



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

pressed adolescents. Archives of General Psychiatry, 56,
573–579.

Murray, C. L., & Lopez, A. D. (1996). The global burden
of disease (Vol. 1). Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.

O’Hara, M. W., Stuart, S., Gorman, L. L., & Wenzel, A.
(2000). Efficacy of interpersonal psychotherapy for postpartum
depression. Archives of General Psychiatry, 57,
1039–1045.

Parsons, T. (1951). Illness and the role of the physician: A
sociological perspective. American Journal of Orthopsychiatry,
21, 452–460.

Ransom, D., Heckman, T. G., Anderson, T., Garske, J., Holroyd,
K., & Basta, T. (2008). Telephone-delivered interpersonal
psychotherapy for HIV-infected rural persons
with depression: A pilot trial. Psychiatric Services, 50,
871–877.

Reynolds, C. F., III, Dew, M. A., Martire, L. M., Miller, M.
D., Cyranowski, J. M., Lenze, E., et al. (2010). Treating
depression to remission in older adults: A controlled
evaluation of combined escitalopram with interpersonal
psychotherapy versus escitalopram with depression care
management. International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry,
25, 1134–1141.

Reynolds, C. F., III, Dew, M. A., Pollock, B. G., Mulsant, B.
H., Frank, E., Miller, M. D., et al. (2006). Maintenance
treatment of major depression in old age. New England
Journal of Medicine, 354, 1130–1138.

Sholomskas, A. J., Chevron, E. S., Prusoff, B. A., & Berry,

C. (1983). Short-term interpersonal therapy (IPT) with the
depressed elderly: Case reports and discussion. American
Journal of Psychotherapy, 36, 552–566.
Sotsky, S. M., Glass, D. R., Shea, M. T., Pilkonis, P. A., Collins,
J. F., Elkin, I., et al. (1991). Patient predictors of response
to psychotherapy and pharmacotherapy: Findings

in the NIMH Treatment Of Depression Collaborative Research
Program. American Journal of Psychiatry, 148,
997–1008.

Spinelli, M., & Endicott, J. (2003). Controlled clinical trial
of interpersonal psychotherapy versus parenting education
program for depressed pregnant women. American Journal
of Psychiatry, 160, 555–562.

Stewart, J. W., Garfinkel, R., Nunes, E. V., Donovan, S., &
Klein, D. F. (1998). Atypical features and treatment response
in the National Institute of Mental Health Treatment
of Depression Collaborative Research Program. Journal of
Clinical Psychopharmacology, 18(6), 429–434.

Sullivan, H. S. (1953). The interpersonal theory of psychiatry.
New York: Norton.

Thase, M. E., Buysse, D. J., Frank, E., Cherry, C. R., Cornes,

C. L., Mallinger, A. G., et al. (1997). Which depressed patients
will respond to interpersonal psychotherapy?: The
role of abnormal EEG profiles. American Journal of Psychiatry,
154, 502–509.
Weissman, M. M., Markowitz, J. C., & Klerman, G. L.
(2000). Comprehensive guide to interpersonal psychotherapy.
New York: Basic Books.

Weissman, M. M., Markowitz, J. C., & Klerman, G. L.
(2007). Clinician’s quick guide to interpersonal psychotherapy.
New York: Oxford University Press.

Wilfley, D. E. (2008). Interpersonal psychotherapy for binge
eating disorder (BED) therapist’s manual. Unpublished
manuscript.

Wilson, G. T., Wilfely, D. E., Agras, W. S., & Bryson, S. W.
(2010). Psychological treatments of binge eating disorder.
Archives of General Psychiatry, 67, 94–101.

World Health Organization. (1992). The ICD-10 classification
of mental and behavioral disorders: Clinical descriptions
and diagnostic guidelines. Geneva, Switzerland:
Author.


CHaPter

9
Behavioral Activation for Depression

soNa DiMiDJiaN
christoPher r. Martell
ruth herMaN‑DuNN
saMuel huBley

The behavioral activation (BA) approach to treating depression has received very strong
empirical support in the past few years, with results as good or better than cognitive
therapy and antidepressant medications, even for the most severe cases of depression.
seemingly counterintuitive at first blush, this treatment does not focus on the notion of
“just do it” but takes a comprehensive look at contingent relationships in the patient’s life
across the full range of behavior, cognition, and affect that may be maintaining the depression.
As such, this very idiographic approach does not prescribe a set number of sessions
to accomplish certain goals but is very adaptable to the individual with depression.
in the detailed and very human description of the treatment of “Mark,” readers will also
note a very up‑to‑date focus on the role of rumination in depression (or worry in anxiety)
as a fundamentally avoidant technique. The illustration of creative therapeutic strategies
for activating patients, and the very adaptable and flexible nature of BA will be of interest
to all therapists treating depression, since it may be one of the easiest to learn and most
disseminable of evidence‑based psychological treatments for depression.—D. H. B.

Behavioral activation (BA) is a structured, brief psychosocial
approach that aims to alleviate depression
and prevent future relapse by focusing directly on behavior
change. BA is based on the premise that problems
in vulnerable individuals’ lives, and their behavioral
responses to such problems, reduce their ability
to experience positive reward from their environment.
The treatment aims to increase activation systematically
in ways that help clients to experience greater contact
with sources of reward in their lives and to solve
life problems. The treatment procedures focus directly
on activation, and on processes that inhibit activation,
such as escape and avoidance behaviors and ruminative
thinking, to increase experiences that are pleasurable
or productive and improve life context. We believe that

BA is an important new treatment for depression for
two main reasons. First, its efficacy is supported by recent
empirical research; second, it is based on simple
and easily grasped underlying principles and utilizes a
small set of straightforward procedures.

Behavioral MoDels of DePressioN

Basic Concepts

The central premise in virtually all behavioral models
is the assumption that depression is associated with particular
behavior–environment relationships that evolve
over time in a person’s life. “Behavior” is a very broad

353


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

construct in these models and includes everything from
taking a walk to grieving over the loss of a loved one.
Behaviors can be fairly circumscribed (e.g., lying on
the couch watching television after dinner) or they can
be part of a more general repertoire (e.g., avoidance of
asserting one’s own needs and desires in conflictual interactions).


“Environment” is also a broad construct that can
best be thought of as the settings in which behaviors
currently occur, as well as those in which behaviors
have evolved over time. The temporal nature of environments
is crucial for understanding behavioral approaches
to depression. Often, behavior that appears
to serve no function in a person’s current environment
has served a very important function in the past. Thus,
when practitioners wonder why a depressed person is
engaging in a particular set of behaviors, such as remaining
in an unsatisfying job, it is often necessary to
consider how particular repertoires (e.g., avoiding potential
losses) have evolved over time.

Finally, all behavioral models of depression emphasize
the importance of contingent relationships between
behaviors and the environments in which they occur.
Contingent relationships are “if–then” relationships between
human activities and their (often interpersonal)
environmental consequences. For example, practitioners
working within a behavioral framework are probably
less interested in the fact that a depressed client
stays in bed each morning worrying, for example, about
the future of a troubled marriage, than they are about
the consequences of this behavior. What happens as a
result? Does the client become more or less depressed?
By staying in bed, does the client avoid something aversive,
such as confronting a spouse about an issue in the
marriage, or going to work and facing a pile of uncompleted
tasks? Understanding contingent relationships
is a central feature of behavioral models of depression
and a requisite skill of BA therapists.

Behavioral Roots of BA

These general behavioral concepts were developed
and refined into specific conceptual frameworks and
treatments for depression by both Ferster (1973, 1981)
and Lewinsohn and colleagues (Lewinsohn, 1974; Lewinsohn,
Antonuccio, Steinmetz-Breckenridge, & Teri,
1984; Lewinsohn, Biglan, & Zeiss, 1976). Ferster’s primary
assumption was that depression is the result of a
learning history in which the actions of the individual
do not result in positive reward from the environment,

or in which the actions are reinforced because they
allow the individual to escape from an aversive condition.
Over time, behavior that would typically produce
positive consequences ceases to do so. For example, for
a variety of different reasons, a person’s efforts to form
close relationships with others might gradually fade
away because they are not followed by positive reinforcement
(e.g., reciprocal efforts from others).

Ferster (1973, 1981) reasoned that this decrease in
response-contingent positive reinforcement produces
two additional consequences that facilitate depression.
First, when people’s efforts do not result in reward, they
often become more focused on responding to their own
internal state than to potential sources of positive reinforcement
in the external environment. This is the classic
“turning inward” that is often seen in depression,
and that makes sense from a behavioral perspective;
when individuals learn that their own behavior is an
unreliable predictor of positive consequences in their
environment, they naturally spend less time attending
to contingencies in that environment.

The second consequence of decreased rates of positive
reinforcement that Ferster (1973, 1981) observed
was a narrowing of individuals’ repertoire of adaptive
behaviors. This makes logical sense as well because
fewer and fewer behaviors are being maintained by
positive reinforcement. Individuals may adopt extremely
passive repertoires (e.g., “doing nothing”) because
their active attempts to become engaged in life are not
rewarded.

Finally, Ferster (1973, 1981) observed that increases
in aversive consequences following behavior typically
lead depressed individuals to become preoccupied with
escape and avoidance. In effect, more energy is expended
attempting to avoid or escape from anticipated aversive
consequences than attempting to contact potential
positive reinforcers in the environment.

Lewinsohn’s (1974) early behavioral model of depression
was very compatible with many of the ideas
proposed by Ferster’s (1973) behavioral analysis of depression.
Lewinsohn and colleagues similarly emphasized
the importance of response-contingent reinforcement
and conceptualized that its rate was influenced
by three factors: the number of potentially reinforcing
events for an individual; the availability of reinforcement
in the environment; and the instrumental behavior
of the individual required to elicit the reinforcement.
Lewinsohn also identified social avoidance as a
core part of his model. Importantly, Lewinsohn, Sullivan,
and Grosscup (1980) developed the first stand



Behavioral Activation for Depression

alone behaviorally oriented treatment for depression.
Later, Lewinsohn, Hoberman, Teri, and Hautzinger
(1985) proposed an integrated model that was intended
to explain the interactive and complex nature of depression,
including dispositional factors such as cognition,
with environmental factors. This model did not overemphasize
or give precedence to either cognitive factors
or environmental factors in the etiology and maintenance
of depression; rather it attempted to account
for the complexity of depression. Research initiated
in Lewinsohn’s laboratory has continued through the
work of former students and colleagues across diverse
settings and populations (Dimidjian, Barrera, Martell,
Muñoz, & Lewinsohn, 2011).

Beck, Rush, Shaw, and Emery (1979) also pioneered
early work on BA. Incorporating BA strategies as a
core component of cognitive therapy (CT) for depression,
Beck and colleagues formalized and widely disseminated
some of the principal BA strategies utilized
within a larger framework emphasizing the importance
of cognition in etiology and treatment of depression.

Contemporary BA

The work of Ferster, Lewinsohn, and Beck strongly
influenced the development of contemporary BA in
important ways. They were a direct influence on Jacobson
and colleagues’ initial research and clinical development
of BA (Jacobson, Martell, & Dimidjian, 2001;
Martell, Addis, & Jacobson, 2001; Martell, Dimidjian,
& Herman-Dunn, 2010). Their work similarly formed
the context of other investigators, such as the team of
Lejuez, Hopko, LePage, Hopko, and McNeil (2001;
Lejuez, Hopko, Acierno, Daughters, & Pagoto, 2011),
who articulated a BA approach that is convergent in
both theory and clinical emphasis on targeting behavior
change. This approach, BA treatment for depression,
has been supported in multiple studies by their
group (e.g., Hopko, Lejuez, LePage, Hopko, & McNeil,
2003).

With respect to a conceptual model of depression,
the current conceptualization draws heavily on the
work of Ferster (1973, 1981) and Lewinsohn (1974)
in emphasizing the central importance of context and
activity in understanding depression. While acknowledging
that genetic, biological, and other distal factors
may be causally related to depression, the current behavioral
conceptualization focuses on the aspects of a
person’s life context that may have triggered depression,
and particular ways of responding to this context

that may be maintaining depression. Specifically, the
model assumes that one reason people get depressed
is because changes in the context of their lives provide
low levels of positive reinforcement and high levels of
aversive control. Lives that are “less rewarding” can
lead to feelings of sadness and depressed mood. And
when people get depressed, they often pull away from
the world in important ways, and the basic routines
of their lives become easily disrupted. Both of these
processes can increase depressed mood and make it
difficult to solve problems effectively in one’s life. In
fact, these processes are conceptualized as “secondary
problem behaviors,” because they frequently prevent
people from (1) connecting with aspects of their lives
that may provide some improvement in mood and (2)
solving problems that may help to decrease stress and
improve life context.

The BA approach to therapy addresses both of the
factors that may be contributing to depression: those
aspects of one’s life that need to be changed to reduce
depression and the ways withdrawal from the world
may be maintaining or increasing depression. BA accomplishes
these aims through “guided activation,”
which is the use of a series of behavior change strategies
that the therapist and client develop together on the
basis of a careful examination of what activities will
be reinforcing for a given client and help to disrupt the
relationships that are maintaining the depression. The
point of BA is not to engage in increased activation at
random or activities that are “generally” thought to be
pleasing or to improve mood (e.g., seeing a movie); in
contrast, activation strategies are highly individualized
and “custom tailored.” The role of the BA therapist is to
act as a “coach” while the client implements the activation
strategies, providing expert help in setting achievable
goals, breaking difficult tasks down into manageable
units, troubleshooting problems that arise, and
maintaining motivation during the process of change.

eMPirical coNtext

The first study to revitalize interest in a purely behavioral
approach to treating depression was conducted
by Jacobson and colleagues (1996), who proposed a
simple but provocative question: Could the behavioral
component of CT account for the efficacy that CT has
demonstrated in previous clinical trials? Adults with
major depression were randomly assigned to one of
three treatment conditions, including BA only, BA plus


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

interventions designed to modify automatic thoughts,
and the full CT package. Results suggested that BA was
comparable to the full CT package in both acute efficacy
(Jacobson et al., 1996) and prevention of relapse over
a 2-year follow-up period (Gortner, Gollan, Dobson, &
Jacobson, 1998).

On the basis of these findings, BA was developed
into a more fully articulated behavioral intervention
that included the behavioral aspects of CT and incorporated
the early behavioral work of Ferster (1973,
1981) and Lewinsohn (1974), as described earlier.
This expanded BA model has been articulated in published
reports (Jacobson et al., 2001; Martell et al.,
2001, 2010) and in a patient-oriented self-help manual
(Addis & Martell, 2004). BA was further tested in a
large, randomized, placebo-controlled clinical trial that
compared its acute and long-term efficacy to both CT
and antidepressant medication (ADM). Two hundred
forty-one patients were randomly assigned to BA, CT,
ADM, or pill-placebo, and severity was used as a stratification
variable during randomization. The findings
suggested that BA is a particularly promising treatment
for depression (Dimidjian et al., 2006). Among
more severely depressed patients, its performance was
comparable to the current standard of care, ADM, and
demonstrated better retention. Both BA and ADM
were superior to CT among more severely depressed
patients. Moreover, follow-up results indicate that BA
appears to have promising enduring effects (Dobson et
al., 2008). Finally, BA may demonstrate an important
cost-effectiveness advantage compared to continuing
patients on medication.

These results were consistent with a range of other
studies suggesting that activation interventions are particularly
important components of cognitive-behavioral
treatments. In a classic study, Zeiss, Lewinsohn, and
Muñoz (1979) reported comparable outcomes for depressed
patients who received treatment focused on
interpersonal skills, pleasant activities, or cognitive
change. In addition, in a study with depressed older
adults, Scogin, Jamison, and Gochneaur (1989) found
no differences in outcome between a cognitive bibliotherapy
treatment and a behavioral bibliotherapy treatment
among mildly and moderately depressed older
adults. The importance of behavioral strategies has
also been reported in other studies across multiple diagnostic
categories (e.g., Borkovec, Newman, Pincus,
& Lytle, 2002; Foa, Rothbaum, & Furr, 2003; Gloaguen,
Cottraux, Cucherat, & Blackburn, 1998). Other
process-oriented research has similarly emphasized the

importance of BA components of CT (Bennett-Levy et
al., 2004) and has suggested the possibility of negative
outcomes when therapists work on changing clients’
thoughts about interpersonal relationships as opposed
to changing actual interpersonal relationships (Hayes,
Castonguay, & Goldfried, 1996).

In addition, Ferster’s early focus on avoidance has
also been underscored by contemporary behavior
therapists. Specifically, Linehan (1993) incorporated
the use of “opposite action” for sadness as a means to
target depression in dialectical behavior therapy. And
Hayes and colleagues (1996) have emphasized the role
of experiential avoidance in the development of a wide
range of psychopathologies and in the conceptualization
of acceptance and commitment therapy (ACT;
Hayes, Strosahl, & Wilson, 1999). A study on an early
precursor to ACT found significant treatment benefits
for depressed clients in comparison to standard CT
(Zettle & Rains, 1989).

Some preliminary studies also suggest that patient
activation is an important element of the change process.
In a substance use treatment study in which one
condition was augmented with BA interventions, pre- to
posttreatment increases in environmental reward were
associated with reductions in depressive and anxiety
symptoms for such patients, but not for those receiving
substance use treatment only (Daughters et al., 2008).
In a study of cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) for
depression, increases from baseline in activation predicted
posttreatment depression improvement (Christopher,
Jacob, Neuhaus, Neary, & Fiola, 2009).

Recent enthusiasm for BA is fueled in large part by
the broad dissemination potential of a straightforward,
parsimonious intervention such as BA. The application
of BA in novel settings and with diverse populations
is a focus of much recent research (see below for detailed
discussion of settings and client variables). Technology
is playing an increasingly important role in the
expansion of BA. Teletherapy over the phone and with
videoconferencing technology has been shown to be effective
for adolescent and late-life depression (Lazzari,
Egan, & Rees, 2011; Quijano et al., 2007) as well as
computerized adaptations of BA delivered via the Internet
(Spates, Kalata, Ozeki, Stanton, & Peters, 2012;
Spek et al., 2007, 2008; Van Voorhees et al., 2009;
Warmerdam, Van Straten, Twisk, Riper, & Cuijpers,
2008). Finally, novel training methods are also being
enhanced with technology. Based on pilot data from a
preliminary computerized BA training program (Hubley,
Woodcock, Dimeff, & Dimidjian, in press), our


Behavioral Activation for Depression

group is currently testing a fully developed computerassisted
therapy program to train therapists in BA.

In summary, research on BA provides a strong foundation
for clinical application with depressed patients
and for extension to novel populations (Dimidjian et
al., 2011). These conclusions are consistent with other
meta-analyses that incorporate clinical trial data from
over 30 studies (Cuijpers, van Straten, & Warmerdam,
2007; Ekers, Richards, & Gilbody, 2007; Mazzucchelli,
Kane, & Rees, 2009) and with influential treatment
guidelines (e.g., National Institute of Health and Clinical
Excellence, 2009).

assessiNG DiaGNostic, cliNical,
aND fuNctioNal DoMaiNs

The application of BA is based on a comprehensive diagnostic,
clinical, and functional assessment. Some of
these assessment activities are completed as a precursor
to the initiation of therapy, and others are ongoing
throughout the course of therapy.

In our treatment outcome research, we have used a
number of structured diagnostic interview instruments
to assess Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders (DSM) diagnoses, including the Structured
Clinical Interview for DSM-IV Axis I Disorders
(SCID-I; First, Spitzer, Gibbon, & Williams, 1997),
and the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV
Axis II Personality Disorders (SCID-II; First, Spitzer,
Gibbons, Williams, & Benjamin, 1996). In addition,
we have used measures of depressive severity, including
the clinician-administered Hamilton Depression
Rating Scale (HDRS; Hamilton, 1960), the client
self-reported Beck Depression Inventory–II (BDI-II;
Beck, Steer, & Brown, 1996), and the nine-item Patient
Health Questionnaire Depression Scale (PHQ-9;
Kroenke, Spitzer, & Williams, 2001).

In routine clinical practice, we recommend conducting
a baseline diagnostic interview (although it can
be administered using a less structured format than
a research-based interview), and the ongoing use of
a measure to assess depressive severity is important.
Typically, the most easily administered measure is a
self-report measure (e.g., BDI-II; Beck et al., 1996).
Also, a number of self-report instruments may serve as
useful assessment measures of patient activity level and
of the reward available in a client’s environment. The
Behavioral Activation for Depression Scale (BADS;
Kanter, Mulick, Busch, Berlin, & Martell, 2007; Kant


er, Rusch, Busch, & Sedivy, 2009), a 29-item measure
of client activation, has been used in several studies
(e.g., Weinstock, Munroe, & Miller, 2011) to measure
changes in levels of activation and avoidance over the
course of BA. The BADS has been validated in European
Spanish (Barraca, Pérez-Álvarez, & Lozano
Bleda, 2011), Persian (Mohammadi & Amiri, 2010),
and Dutch (Raes, Hoes, Van Gucht, & Kanter, 2010). A
recently developed nine-item short form of the BADS
demonstrated improved psychometric properties compared
to the original, and good internal consistency
and predictive validity in the validation study (Manos,
Kanter, & Luo, 2011).

In addition, self-report questionnaires have been
developed to measure the construct of responsecontingent
positive reinforcement, including the
Environmental Reward Observation Scale (EROS;
Armento & Hopko, 2007) and the Reward Probability
Index (RPI; Carvalho et al., 2010). Both of these
measures are brief, and initial psychometric studies
indicate promising psychometric properties. Clinicians
who want a nomothetic measure of pleasurable activities
to augment the idiographic behavioral assessment
(described in more detail below) can use the Pleasant
Events Schedule (Lewinsohn & Graf, 1973). These
measures may prove to be useful clinical tools that can
be administered periodically throughout the course of
treatment to assess change in activity and reward. For a
full discussion of measures available and issues related
to measuring the BA model, see Manos, Kanter, and
Busch (2010).

Because functional capacity is such a key component
of BA treatment, it is important to gather detailed information
about the impact of the client’s depression on
functional status across multiple life domains, including
work, family, social activity, and so forth. These
domains can be assessed using clinical interview or
standard assessment instruments (e.g., the Social Adjustment
Scale [Weissman & Bothwell, 1976] and the
Medical Outcomes Study 36-Item Short Form Health
Survey [Ware & Sherbourne, 1992]).

course of treatMeNt

BA is a theory-driven as opposed to a protocol-driven
treatment and, as such, is highly idiographic in its application.
Treatment does not follow a required sessionby-
session format; however, it does follow a general
course over time. This general course comprises the


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

following activities, which are described in greater detail
below:

••
Orienting to treatment

••
Developing treatment goals

••
Individualizing activation and engagement targets

••
Repeatedly applying and troubleshooting activa


tion and engagement strategies

••
Reviewing and consolidating treatment gains

Orienting to Treatment

BA begins with orienting the client to the treatment, a
process that is typically the focus of the first two sessions.
The primary tasks to accomplish during this
initial phase of treatment include discussing the BA
model of depression and primary treatment strategies,
and providing information about the structure of treatment,
and the roles and responsibilities of the client and
therapist.

The presentation of the treatment model includes
describing the behavioral approach to depression and
the process of change during treatment, discussing the
specific ways the model fits with the client’s experiences,
and encouraging and responding to questions and
concerns about the model. The model is presented both

verbally during the first session and in a brief, written
description that is given to the client at the end of the
first session. In addition, many clients find the illustration
provided in Figure 9.1 to be a helpful adjunct when
orienting to the model. A detailed transcript illustrating
the presentation of the treatment rationale is included in
the case study below, and the key points to address are
summarized in Table 9.1.

During the second session, therapist and client again
discuss the treatment model and the client’s reactions,
including questions that may have arisen following the
first session. It is essential that the therapist obtain “buy
in” from the client with the basic elements of the treatment
model. Therapy works best if the client accepts
and buys into the rationale for treatment and the case
conceptualization (Addis & Carpenter, 2000). The
therapist is advised to guard against moving too quickly
if the client does not express agreement with the key
tenets of the model. Thus, during the initial sessions,
it is essential that the therapist encourage the client to
ask questions and elicit the client’s potential doubts and
concerns.

For instance, some clients may find it difficult to accept
the idea that changing behavior directly is an effective
way to work with depression. Often, clients are
strongly committed to a biological explanation for their


What is the context? How do you feel? What do you do (or not do)?


Have any problems started, continued, or worsened?

figUre 9.1. The behavioral activation treatment model.


Behavioral Activation for Depression

table 9.1. 10 key Points to address
when Presenting the treatment Model

1. Behavioral activation is based on the idea that the
events in your life and how you respond to such events
influence how you feel.
2. BA assumes that one reason people get depressed is that
their lives are providing too few rewards and too many
problems. Sometimes it is possible to identify easily
stressors or problems; other times there are no clearly
identifiable stressors but there is still not adequate
reward from the environment.
3. When one’s life context is difficult, it is common to
experience feeling sad, down, discouraged, anxious,
fatigued, drained, and so forth.
4. When feeling these ways, it is also common to do (or
not do) particular actions. People often pull away from
the world around them and find that basic routines in
their lives become disrupted.
5. Pulling away from the world when feeling down is
natural and understandable. The problem is that it also
can initiate downward spirals with how you feel (e.g.,
the less you do, the worse you feel, and the worse you
feel, the less you do).
6. Acting (or not acting) in such ways also can maintain
depression by making it hard to solve life problems
effectively; this initiates another downward spiral in
which what you do or don’t do makes the context of life
harder or keeps you from improving it.
7. In this treatment, we will work together to focus on
specific things you can do to help shift these downward
spirals and help you become more active and engaged in
your life.
8. BA is not just about “doing more.” If feeling better were
that easy, you would have already done it. We can work
together to identify the activities that would be most
helpful and the small and manageable steps you can
take to get started. You can think of me as a your coach
or a consultant in the process of change.
9. Each session will involve developing practical and
do-able steps to engage in activities that improve mood
and to solve specific life problems. Between sessions,
you will work on homework assignments that we
develop together; these assignments are an essential part
of therapy and will focus on re-connecting or building
parts of your life that increase feelings of pleasure or
accomplishment and bring you closer to important life
goals.
10. Activating and engaging in specific ways can help
you experience more reward and effectively solve life
problems. When you are active, engaged, and solving
problems effectively, it is likely that you will be moving
toward important life goals and feeling better.
depression. It is not advisable for therapists to debate
this position; instead, therapists can explain that there
are many sources of vulnerability to depression, and
that one of the effective ways to change depression is
by changing what one does. At times, clients also may
think that the emphasis on behavioral change means that
all they need to do is exercise more, go to a few more
movies, or take a few more walks, and their depression
will remit. If clients understand BA in this way, then it
is not surprising when they feel that the treatment invalidates
their degree of distress and the difficulty they
face in overcoming depression. We often find it helpful
to talk to clients about two points. First, behavior can
have a powerful effect on our moods, and people are
often unaware of this link, particularly when they are
depressed. For example, subtly shifting the way someone
approaches interactions with family members may
not rid that person of depression, but it can reduce the
severity of depressed mood, thereby setting the stage
for other changes that collectively help to reverse the
depression. The second point is that behavior change is
not easy; if it were, we would all behave exactly as we
think we should all the time (and we know this is not
the case!). Changing behavior requires knowing what
to change, and this can take some serious and sustained
“detective work” in therapy. The therapist can again
emphasize his/her role as a coach in helping the client
to figure out what to change and how to do it.

In addition to presenting and discussing the treatment
model, it is also important to discuss thoroughly
the structure of treatment and the roles of therapist and
client. It is necessary to emphasize three key elements:
between-session practice, collaboration, and the structure
of sessions.

1. It is important early in treatment to highlight the
active nature of BA and establish the importance of
between-session practice. The therapist sets the tone of
therapy and expectations by highlighting that BA is a
very action-oriented and problem-focused treatment in
which the majority of the “work” of therapy goes on
between sessions, as the client implements plans that
therapist and client devise in session. Subsequent sessions
examine what the client has learned, highlight
relevant consequences of activities, and identify barriers
and troubleshoot to maximize the likelihood of success
on future attempts. The assignment of homework
begins in the very first session, when the therapist asks
the client to read the brief pamphlet that reviews the
key ideas of the BA approach (see Martell et al., 2001).

CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

2. It also is important to emphasize that BA is a collaborative
approach to therapy, in which therapist and
client work together in the service of the client’s goals.
3. It is also helpful to orient clients to the structured
nature of each treatment session. Although the specific
foci of each session vary across clients and across time,
each session nonetheless follows a similar general outline.
Specifically, as in cognitive therapy for depression
(Beck et al., 1979), each session begins with therapist
and client setting an agenda in a collaborative fashion.
The aim of the agenda is to organize the time effectively
and to ensure that sessions address the client’s most
important topics and have maximal likelihood of helping
the client reach key goals. Because the goal of treatment
is activation, the more control given to the client
in setting the agenda, the better. In addition, given the
integral role of homework in BA, the majority of each
session is devoted to reviewing homework from the
previous session and assigning homework for the next
session. The ending of each session includes asking the
client to reiterate a “take-home message” from the session,
verifying that the client has a clear understanding
of the assigned homework, and reviewing the time for
the next scheduled session and methods to reach the
therapist, if needed, in the interim.
In attending to each of these specific tasks, the therapist
establishes his/her credibility as an expert who can
help the client and conveys a sense of hope. By establishing
at the outset of treatment a strong foundation of
collaboration, client and therapist can begin working
together toward the client’s goals.

Developing Treatment Goals

The ultimate goal of BA is to help clients modify their
behavior to increase contact with sources of positive
reinforcement in their lives. Typically, this process
involves first addressing basic avoidance patterns and
areas of routine disruption and, second, addressing
short- and long-term goals. A good deal of the therapist’s
time in BA is spent helping clients to increase
awareness of their escape and avoidance repertoires
and to practice active coping responses. Often, part of
this process also involves changing basic routines (e.g.,
sleeping, eating, and social contact). Thus, short-term
goals are set to specify concrete accomplishments that
can help clients shift their life situations in a less depressing
direction. Often, therapists are uncertain about

how to sequence treatment targets; generally, we focus
initially on behavior change that has the greatest likelihood
of success, which may be based on ease of accomplishment
or level of importance to client values and
priorities. Common examples might include getting the
house cleaned, spending time with friends and family,
making headway on a large pile of paperwork on which
the client has procrastinated, exercising more frequently,
and so on. Often, behaviors necessary for progress
on short-term goals can be scheduled and structured in
such a way that they substitute for maladaptive avoidant
or withdrawal responses. A therapist works with a
client to make progress on short-term goals regardless
of how the client is feeling. In other words, one of the
therapist’s primary goals is to help the client change the
pattern of having his/her behavior governed by mood.
Rather, the objective is to make progress on goals regardless
of how one feels at a particular point in time,
under the assumption that progress on life goals is itself
antidepressive. This is a crucial point because clients
often judge the success of a particular behavior change
based on how it makes them feel in the moment. Thus,
it is important for therapists to remain mindful of the
consequence of different behaviors specifically with
respect to whether they help clients move toward or
achieve treatment goals.

Once the short-term goals relating to avoidance,
withdrawal, and routine disruption have been addressed,
clients are assisted in addressing larger life
circumstances that may be related to depression. Larger
life goals are those shifts that take time to accomplish
but have the potential to alter a person’s life situation in
substantial ways. Common examples include finding a
new job, getting out of a distressing relationship, starting
a new relationship, or moving to a new city or town.
BA can be helpful in teaching and encouraging clients
to continue to make progress toward these goals even
though their actual realization may take some time
to accomplish. Essentially, in BA, clients learn basic
change strategies that can be used to accomplish shortterm
and larger life goals.

Individualizing Activation
and Engagement Targets

No two people are the same, and no person is exactly the
same from situation to situation. In the context of treating
depression, this means that the particular activation
strategies that work for one person may not work for
another, and they may work for the same person some



Behavioral Activation for Depression

times, but not always. Whether activity–environment
transactions shift someone’s mood in a positive or negative
direction is an empirical question, and one that
requires careful attention and assessment to answer.
Much of the skill of doing competent BA relies on just
this kind of careful examination. In BA, this process is
referred to as “functional analysis,” which is the key to
individualizing activation targets and the heart of BA.
Functional analysis involves identifying for each client
the variables that maintain the depression and are
most amenable to change. This understanding forms
the basis of the case conceptualization and guides the
idiographic application of specific activation strategies.
In general, the therapist must engage the client in a detailed
examination of the following:

••
What is maintaining the depression?
••
What is getting in the way of engaging in and enjoying
life?
••
What behaviors are good candidates for maximizing
change?

This process sounds simple, yet in practice, it can be
complicated given that we all frequently lack awareness
of the contingencies that control our behavior.
Given this reality, early in treatment, we talk explicitly
about the goal (and the challenge!) of identifying these
relationships.

Two key steps are involved in identifying the contingencies
that control behavior. First, therapist and client
must clearly and specifically define the behavior of
interest; this includes defining the frequency, duration,
intensity, and setting of the behavior. The behaviors of
greatest interest are those most closely tied to changes
in mood. For clients who are familiar with antidepressant
treatment, we often explain that we want to identify
the ingredients of a behavioral antidepressant that
works for them. In order to do so, we need to define
specifically the activities that maintain depression (e.g.,
“down activities”) and those that improve mood and
functioning (e.g., “up activities”). For instance, for one
client, difficulty completing basic household tasks was
maintaining and exacerbating his experience of depression.
It was important to specify the problems of (1)
filling and closing bags of household trash, then leaving
them in the pantry room rather than taking them
to the dumpster behind the house for the past 6 weeks,
and (2) receiving bills in the mail and placing them unopened
in a file drawer for the past 4 months. Treatment
with this client began with a series of graded tasks to

accomplish the goal of taking out the trash. This was
identified specifically as a potential “up” activity (even
though it was, admittedly, not a pleasurable one) and
selected as an initial focus because therapist and client
decided it was more easily accomplished than addressing
the bills, which the client experienced as more
overwhelming.

Second, therapist and client can begin to identify the
antecedents and consequences of the behavior, with
the goal of specifying variables that elicit or reinforce
depression. In terms of the BA model, this is parallel
to identifying the links between context and mood,
between action and mood, and the downward spirals
that can maintain depression over time. Understanding
basic behavioral principles can often be of great
value in identifying these contingent relationships.
What does this mean in practical terms? For depressed
clients, a number of contingent relationships are often
observed. As we discussed earlier, negative reinforcement
contingencies are often pervasive. “Negative reinforcement”
means that the likelihood of a behavior
occurring is increased by the removal of something
from the environment, typically an aversive condition.
Negative reinforcement contingencies can be a
very adaptive part of human behavior. For instance,
putting on a warm coat to avoid getting cold, stopping
at stop signs to avoid getting in accidents, and being
extra nice to a parent after crashing the car to avoid
being punished are all examples of ways that negative
reinforcement can serve one well. Unfortunately,
however, when an individual becomes depressed, his/
her behavioral repertoires can become dominated by
escape and avoidance behaviors that temporarily allow
a person to escape from painful feelings or difficult
interpersonal situations. In this way, many avoidant
and escape behaviors may be understood as secondary
coping responses—efforts to cope with the experience
of depression that, unfortunately, make it worse.
For example, a person might attempt to escape from
feelings of hopelessness and fatigue by taking a long
nap in the middle of the afternoon. This might, as a
consequence, temporarily remove the person from an
aversive context, but it can also prevent him/her from
taking the steps necessary to shift into a less depressive
context overall (exercising, applying for jobs,
cleaning the house, etc.). Substance abuse, excessive
sleeping, watching too much television, and general
inactivity are all common examples of secondary coping
responses that can be maintained by negative reinforcement.
These types of negative reinforcement


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

contingencies are often central in preventing people
from coming into contact with potentially reinforcing
environments that contribute to leading a more adaptive
and engaged life. Careful assessment is required to
identify whether and how specific negative reinforcement
contingencies are active in a client’s life. Positive
reinforcement contingencies may also be problematic
for clients. In these cases, the likelihood of a behavior
is increased because it is contingently associated with
positive consequences. For instance, going to bed early
may be positively reinforced by family members offering
empathy and support. Some behaviors, such as
overeating and substance abuse, can also provide immediate
positive reinforcement but detract from longterm
goals, thereby maintaining the depression.

How do we conduct functional analyses in BA?
There exist two primary supports for the BA therapist
doing functional analyses: the BA model and activity
monitoring. First, the BA model used to orient clients
at the outset of treatment can be used throughout treatment
to guide assessment of specific events that arise in
a client’s life to help identify key links between activity
and mood. For example, if a client begins to talk in
session about feeling troubled by a difficult interaction
with her son, the therapist can suggest that they use the
model to understand the components of the interaction.
Together, they can discuss and write down specifically
what happened (e.g., “My son said that he was failing
math”), how the client felt (e.g., “I felt sad about how
hard our lives always seem to be and afraid that he
would not graduate”), and what the client did (e.g., “I
left dinner, went to my room, and thought about how
I’m failing as a parent”). These components can then
be linked to identify the downward spiral that maintains
negative mood (e.g., isolating and ruminating increases
anxiety and sadness) and the downward spiral
that prohibits effective problem solving (e.g., “I didn’t
talk directly with him, and he got angry, went out with
his friends, and didn’t come home until the middle of
the night”). This process of assessment helps to identify
targets of activation for that difficult event (e.g.,
generate and practice alternatives to leaving the interaction
and ruminating; identify and implement steps to
solving the problem of her son’s poor performance in
math). Repeated application of the model in sessions
and for use as homework between sessions also will
help therapist and client identify patterns of maladaptive
actions over time and place. Finally, repeated use
of the model in such ways teaches the client a method
to guide his/her actions long after therapy has ended.

Second, activity monitoring in the context of daily
life is the heart of the assessment process in BA.
Through detailed and ongoing activity monitoring that
the client completes between sessions, therapist and client
can work together to develop an understanding of
the questions listed earlier. Given the role of activity
monitoring, it is important early in treatment for the
therapist to set the stage to explain clearly how to do it,
defining both what to monitor and when to do it. Also,
therapists must carefully and skillfully review monitoring
tasks to reinforce the client’s efforts to begin developing
activation and engagement assignments.

Therapists may elect to use a number of different
formats for activity monitoring, the most basic form of
which includes recording both an activity and a mood
rating for each hour of the client’s waking day. Therapists
also may elect to have clients monitor mastery
(sense of accomplishment) or pleasure (enjoyment) associated
with specific activities. Generally, we advise
clients to record enough information about activities
that we can begin to identify links between what they
were doing and how they were feeling, but not so much
information that the task is overly burdensome. It also
is helpful to identify at what intervals during the day
the client will write down the observations (e.g., morning,
lunch, dinner, before bed). If recording for each
hour is too taxing for a client, time sampling procedures
may also be used. In such a procedure, client and
therapist agree on a specified number of hours when
activities will be monitored during the week between
sessions. Time sampling procedures need to include a
variety of situations in which the client functions during
the week. In general, therapists will want to encourage
clients to complete entries at regular intervals
throughout the day and are advised to work with clients
to develop plans for recording that take advantage of
natural cues and rhythms in their lives to facilitate such
regular recording.

Therapists can provide clients with a simple weekly
Activity Record for monitoring assignments (e.g., see
Figure 9.2). However, as is often emphasized in BA,
the function of the behavior is more important than
its form; thus, clients may eschew monitoring on an
Activity Record but be comfortable using personal
calendars, smartphones, or other idiosyncratic recording
methods. Adapting the monitoring assignment to a
form that is compatible with the client’s normal daily
routine is highly encouraged. For instance, clients who
spend a lot of time in their car may keep their records
above the visor; others may find it helpful to keep it


Behavioral Activation for Depression

Instructions: Record your activity for each hour of the day, and record a mood rating associated with each activity. Use
the scale below with the anchors that you and your therapist develop to guide your mood rating. Aim to make entries
on your Activity Record at least every 3–4 hours each day.
Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday Saturday Sunday
5–6
6–7
7–8
8–9
9–10
10–11
11–12
12–1
1–2
2–3
3–4
4–5
5–6
6–7
7–8
8–9
9–10
10–11
11–12
12–1
1–2
2–3
3–4
4–5

Mood Ratings: 0: Description, with examples of associated activities:

5: Description, with examples of associated activities:
10: Description, with examples of associated activities:
figUre 9.2. Activity Record (hourly).


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

taped to the refrigerator or bathroom mirror; still others
find it useful to carry it with them in a pocket, purse,
backpack, or briefcase.

When a client has completed an activity monitoring
assignment, it is essential for the therapist to review it
in detail. Failing to review activity monitoring records
may mean missed opportunities to reinforce the client’s
behavior and to develop the case conceptualization.
Much of competent BA lies in skillfully reviewing a
completed Activity Record. What does the competent
therapist attend to when reviewing the records? In general,
the therapist will want to keep the case conceptualization
questions listed earlier in the forefront of his/
her mind when reviewing a completed activity log. The
therapist reviews the Activity Record to understand
the client’s activities, routines, and life context, and to
begin to identify patterns that may be maintaining or
exacerbating depressed mood.

Specific questions that therapists can use to guide
their review of activity schedules are listed below:

••
What would the client be doing if he/she were not

depressed (working, managing family responsi


bilities, exercising, socializing, engaging in leisure

activities, eating, sleeping, etc.)?

••
Is the client engaging in a wide variety of activi


ties, or have his/her activities become narrow?

••
What is the relationship between specific activities

and mood?

••
What is the relationship between specific life con


texts/problems and mood?

••
In what ways are avoidance and withdrawal main


taining or exacerbating depression? What does the

client avoid or from what is he/she pulling away?

In what specific ways?

••
Are there routine disruptions?

••
Where has contact with reinforcers been lost?

••
Are there deficits in coping skills and strategies?

To answer these questions, it is essential to focus on
the parts of the client’s activity and context that change
and the parts that are consistent over time. It is not uncommon
for depressed clients to report that their mood
is always low, no matter what they are doing or where
they are doing it. They may describe that they simply
feel “blah” all the time or that, perhaps, their mood
changes, but such changes are minor or irrelevant. A
central premise of BA, however, is that variability is
everywhere, though sometimes it is difficult to detect.

Moreover, the variability is not random. Instead, variations
in behavior and its settings have a direct effect on
a person’s mood and, as such, provide critical information
about central contingencies. When clients report
that they feel depressed “all the time,” it is either because
they are inaccurately reporting on their mood retrospectively,
their behavioral repertoires are extremely
narrow (e.g., lying in bed all day long), or they have
not learned to discriminate between subtle differences
in mood. This last point is a critical one. One of the
key tasks for therapists is to help clients understand
that their moods are intimately linked to what they are
doing, where they are doing it, and the resulting consequences.
Treating depression requires making a series
of strategic changes in each of these domains, all of
which are based on understanding the basic contingent
relationships.

Repeatedly Applying and Troubleshooting
Activation and Engagement Strategies

Given the idiographic nature of BA, the course of treatment
may look quite different across a range of clients.
Despite this diversity, we discuss below a few straightforward
behavioral methods that are frequently used.

Activity Scheduling and Self-Monitoring

The major work of therapy in BA occurs between treatment
sessions. It is uncommon for clients to leave a
session without some specific activities with which to
experiment during the week. Thus, activity scheduling
and monitoring of outcome are standard methods used
throughout treatment. At the end of each session, the
client should clearly understand the specific activity assignment
and have a clear strategy for implementing it
during the week (including a plan for overcoming likely
obstacles to implementation).

Specifically scheduling the activity is a useful tool
for having the client commit to times when he/she will
do the homework. When the assignment is listed in
writing on a particular day of the week, at a particular
hour, the client has the benefit of an external aid to motivate
behavior change (i.e., working from the “outsidein”
as opposed to the “inside-out”). Activity scheduling
is also used frequently for clients with significant
routine disruptions. Schedules can be an aid in the effort
to develop and follow regular routines for eating,
working, sleeping, exercising, and maintaining social


Behavioral Activation for Depression

contact. Depending on the activity, the client may not
specifically schedule the time but may instead record
its completion on a daily log.

A key part of scheduling activities frequently involves
careful attention to contingency management.
As social psychologists have long known, “The correlations
between intention and behavior are modest . . .
the weak intention–behavior relation is largely due
to people having good intentions but failing to act on
them” (Gollwitzer, 1999, p. 493). Given this reality, it
is essential for BA therapists to consider ways they can
help clients structure their environment so as to maximize
success with treatment assignments and goals.

One helpful method of contingency management is
the use of public commitment to enhance the likelihood
of completing assignments (Locke & Latham, 2002).
Often, we explore whether friends, coworkers, or family
members are available to be included in activation
plans. For instance, one of our clients learned in treatment
that when his depression was more severe, it was
essential for him to tell his wife each morning the primary
tasks he intended to complete that day. For him,
“keeping his word” was an effective reinforcer that
helped to increase his activation.

In addition, we work with clients to structure their
environments in other ways that will enhance activation.
Thus, for a client who works on an exercise plan
during the week, putting on her exercise clothes before
she leaves work at the end of the day is an essential part
of the plan.

Finally, clients may also experiment with the use of
arbitrary reinforcers for specific behavior change tasks.
Although the emphasis of BA is heavily on increasing
contact with natural reinforcers in one’s environment,
the selective use of arbitrary reinforcers can at times be
helpful. The client we noted earlier planned a special
dinner with his wife at the end of a week of adherence
with activation tasks; the client who was working on
the exercise program bought a new shirt for exercising
after she started her new program.

Occasionally, therapists may suggest the use of aversive
contingencies to help promote behavior change;
for instance, one client found it useful to agree to call
his therapist if he was going to stay in bed and miss
work for the day. We have described to other clients
the method of writing donation checks to their least favored
charities, which are then cashed if they do not
complete scheduled activities (Watson & Tharp, 2002).
Often, simply the suggestion of an aversive contingency

is sufficient to motivate change. For instance, the client
who agreed to call his therapist did, in fact, call early
one Monday morning; when he was halfway through
leaving a message, he stated, “This is ridiculous. Forget
it, I am going to work.”

When clients do activity scheduling, it is also essential
to build in a monitoring component such that they
record the context and consequences of activation. This
provides both information about the specific activation
assignment, and regular and ongoing practice in
noticing contingent relationships between activity and
mood. It is essential for the therapist to discuss what the
client learned from the activation and self-monitoring
tasks in each session. In addition, the therapist needs to
provide regular feedback about progress and to highlight
areas of improvement or troubleshoot problems
that may have arisen.

It is essential for the therapist not to shy away from
asking about homework that is incomplete or not done.
Attending to these domains is exactly the job of the BA
therapist. Repeated and persistent focus on a small set
of activation tasks often occupies a great deal of the
course of treatment. Asking about what prevented the
completion of homework gives therapist and client essential
information about important barriers and possible
examples of avoidance patterns. The purpose of
such discussions is not to punish or shame the client, so
it is important to approach homework review with a direct
and nonjudgmental attitude. At the same time, discussing
incomplete or partially completed homework
may be experienced as aversive by the client, which
may help to facilitate his/her doing the homework next
time (i.e., through being negatively reinforced by escaping
from the therapist’s uncomfortable questioning).
If this occurs naturally, it is not a problem and
can in fact enhance treatment progress. However, the
therapist should never use shame or criticism, however
subtly, to enhance homework completion.

Graded Task Assignment

Graded task assignment, which is a core part of CT
for depression (Beck et al., 1979), is also a hallmark of
BA and a key part of most activity scheduling efforts.
Thus, it is important for therapists to help clients break
down behaviors into specific, achievable units to facilitate
successful behavior change. Knowing how to break
down tasks and grade them appropriately in a stepwise
progression from simple to complex requires thera



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

pists to use a broad array of basic self-management and
problem-solving skills. Toward this end, it is also important
for therapists to help clients learn the method of
grading tasks during therapy, so that they can apply this
skill to new contexts and tasks after therapy has ended.
In explaining the tool of graded task assignment, it is
often important to remind clients that the goal is not to
accomplish all parts of the activity; rather, the goals are
to get started on important tasks, increase activation,
and disrupt avoidance. Therapists can also explain to
clients that breaking tasks down helps to ensure success
with subtasks, and such success experiences can in turn
reinforce and motivate work on successive components
of the larger task.

It is very important to break down tasks in such a
way that early success is guaranteed. If clients experience
difficulty with tasks, therapists may want to revisit
explicitly whether the task was broken down and graded
sufficiently. Clients also can be asked to envision
the steps involved in a given task before attempting it
outside of therapy, and to anticipate any obstacles that
might arise. If this process suggests that certain components
may be difficult to master, therapist and client
can grade that task into smaller and more achievable
components.

Avoidance Modification and Problem Solving

This is perhaps one of the most rich and varied aspects
of BA. As noted earlier, clients may be addressing
avoidance of concrete tasks at work or home, avoidance
of painful emotions such as grief or fear, avoidance of
interpersonal conflict, and so forth. The specific methods
used to address these areas are tied to the specific
nature of the avoidance. For instance, a client who
avoids the experience of grief over a lost relationship
may be assisted in spending time each day reviewing
photos of the former partner, reminiscing about times
they shared, and so forth. A client who avoids tasks at
work may be assisted in breaking down tasks, making
specific to-do lists, asking others for help, and so forth.
A client who avoids interpersonal conflict may be assisted
in practicing assertive communication in role
plays in sessions, experimenting with discussions with
friends, bringing a family member to a therapy session,
and so forth. That said, within this broad domain, a
number of basic strategies may be helpful in planning
treatment.

First, it is essential when addressing avoidance to
start from a collaborative stance with the client. It is

important to understand and to communicate an understanding
of the discomfort that a client may experience
in a particular situation, which is then followed by
some action on the part of the client to end the aversive
experience. Therapists can emphasize the ways that
avoidance may serve an adaptive function in the short
term but be problematic in the long term. Given that
many avoidant behaviors may be under the control of
immediate contingencies, it is often helpful to highlight
repeatedly the long-term consequences of particular
behaviors. Returning to the BA model to highlight such
patterns is often helpful.

Second, basic problem-solving methods are frequently
used to address avoidance. Although we rarely
teach problem-solving steps in a structured and formal
manner, addressing avoidance typically involves figuring
out how to approach and solve problems. Thus, it is
essential for therapists to maintain a problem-solving
mind-set with respect to avoidance and to work with
clients to generate a range of options for possible alternative
coping behaviors. Problem-solving strategies
include defining and assessing the problem, generating
alternative solutions, managing environmental contingencies,
and troubleshooting the solution when needed.
It should be noted that all of the other basic strategies
are also frequently used in the service of avoidance
modification and problem solving (activity scheduling
and monitoring, graded task assignment, etc.).

Third, to help maintain a consistent focus on avoidance,
clients may be assisted by several mnemonic
devices. These devices help to organize a method of
examining, “What is the function of a behavior; what
are its consequences?” We have used the acronym AC-
TION to identify the general approach that we ask clients
to take (Martell et al., 2001):

••
Assess—Is this behavior approach or avoidance?

Will it be likely to make me feel better or worse?

••
Choose—Either choose to continue this behavior,

even if it makes me feel worse, or try a new be


havior.

••
Try—Try the behavior chosen.

••
Integrate—Any new behavior needs to be given

a fair chance, so integrate a new behavior into a

routine before assessing whether it has been help


ful or not.

••
Observe the Results—Pay close attention and

monitor the effects of the new behavior.

••
Never Give Up—Remember that making changes

can often require repeated efforts and attempts.


Behavioral Activation for Depression

When clients demonstrate behavioral patterns characterized
by avoidance behaviors, therapists may use
the acronym of being in a TRAP (Martell et al., 2001):

••
Trigger—usually something in the environment

(e.g., criticized by employer)

••
Response—usually an emotional reaction (e.g.,

feels shame and sadness)

••
Avoidance Pattern—The avoidance behavior(s)

used to cope with the emotional response (e.g.,

leaves work early, complains to partner about dis


pleasure with job)

Therapists then ask the client to get out of the TRAP
and back on TRAC; that is, under the same trigger and
response conditions, they are asked to experiment with
“alternative coping” behaviors.

Engagement Strategies

Research has well documented the frequency and negative
consequences of ruminative behavior among people
with depression (Nolen-Hoeksema, 2000). The BA
approach considers ruminating as a behavior that frequently
prevents people from engaging fully with their
activities and environments. BA therapists are on alert
for client reports of ruminating and are also careful to
assess whether ruminating is a problem when clients
return to sessions reporting that an activation assignment
“didn’t work.” If, for example, a client reports that
she experienced little mood improvement while playing
with her son in the park, the therapist will want to examine
whether she was only partially engaged with the
task of playing because her mind was focused on why
her former partner did not want to continue their relationship,
what that meant about her value as a woman,
and so forth.

In addressing rumination in BA, we are less interested
in the particular content of ruminative thoughts
than in the context and consequences of rumination.
For instance, in working with a client who frequently
ruminated about a job that he regretted having declined,
the BA therapist asked him to examine the following
types of questions: What were you doing while
you were thinking about the other job? How engaged
were you with the activity of the moment and with
your surroundings? What happened during and after
your thinking about the other job? In examining these
questions, therapist and client identified that the client
was more likely to ruminate when he was working on

aversive tasks in his current job, about which he felt
significant anxiety; thus, ruminating was negatively reinforced
by distracting the client from anxiety and decreasing
his focus on the aversive tasks. BA therapists
may ask clients who ruminate frequently to experiment
with “attention to experience” practice, in which they
deliberately focus their attention on their current activity
and surroundings. For instance, they may be asked
to bring their full awareness to physical sensations (colors,
sounds, smells, tastes, physical movements, etc.).
These strategies are akin to mindfulness practices
(Segal, Williams, & Teasdale, 2002) and are also very
consistent with the dialectical behavior strategy of “opposite
action all the way” (Linehan, 1993).

Reviewing and Consolidating Treatment Gains

As therapist and client agree that there has been sufficient
improvement and termination seems indicated,
remaining sessions should focus on relapse prevention,
which largely involves reviewing and consolidating
gains the client has made. Toward the end of therapy,
it is often wise to focus on anticipating situations in
the client’s life that may trigger depressive feelings and
behaviors, and to generate plans for coping with such
situations. Upcoming life events that can be anticipated
as challenges for the client (e.g., the death of a parent,
a career change) should be discussed in detail, and the
client can draft a self-help plan to activate in the face
of the stressor. In addition, it is also very important to
review the basic BA model and the methods used in
therapy to ensure that the client is leaving with a solid
understanding of how to apply these as tools in the future.
For instance, therapists will want to review how
to identify links between what one does and how one
feels, how to set specific and concrete goals, how to use
graded task assignment, and how to identify and target
primary avoidance patterns (noticing that one is ruminating
more at work, noticing that one is starting to fail
to return phone calls of friends, etc.).

The Therapy Setting

Initial research on BA primarily focused on the context
of outpatient individual psychotherapy settings;
however, recent studies are examining application
across a broad array of settings and delivery modes.
For example, several groups have found creative ways
to transport BA to settings outside of specialty mental
health clinics. Preliminary trials have documented the


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

promise of treating adult primary care patients with depression
using BA (Gros & Haren, 2011; Uebleacker,
Weisberg, Haggarty, & Miller, 2009), and Ekers and
colleagues have provided confirmation showing that
nonspecialists can learn and effectively deliver BA in
primary care settings (Ekers, Dawson, & Bailey, 2013;
Ekers, Richards, McMillian, Bland, & Gilbdoy, 2011).
Similarly, Hopko and colleagues (2011) recently conducted
a successful randomized controlled trial (RCT)
of BA for depressed cancer patients in oncology clinics.
Dimidjian and colleagues are also currently testing BA
in a multisite RCT for antenatal depression with a flexible
delivery format, and obstetric nurses and behavioral
health providers as study clinicians. Group therapy appears
to be a viable format for delivering BA to larger
numbers of clients (Houghton, Curran, & Saxon, 2008;
Porter, Spates, & Smitham, 2004). There is also growing
interest in integrating BA into university settings
(e.g., Cullen, Spates, Pagoto, & Doran, 2006; Gawrysiak,
Nicholas, & Hopko, 2009; Reynolds, MacPherson,
Tull, Baruch, & Lejuez, 2011).

Treatment duration has ranged from 12- to 24-session
formats. Limitations of client resources, insurance
reimbursement, and other factors may necessitate particular
treatment durations. In our studies and clinical
work, we often schedule brief phone contacts between
sessions to reinforce the interpersonal connection to
the therapist and the importance of completing the
between-session assignments, and to provide an opportunity
to address questions or problems with the
between-session assignments.

Although BA is most often delivered as an individual
treatment modality, significant others in clients’ lives
are often included in sessions across the course of treatment.
Decisions about whether to include significant
others in treatment follow from the functional analysis;
thus, they are determined on an idiographic basis. Conjoint
sessions can be helpful in assessing patterns that
may be maintaining the client’s depression, providing
information and education to the family member about
the treatment rationale and approach, and providing opportunities
for the client and family member to practice
new interpersonal behaviors with the therapist’s direct
and immediate feedback.

Therapist Qualities

In our experience, a number of structural and stylistics
qualities are important for BA therapists to bring
to their clinical work. Briefly, the structured nature of

BA is maintained through the use of agendas to guide
session foci; therapists engage clients in the process
of collaborative agenda setting at the outset of each
session. Typically, the agenda includes some review
of progress through administration of a depression inventory
(e.g., BDI-II or HRSD), review of homework,
discussion of target problems, assignment of new
homework, and a session summary. In addition, the
structure is guided by a steadfast focus on nurturing
activation. From a stylistic standpoint, essential qualities
of the BA therapist include an emphasis on collaboration
or learning together as a team. In so doing,
the therapist is mindful of pacing to support active collaboration
and of soliciting information to ensure that
the client understands information presented in session
(e.g., specific targets or interventions, the overall BA
model, or other “take-home” points from the session).
All of the BA strategies also require the basic skill of
being a good problem solver. Therapists approach most
matters that arise in treatment simply as problems to
be solved. Thus, therapists must be naturally curious
about factors that maintain problems and be skilled at
generating a range of more functional alternative behaviors.
Toward this end, it is important to be comfortable
with a direct, matter-of-fact, and nonjudgmental
manner of communication, particularly in the face of
challenges such as not doing assigned activation plans
or not attending scheduled sessions. Therapists must
also balance a genuine sense of empathy and understanding
for the suffering and struggles of their clients
with an optimistic and dogged commitment to the possibility
of change. BA therapists validate the struggles
clients experience and seek out occasions to encourage
progress, even if seemingly minimal. Finally, understanding
basic behavioral concepts and principles can
help therapists conceptualize cases according to a behavioral
model of depression and present a coherent
framework to clients.

The acronym ENLIVEN (Dimidjian, 2011) captures
the structural and stylistic strategies necessary for the
competent BA therapist in an easily remembered mnemonic:


••
Establishes and follows agenda

••
Nurtures activation

••
Learns together with client

••
Is nonjudgmental

••
Validates

••
Encourages

••
Naturally expresses warmth


Behavioral Activation for Depression

In our treatment outcome research, we have used
ongoing clinical supervision and therapist consultation
teams to assist therapists in adhering to and refining
these important therapist qualities. Therapists typically
meet together weekly for 1–2 hours. The teams help
therapists increase skills with basic treatment strategies
(conceptualizing treatment plans, doing functional
analysis, effectively grading tasks, etc.). In the context
of a focus on specific cases and strategies, the team
also provides essential reinforcement for the therapist
qualities of empathy, nonjudgment, problem solving,
curiosity and persistence, and optimism about change.
Although we have not tested this hypothesis empirically,
we strongly suspect that it would be difficult for
many therapists to maintain these qualities particularly
in their work with clients struggling with severe, complicated,
or chronic depression without the support of
an effective consultation team.

Client Variables

Our treatment outcome research suggests that depressed
adults can experience acute and enduring clinical benefit
from a course of BA. Our clinical impressions are
that engagement with the basic treatment rationale and
willingness to complete homework assignments are
both important predictors of outcome in BA. Moreover,
it is important to note that we used a number of client
characteristics as exclusionary criteria in our treatment
research. For instance, if a client were acutely suicidal,
such that his/her risk could not be managed on an
outpatient basis, then we would refer him/her for more
acute and intensive treatment. In addition, if a client
had a comorbid diagnostic disorder that was more severe
and prominent (more interfering and the primary
focus of the client), and necessitated another evidencebased
treatment (e.g., obsessive–compulsive disorder),
then we would also refer him/her to a more specifically
appropriate treatment. We also carefully evaluated any
potential medical problems that may have contributed
to depression and referred clients for appropriate concurrent
medical treatment, if necessary.

Recent clinical research also highlights the potential
of BA as a treatment option for patients across the
lifespan, including adolescents (McCauley, Schloredt,
Gudmundsen, Martell, & Dimidjian, 2011; Ritschel,
Ramirez, Jones, & Craighead, 2011; Ruggiero, Morris,
Hopko, & Lejuez, 2007; Van Voorhees et al., 2009).
This work is in line with earlier work by Lewinsohn
and colleagues (1984) in the development of the Cop


ing with Depression Course for adolescents. This treatment
program includes activity scheduling, relaxation
training, assertiveness and social skills training, and
cognitive restructuring. Admittedly, the inclusion of
cognitive restructuring in the Coping with Depression
Course places this program in the broader area of CBT
rather than specific BA, but the emphasis is on scheduling
pleasant events. Evidence also supports the use
of BA with older adults (Acierno et al., 2012; Meeks,
Looney, van Haitsma, & Teri, 2008; Meeks, Teri, van
Haitsma, & Looney, 2006; Snarski et al., 2011; Sood,
Cisek, Zimmerman, Zaleski, & Fillmore, 2003; Teri,
Logsdon, Uomoto, & McCurry, 1997), ethnically diverse
patients (Kanter, Hurtado, Rusch, Busch, &
Santiago-Rivera, 2008; Kanter, Santiago-Rivera,
Rusch, Busch, & West, 2010), patients with anxiety
and borderline symptoms (Hopko, Lejuez, & Hopko,
2004; Hopko, Sanchez, Hopko, Dvir, & Lejuez, 2003),
patients with posttraumatic stress disorder (Jakupcak et
al., 2006; Mulick & Naugle, 2004; Wagner, Zatzick,
Ghesquiere, & Jurkovich, 2007), substance users with
elevated depressive symptoms (Daughters et al., 2008;
MacPherson et al., 2010), patients with schizophrenia
(Mairs, Lovell, Campbell, & Keeley, 2011), inpatients
(Curran, Lawson, Houghton, & Gournay, 2007; Hopko,
Lejuez, et al., 2003), patients with cancer (Armento &
Hopko, 2009; Hopko, Bell, Armento, Hunt, & Lejuez,
2005; Hopko et al., 2011) and other medical comorbidities
such as obesity (Pagoto, Bodenlos, Schneider,
Olendzki, & Spates, 2008) and diabetes (Schneider et
al., 2011). Although many of these studies are preliminary,
reporting data from small open-trial designs, the
breadth of this work suggests that BA may be adapted
as a treatment framework for a wide variety of clients
struggling with depression and comorbid problems.

case stuDy

Background Information

The following section presents the treatment of Mark,
a 43-year-old man with a long history of depression.
Mark was in treatment for 19 sessions across 4 months.
The description here is presented to illustrate the implementation
of core BA principles and strategies. Earlier
sessions are described in greater detail to provide the
reader with “how-to” information regarding the primary
principles and strategies. Later sessions emphasize a
thematic focus for which the same types of principles


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

and strategies are applied. It is important to emphasize
at the outset that this case description is not intended
to communicate a prescriptive course of treatment, and
readers are advised against following the sequence of
strategies in a lockstep fashion. BA is a highly idiographic
treatment, in which the choice of specific activation
strategies is driven by functional analysis; given
this, the reader is encouraged to attend to the ways the
therapist conceptualizes Mark’s difficulties and implements
treatment strategies over the course of therapy.
It is our hope that this detailed illustration will inspire
readers to apply the basic principles and core strategies
in a flexible and idiographic manner.

Mark sought treatment at the urging of his primary
care physician. His recent episode of depression had
lasted without remission for 3 years. Mark also had a
history of alcohol abuse. His early alcohol abuse had
caused significant problems in Mark’s first marriage,
which ended in divorce when he was in his early 20s;
however, problems with alcohol were not a cause of current
concern. He had been in therapy previously, during
his separation and divorce 4 years earlier. However,
Mark described it as unstructured and unfocused, and
reported that he stopped going after a few sessions. He
lived alone, although he had joint custody of his twin
adolescent daughters; Mark and his ex-wife alternated
parenting every other week.

Mark reported that he had had periods of depression
for “as long as I can remember.” In particular, he recalled
his first episode of depression at age 12, shortly
after his father abruptly left and severed all contact
with Mark and his family. Mark reported that he had
believed his parents were happily married and, at that
time, blamed himself for his father’s departure. Mark
reported that his mother and older siblings never discussed
his father. In describing his mood during adolescence
and adulthood, he reported, “I have periods
when I’m able to function OK. I go to work and all that,
but I’m never really happy.” Mark’s primary depressive
symptoms included depressed mood, loss of pleasure
in nearly all activities, excessive guilt, fatigue, difficulty
concentrating, and occasional passive thoughts of
death.

Mark had had a social network that revolved primarily
around his former marriage, but he had withdrawn
from that network since his separation and divorce.
Currently, he spent most of his time alone, with the
exception of caring for his daughters. Mark was college
educated and worked as an accountant for a local
manufacturing company. He also wrote children’s sto


ries and, prior to his most recent episode of depression,
was working on a number of stories as a member of a
local writer’s group.

Case Conceptualization and Overview
of Treatment

Mark’s depression was conceptualized as occurring in
the context of his divorce and the changes that ensued
following that process; in addition, vulnerabilities related
to his family history also formed a context for his
current experience. Mark experienced intense grief and
anxiety following his divorce to which he responded
with patterns of interpersonal avoidance, which in turn
were negatively reinforced by reductions in the grief
and anxiety. Mark had trouble fully engaging in his
significant relationships and instead avoided intimacy
in various ways in both overt ways (e.g., refusing social
contacts) and subtle (e.g., ruminating about mistakes
he made in the past, failing to express commitment
to the relationship and what he thought or felt about
various topics on a regular basis). Over the course of
treatment, the therapist and Mark hypothesized that
avoiding close interpersonal connections in his adult
life kept Mark detached enough that he would not
feel subsequent losses as acutely as those he felt as a
child. However, these patterns of avoidance also maintained
Mark’s depression by limiting his experience of
reward in many of his current contexts. Treatment focused
initially on increasing activation and addressing
many secondary problems and routine disruptions that
had become established. Treatment sought to reverse
the downward spirals of depression by scheduling and
structuring activities. Although Mark increased his activation
relatively quickly, his mood did not improve
significantly. This led to a primary focus on Mark’s rumination
and the ways it functioned to avoid intimacy
in his relationships, and experimentation with new behaviors
designed to move Mark closer to his goal of
having a close intimate relationship and feeling better.

Session 1

Session 1 focused on reviewing the results from the
assessment process, presenting the treatment model,
encouraging questions and feedback, and tailoring the
model to Mark’s specific experiences. The review of
the assessment process is typically brief; in this part
of the session, the aim of the therapist is to ensure that
he/she has a solid understanding of the client’s present



Behavioral Activation for Depression

ing problems, relevant history, and previous experience
with treatment, if any. The therapist also reviews the
basic diagnostic formulation to ensure that the assessment
outcome matches the client’s subjective experience
of his/her current problems. Discussion of the
treatment typically forms the bulk of the early sessions.
The following transcript provides an example of the
therapist presenting the treatment model and responding
to frequently asked questions about the etiology
of depression. Specifically, the therapist puts forth the
idea that depression is treated behaviorally, regardless
of etiology.

tHeraPist: Let me tell you a little about the basic
model that guides BA. The first idea is that there are
often things that happen in people’s lives that make it
hard for them to connect with the kinds of experiences
that would normally help them feel good. These
shifts can be clear and easy-to-detect changes like
major losses or disruptions in life. And they can also
be smaller things, like the kind of things that just
bug you a little but they keep happening, or you have
a bunch of them happen all around the same period
of time. The most important part is the idea that the
effect of these events is that it’s harder to connect
with the kinds of experiences that could give you a
sense of pleasure or accomplishment in your life, and
that could help you feel better. Does that sound like
it fits for you?

mark: I would say that is true for me. Definitely getting
divorced was a big one. I think that did set things
off, but even now, there isn’t much that helps me feel
better. Even things that I think should help me feel
better don’t do much. I just don’t have the energy at
this point.

tHeraPist: Yes, exactly. It’s very normal to feel a
whole range of things in the context of such events.
Often sadness or grief is central, but so are feelings
of fatigue and a sense of not having energy or interest
in anything. All of these are parts of the experience
of depression.

mark: That describes it.

tHeraPist: I’m going to draw that out here on this
form. In the first circle, we can list some of the events
we’ve already talked about, like the divorce, sharing
custody of your girls, and your move. Those reactions
of fatigue and low energy that follow are very
normal, and we’ll write them in here in the second
circle. What we find often happens is that people can

respond to these changes by pulling away from their
lives even more. This pulling away can happen sometimes
in obvious ways, like staying in bed or calling
in sick to work, or canceling social engagements, and
sometimes in more subtle ways, like being focused
more on your thinking than on the activities you are
engaged in. Does that make sense for you?

mark: Yes, absolutely. I do all of those things.

tHeraPist: It makes total sense that you would pull
away when you are feeling so down. The problem
with pulling away like this is that it tends to keep
people stuck in feeling depressed, and the pulling
away can become a problem in its own right. So that
is the arrow that links what you do and how you feel
in a kind of downward spiral. The more you pull
away or the more you are caught in your thoughts,

the worse you actually feel, the less energy you have.

mark: Yes. That sums it up.

tHeraPist: And, actually, for many people, there is
also a second downward spiral. So the more the first
downward spiral is set in motion, it actually can lead
to new problems, like your boss gets frustrated with
you or your friends stop calling, or it can keep you
from solving some of the problems that triggered the
depression in the beginning. So the ultimate goal of
our work together is to figure out new actions you
can take here (pointing to the third circle on the diagram)
that can help to reverse this downward spiral.
We will want to learn together what sorts of activities
may have a positive effect on your mood, and
then help you activate and engage in those specific
ways. And we will figure out how to solve the problems
that are creating stress or dissatisfaction in your
life. How do you see this fitting with your experience?
Do you have questions about what I’ve said?
Parts that fit or don’t fit?

mark: I understand what you are saying, and I think
some of it fits, but I guess I don’t understand why I
get so depressed. I mean, other people have stressful
things in their lives and they seem to function. Other
people get divorced or have crappy jobs, and they
move on. I mean, come on, I’ve been divorced for
4 years now. I think depression runs in my family.
My older brother has been depressed forever, and I
sometimes wonder if my dad was depressed when he
took off. Sometimes, I can’t really identify anything
that has happened in my life. I mean, I am never really
happy and then, it’s just like a switch goes in my


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

brain and I’m back in that dark hole again. How does
that fit with what you are saying?

tHeraPist: That is an excellent question. What I mean
as I talk about depression is that some people are
more vulnerable than others. And, there are many
ways that you may be vulnerable to depression—
through genetics, biology, or experiences in your
history. In fact, we can add some of these things you
are talking about now to the first circle as part of the
context for you. (Writes in family history.) What this
treatment emphasizes is that it’s possible to change
depression by making changes in what you do.

mark: That makes sense to me. One part of what you
said definitely fits for me—the part about pulling
away more. I definitely do that. Sometimes I don’t
talk to another person or get out of bed all weekend.
I know it makes it all worse. But I still do it. I don’t
seem to be able to do anything else when I feel that
way.

As the therapist replies to these very common questions,
she seeks to normalize avoidant responses to depression.
It is essential for the client to experience the
therapist as someone who understands and has sincere
empathy for his/her struggle. The therapist must communicate
that the client’s behaviors make sense, even
though they may not serve the client well in the long
term. In this way, the client is more likely to experience
the therapist as an ally in the change process as opposed
to someone who oversimplifies or “doesn’t get” the
challenges of making changes. Additionally, the therapist
also emphasizes to Mark the importance of guided
activity, highlighting her own role as an expert and the
importance of careful assessment. She emphasizes the
difference between assignments based on a superficial
understanding of depression and those that are guided
by functional analysis, a key aspect of the treatment, to
which the therapist will return many times.

tHeraPist: Those are great observations and are really
on target with what I have noticed for a lot of people
as well. What many people experience is that when
they start to activate and engage, they can actually
feel worse initially! The troubling fact about pulling
away or avoiding is that it does provide some shortterm
relief. But in the long term, that downward spiral
can keep you trapped in depression.

mark: That makes a ton of sense to me. I just don’t
want to do anything. Making a meal makes me tired.

I feel irritated by the sound of silverware scratching
on plates. It’s kind of crazy, but I just want to crawl
in a hole, to turn out a light in my head and make
it all go away. Then, I end up feeling worse when I
do stay in bed. I used to drink, too. I knew it would
make it worse, and I don’t do it much anymore, but it
helped in the moment, even though I knew it didn’t
really help. I guess I felt better temporarily and that
was enough.

tHeraPist: Yes, exactly. Avoidance is a perfectly natural
response. What unfortunately happens, though,
is that you are not in touch with all those things that
can give you pleasure and a sense of accomplishment,
and you are not engaged in solving the problems
that create stress in your life.

mark: That’s the first and second downward spirals
you were talking about, right? I get it but it just all
feels so overwhelming. Just the thought of it . . .

tHeraPist: Yes, I know. That is where I come in. It’s
important to emphasize that this treatment is not just
about me saying you should “do more” in general.
Sometimes I tell people that it’s not the Nike approach
to therapy, where I tell you each week to “just
do it.” You have probably received feedback like that
from other people in your life, and you may even say
something similar to yourself.

mark: Yeah, guilty as charged.

tHeraPist: My assumption is that if this were easy
to figure out, you would already have done it. It’s
a simple treatment but that doesn’t mean it’s easy.
The reason that you are here is that it’s not easy, and
that is where my expertise comes in. A major part
of this treatment is the idea of guided activation.
This means that you and I will be working together
to identify specific ways in which you can experiment
with activation. My expertise lies in figuring
out, first, where the places are that would be the most
helpful in increasing your activation and engagement,
and second, what small and manageable steps
you can take to get started. You can think of me as a
coach or consultant to you in the process of change.
We will work together, as a team, in small steps, all
along the way. How does that sound?

mark: The idea of it sounds good. I guess it’s worth
trying.

tHeraPist: I’d like to ask you to read a short pamphlet
about this treatment, between now and the next time
that we meet. It will provide you with more infor



Behavioral Activation for Depression

mation. When we meet next time, we can talk more
about how we will put the ideas into practice.

With this initial session, the therapist has begun to
teach Mark about the treatment model and is getting
him actively involved in and on board with the rationale.
The therapist has oriented Mark to their respective
roles in treatment and has given him this first
homework assignment (reading the treatment rationale
pamphlet). These critical tasks of the first session set
the stage for additional discussion in Session 2.

Session 2

In Session 2, the therapist carefully follows up on a
number of the key orienting tasks, which includes ensuring
that Mark is on board with the basic treatment
model and explaining the structure of the therapy. The
therapist attends to these topics in opening the session:

tHeraPist: It’s great to see you today, Mark.

mark: Thanks. It’s good to be back here.

tHeraPist: That’s great. You know, when I was thinking
about our session last time, I realized that there
were a couple of points I wanted to emphasize more.
One of the important ones is that this is a very collaborative
approach to therapy, and one that is also
fairly structured. So each time we meet, we will start
out by setting an agenda for the session, and we will
do this collaboratively. In fact, over time, you will set
the agenda more and more, though I may have more
to say about it in the beginning. The idea is that I’m
the expert on how to get over depression, and you are
the expert on yourself and your life, and what things
help or don’t help.

mark: That sounds reasonable to me.

tHeraPist: Great. So in terms of the agenda for today,
I have a couple of things. I’d like to talk more about
the treatment approach and your reaction, and more
about how we put some of the ideas into practice.
Do you have items you want to be sure we address
today?

mark: No, that sounds good. I did read the pamphlet,
and it really hit home. It was like they wrote it about
me, basically. I thought, “Thank goodness somebody
has figured this out.”

tHeraPist: That’s great. I think one of the core ideas
of the model is things happen that tend to trigger de


pressed mood, and then people tend to do things, or
not do things, that make the depression worse. For
you, my understanding is that the main trigger was
your divorce and that occurred in the context of your
history of important losses, too, in your family growing
up.

mark: Yeah, both are true. I’ve really pulled back on
a lot, like not exercising and not doing things with
other people or even with my girls. We used to cook
these great dinners together and now it’s like an effort
to get organized to order pizza. It’s kind of like
that everywhere—at work, too. I’m just managing
the minimum and, honestly, a lot of times I’m not
even doing that.

tHeraPist: I know. It can be very hard to keep doing
the sort of things that will keep you feeling well. And
that is where this therapy comes in. From our session
last time and from your reading, what is your
understanding of what we are going to be doing in
here, and how I am going to be helpful? If you were
to tell a friend of yours what we were going to do in
this therapy, what would you say?

mark: I guess I would say that we are going to pinpoint
the activities that give me some pleasure or
help me feel like I’m handling things well. Then, we
will figure out how to help me get into the position of
being more involved in some of those things.

tHeraPist: Yes, that is a big part of it. Sometimes in
people’s lives something that is completely beyond
their control triggers depression, and then what I call
secondary problem behaviors get triggered or made
worse. These are the behaviors that involve pulling
away or avoiding, as you were saying, like stopping
fun activities with your girls or withdrawing at work.
And in those cases we work on the secondary problem
behaviors, and that is the core of the therapy.
Other times, we also need to address larger problems
in your life that may be related to what makes you
vulnerable to depression. In those cases, therapy
can involve both directly addressing the secondary
problem behaviors and working directly on the problems,
after we have kind of cleared the path for doing
some problem solving by getting you activated and
engaged.

mark: That sounds like it’s probably the case for me
because I know I had a lot of problems relating to
Diane that were part of our divorce, and those are
not any better.


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

tHeraPist: Yes, we will talk more as we go along
about what set off the depression for you. In a global
sense, we know now that it was the divorce. But, as
we start following your mood and activities day to
day, we will see the ways that your mood has ups and
downs. We will work together and look at that carefully,
asking what set that off, how you responded to
your mood hitting that point, and whether it would
help if you tried something different.

The therapist has now stated twice that generally a
contextual event triggers depression, while earlier acknowledging
that several things can contribute to vulnerability.
This is a subtle but important point because
clients sometimes believe their depression came “out of
the blue” or that it is simply “biological” and not modifiable
by behavioral means. By emphasizing an environmental
antecedent (e.g., a loss of positive reinforcement),
the therapist sets up the idea that rather than
depression being completely beyond patients’ control,
their depressive response makes sense, and more importantly,
it is possible to make behavioral changes to
regain or establish new reinforcers in their lives. Moreover,
the therapist has continued to emphasize the importance
of carefully monitoring and assessing the relationships
among mood, activity, and context as a key
part of designing effective behavior change plans. The
therapist then builds on this foundation as she moves
into the other main focus of Session 2—the initiation
of activity monitoring. Here, the therapist explains to
Mark why activity monitoring is important, begins to
teach him how to complete an Activity Record (see
Figure 9.3), and links it directly to some of his recent
experiences.

tHeraPist: One of the main tools that we use in this
therapy is called an Activity Record. This is one example.
(Hands Mark the record.) As you can see, it
has blocks for each hour of the day. I’d like you to use
this to start recording your activity and your mood.
It’s basically a way to keep track of how you are
spending your time during the day and how you are
feeling. We want to learn what you are doing on an
hour-by-hour and day-to-day basis. What things in
your life help you feel better, and what things make
you feel worse? You and I will review these very
carefully together, focusing on how you are spending
your time and how you feel. Sometimes the Activity
Record tells us right away where changes need to be

made, and other times we have to look at it over a
couple of weeks.

mark: OK.

tHeraPist: Is there anything you have been doing
since you started to feel more depressed that is different
from what you normally do?

mark: Yes, exercising less, watching more TV, and
just the amount of time I spend thinking about all
this. It’s just crazy.

tHeraPist: It’s not crazy at all, but I agree that it’s
not helping you very much. And it’s very difficult,
which is why you are here. We can start to figure this
out together. It’s great that you are already aware of
those patterns, and those are good examples of looking
concretely at what you are doing. This therapy is
about increasing your awareness of how your mood
is affected subtly from activity to activity and increasing
those that tend to be more rewarding. It’s
like we are on a detective mission for the “up” and
“down” activities in your life, those that are linked
with feeling improved mood and those are that not.

mark: Makes sense. So, should I write all this down?
Do you really want me to do this every hour?

tHeraPist: Here’s the guideline that I use: I want
people to record their activity frequently enough that
they are not relying heavily on memory. The problem
with memory when you are depressed is that your
awareness can be dulled or biased by the depression.
So you don’t have to do it every hour. We have to
be realistic about the rest of your life! But you may
want to experiment with doing it every 3–4 hours.
Sometimes, people like to do it at breakfast, lunch,
dinner, and before bed.

mark: That might work for me.

tHeraPist: Let’s go over what to write down. You put
your activity down for each hour block and then for
each hour block you also assign a mood rating from
0 to 10. Let’s look at today as an example. What were
you doing in the hours before you came here?

mark: I was at work.

tHeraPist: Okay, great. What were you doing at work?

mark: I was teaching a new employee how to use our
computer system. It was really frustrating because
she wasn’t picking it up and I didn’t have much patience.


tHeraPist: That’s great information to record. Why


Instructions: Record your activity for each hour of the day, and record a mood rating associated with each activity. Use
the scale below with the anchors that you and your therapist develop to guide your mood rating. Aim to make entries
on your Activity Record at least every 3–4 hours each day.
Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday Saturday Sunday
5–6
6–7 Awake
thinking in
bed (9) 7–8
8–9 At work (7)
9–10 Getting
ready for
work (8)
10–11 At work (7)
11–12
12–1
1–2
2–3
3–4 Working/
teaching
employee
(5)
Home (7)
4–5
5–6
6–7 Therapy (5) MakingDinner (6)
7–8 TV (9) TV (9)
8–9
9–10
10–11
11–12
12–1
1–2
2–3
3–4
4–5

Mood Ratings: 0: Description, with examples of associated activities: writing; playing with my kids

5: Description, with examples of associated activities: doing a work task that is only
moderately interesting but I’m focused and concentrating
10: Description, with examples of associated activities: thinking about how I’ve screwed
everything up
figUre 9.3. Sample completed Activity Record (hourly) (assigned on Monday and reviewed on Thursday).

375


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

don’t you write down “working–teaching new employee.”
Now, I also want you to record your mood
on a 0- to 10-point scale, so let’s see if we can get
some anchors here. What would be 0 mood for you?
We can track this in whatever way will be most useful
for you, so we could consider that 0 might be feeling
really good, with no depression or feeling down
at all. If so, we would then consider 10 to be when
you feel your absolute worst, the worst you could
possibly feel. It might be helpful to think of some
activities that are a 5 or in between, when you’re not
feeling your best but you’re not feeling particularly
bad either. Which activities might be associated with
each?

The therapist and Mark then worked together to identify
activities that were associated with the low, middle,
and high ends of the scale. Some clients prefer to use the
low end of the scale to indicate feeling negative mood,
whereas others (like Mark) prefer to anchor the low end
as indicating feeling positive mood (“really good” for
Mark). Allowing such flexibility can be helpful as long
as therapist and client are clear about the anchors that
will be used when the client completes the monitoring
at home. It should also be noted that therapists may ask
clients to rate other dimensions, such as the degree to
which activities were associated with mastery and pleasure
(Beck et al., 1979) or a sense of being nourished
or depleted (Segal et al., 2002). These may be rated
instead of or in addition to mood. Often we begin by
asking clients to record mood ratings given that this
is an easier starting place for many clients because it
requires less discrimination of subjective experience;
moreover, the mood rating provides essential information
about potential antidepressant activities. For some
clients, it is helpful to build on this by teaching them
how to distinguish between mastery and pleasure, and
the ways in which both can be helpful in regulating
mood. In the case of rating mood or mastery–pleasure,
it is important to review carefully the method and scale
we want clients to use. For other clients, the dimensions
of nourishing and depleting are helpful to identify activities
that are antidepressant.

tHeraPist: Given this scale, what was your mood rating
for the 2 hours of “working” today?

mark: Probably a 5.

tHeraPist: That’s exactly it. Now, sometimes what
happens is that people don’t fill it out because they

think, “I wasn’t doing anything.” It’s important to
realize that even if you are not doing an activity, we
want to know that, too.

mark: What do you mean?

tHeraPist: Well, when people think “activities,”
they often think of things like “going to the store,”
“watching a movie,” “picking up my child from
school.” But, we are conceptualizing activity more
broadly. It might be driving by Diana’s house or having
a significant phone conversation with someone,
or even lying in bed, spending time thinking about
Diana.

mark: That would be true on a lot of days.

tHeraPist: Yes, and you can write that down. Those
are some of the most important things. In some
ways, the more detail, the better. We want to start
noticing subtle changes. We want to build on those
times that you feel just a little better, and we want to
figure out what the problem is when you feel worse.

mark: I think I got it.

tHeraPist: Great! People usually come away from this
thinking that it sounds really simplistic. And it does.
It sounds simple, but in practice it is not that simple.
It can be difficult to do in the beginning, to really
look at all your activities and figure out how your
mood is related to them. It takes skill and hard work
on both our parts. Is there anything that we can think
of now that might get in the way of your doing this
monitoring this week?

The therapist ended the session by discussing with
Mark potential barriers to doing the assignment, encouraging
him to make contact by phone if any questions
arose, and offering encouragement about the likelihood
that she could be helpful to him.

Session 3

As noted earlier, one of the necessary competencies
of a BA therapist is the ability to review an Activity
Record and glean information that will help to customize
activation and engagement strategies. Session 3
focused heavily on reviewing Mark’s Activity Record
(see Figure 9.3) and using the information collected
as a springboard for more detailed assessment of key
problem behaviors. Again, the therapist’s focus in these
early sessions is on increasing activation in areas that
will improve Mark’s mood; this work will set the foun



Behavioral Activation for Depression

dation for later work on avoidance modification and
problem solving.

tHeraPist: Shall we go over your Activity Record?
mark: OK. (Hands the therapist the record.)
tHeraPist: Why don’t you walk me through it? What

did you learn? (Hands the record back to Mark.)
mark: I’m not sure if this is what you had in mind.
I started the next day after our last session. I went
to work that day, but I was feeling so lousy that I
left early and came home. I was just kind of fiddling
around the house until dinner. I felt really down all
day up to that point; I rated my mood as a 7. I did
make dinner, which was a little better for me. I used
to love to cook for Diana and myself, and we would
make these big feasts sometimes with the girls. Since
the divorce, though, sometimes I just grab a bag of
chips or something like that, or on a good night I
might order a pizza. When I was cooking, I felt a
little better then, about a 5.
tHeraPist: This is terrific. You did a really great job
with this. You completed the record exactly as we
talked about—writing down your activities and also
your mood rating—and all of this information is extremely
useful. I want to ask you some more questions
about specific parts of the day in a minute, but
right now let me just get an overall sense of things.

Notice how the therapist is careful to reinforce the
client’s efforts early in the review process. Clients are
often uncertain about how to complete the record, and
it is not uncommon for them to return with partially or
improperly completed records. In such cases, therapists
must balance the need to provide corrective feedback
and to reinforce the client’s efforts. Frequent client errors
include writing down activities very globally (e.g.,
“at work” for 6 hours), failing to record mood ratings,
or failing to record anything because they did “nothing.”
In such cases, the therapist should address these
problems in a straightforward and matter-of-fact manner.


tHeraPist: What happened after you made dinner?
mark: Well, after dinner, I started watching TV, and
everything kind of tanked from there. I sat and
watched TV until 2:00 in the morning. I guess it
helped in that it kept my mind off of worries about
work and just feeling lousy about Diana, but I was

really depressed the whole time. In fact, I rated my
mood as a 9.

tHeraPist: That is really important information. I see
that you were also up the next night watching TV
until 1:00 A.M. Is this true of a lot of nights for you,
or are these two more like exceptions?

mark: I wish they were exceptions, but no, it’s been
more the rule. And then what happens is that I just
can’t get up in the morning. Well, I guess I do wake
up, but I just lie there in bed. I’ve been getting to
work pretty late, and some days I just call in sick.

tHeraPist: So we’ll use this log to pick up themes of
specific activities that can help you feel good and
those that may be contributing to your depression,
like we talked about last time, the “up” and “down”
activities. It seems like there are a few that might be
important. I’m thinking that the watching TV and
going to bed late is one big one, and the other two are
cooking and how you are doing at work.

mark: I think the TV is a really big one.

Notice here that the therapist identified a few broad
areas that appear to be related to the maintenance of
the client’s depression. The BA therapist is also alert
to disruptions in the client’s normal routines; in Mark’s
case, both eating and sleeping routines appear to have
been significantly altered. The therapist then works
collaboratively with Mark to target a specific area for
further assessment and problem solving (i.e., nighttime
TV watching). At this point, the therapist begins the
more explicit process of functional analysis.

tHeraPist: OK, why don’t we start there? Let’s get
clear first about what the problem is because it
doesn’t sound like it’s watching TV in general.

mark: That’s true. Normally, I would watch some TV,
like I might watch for an hour. But, actually, come to
think of it, I was more involved in my writing then,
too. So, normally, I might watch TV until about 9:00

P.M. and then turn off the TV and write for another
hour. Or, if I had the girls, we might watch a show
together and then turn off the TV and read or play a
game, or just hang out together, or maybe I’d be on a
phone call or something.
tHeraPist: So, this is different for you. The problem,
then, is that you don’t turn off the TV at 9:00 P.M.
and instead watch it for an additional 4–5 hours.

mark: Yes, that’s the problem.


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

tHeraPist: Are you doing this every night of the week
or just on work nights?

mark: I hate to admit it, but it’s pretty much all nights,
not always so late, but pretty much always later than
is good for me.

To this point, the therapist has successfully defined
the problem in specific and behavioral terms. With a
clear and mutual understanding of the problem, therapist
and client can begin to consider the contingencies
that may be maintaining the problem and what may be
amenable to change.

tHeraPist: We should probably look at what gets in
the way of turning the TV off, since it does not seem
to have a great effect on your mood. If you were to
turn off the TV at 9:00 P.M. now, what do you think
would happen?

mark: I thought about turning it off last night, but I
just didn’t want to think about all of this stuff.

tHeraPist: By “all this stuff,” do you mean the divorce
and the pressures at work?
mark: Yes, both of them.

tHeraPist: So, that is what you are actively avoiding.
And the TV helps you to distract?

mark: Yes, I just don’t have the mental awareness now
to start writing. I can’t focus on it, and I’m just not
interested.

tHeraPist: I think you have the right idea in terms of
distraction, but the problem is that you are distracting
yourself with something that doesn’t give you
much pleasure and not much accomplishment.

mark: And meanwhile the house is a mess. I haven’t
paid my bills in months, and . . .

tHeraPist: Yes, that makes sense. That’s the second
downward spiral we talked about. What do you think
about working together on the problem of watching
TV? Then, we can tackle some of those other things
you are raising. The TV problem might be simple to
solve, but my guess is that there is more to understand
about it.

Notice how easily the client can become overwhelmed
and hopeless in response to the myriad problems
in his life. The therapist is alert to this possibility
during sessions and is careful to refer back to the BA
model as a way to understand the client’s experience

and to refocus the client on the problem at hand. In
addition, the therapist also takes a keen interest in the
“minutiae” of the client’s day-to-day behavior, particularly
if such behavior is related to mood. This detailed
level of interest is critical. Its intent is twofold: First,
such discussions guide the choice of activation targets
and specific assignments; second, it is the intent that
such discussions will teach Mark to take a similar interest
and begin to notice patterns that are more and less
helpful in working his way out of depression.

tHeraPist: Let’s understand better what happens with
the TV. Does it come into your mind, the thought
that you might be better off if you turned off the TV?

mark: Typically, I think, “I should go to bed.” But I
know that if I go to bed, I’ll just lie there awake anyway,
thinking about what Diana is doing, thinking
about how much I am going to hate being at work the
next day. So, then I think I might as well watch TV.

tHeraPist: Is that what happens in bed? You lie there
and ruminate about Diana or things you have done or
haven’t done at work?

mark: Pretty much exactly.

In this transcript, the therapist has effectively identified
a number of key relationships. Nighttime TV
watching is associated with (1) deteriorated mood; (2)
poor performance at work; and (3) a process of negative
reinforcement in which negative affect (specifically,
grief and anxiety) potentially is reduced when
the client is watching TV. The therapist has done so
in a collaborative and nonjudgmental manner, and the
client is on board. At this point, the therapist explicitly
examines her hypothesis with Mark about the relationship
between TV and mood. On the basis of this understanding,
they can then consider possible activation
strategies.

tHeraPist: I’m wondering if part of what is happening
is that watching TV is helpful in the short run
because it takes your mind away from these topics
that are connected to a lot of potential sadness and
also anxiety about the future.

mark: Yeah, that’s true.

tHeraPist: But the tough part is that while it works
in the short run, it’s that same downward spiral or
vicious cycle in the long run because watching TV
gives you almost no pleasure and it keeps you from


Behavioral Activation for Depression

doing activities that you previously got a lot out of,
and it sets you up for having problems at work.
mark: Yes, exactly. It’s crazy, I know, but it’s such an
easy way out when I’m just beaten by the day.

tHeraPist: Absolutely! So we have to take that into
account when we think about making any changes
here. I’m thinking that you could try going to bed in
spite of that, and we could work on the ruminating.
Or, if you are going to be up, you could do things that
are better than the TV. Which do you lean toward?

The therapist attends to the function (distraction) of
the problem behavior (TV watching), while engaging
in problem solving in a very collaborative manner.

mark: Probably finding other things, better than the
TV. I used to go to a book group one night a week.
It was made up of other writers and I liked a few of
the people a lot, so when I was doing that, I was also
doing reading in the evenings, too.

tHeraPist: OK, does reading seem more of a way you
could start getting back into some of your writing,
versus jumping in with writing itself?

mark: Yes, there is no way I could write now. I would
just be staring at a blank page, feeling like crap.

tHeraPist: OK, that makes sense. So what about starting
with this? One option is that you could have a
limit for yourself of 9:00 P.M. for TV and we could
work on identifying a book that you could read instead.


mark: It’s a good idea. It’s more a question of my
doing it.

It is very important that the therapist not gloss over
comments such as Mark’s final statement. When clients
express doubt about how or whether they will implement
an activation strategy, it is essential to attend to
this in detail. Additionally, it is helpful for the therapist
to be attentive to statements such as “I’ll just have to
make myself do it,” which generally indicate that therapist
and client have not sufficiently identified the contingencies
that control the behavior. In our experience,
use of sheer willpower is unlikely to meet with great
success, and suggestions of such signal that further assessment
is required, as the therapist illustrates.

tHeraPist: So we need to be sure we are getting at
the real problem, instead of just saying, “Oh, you are

going to do this,” and leaving it at that. What kind of
reader are you? Are you someone who can get really
involved in a book?

mark: I do get really involved. In fact, I’ll think about
the book a lot during the day, if I’m already into it.

tHeraPist: But getting yourself to do it is hard.

mark: Yes, it’s getting started on things.

tHeraPist: That is great to know. So, we have to somehow
get you involved in the book so that when 9:00

P.M. rolls around, you are already involved, so it will
be easier to turn off the TV.
mark: That would make it easier.

tHeraPist: What if you were to buy a book on the way
back from our session and begin reading it in the
café of the bookstore.

mark: Oh, yeah, that is right on the way back. I can
do that.

tHeraPist: Mark, I think the trick with all of this is to
figure out what is going to help you move toward the
things that will be beneficial for your mood. And this
is what is really hard—getting yourself to go back
to the things that you used to enjoy, when you have
no interest in them right now. When you feel good,
you take it for granted that it’s easy to do things like
reading, spending time with friends or your girls,
and even writing. When you don’t feel good, you really
notice it. The problem is that you’re in this vicious
cycle again. The longer you do not do things,
the more badly you feel and the less you want to do.
The trick for us is to figure out ways to help you start
to do some of the things that will give you pleasure
again.

The therapist acknowledges to the client that the new
behavior will be hard to initiate because of mood, and
that it is necessary to do so anyway. Many times, clients
employ an “inside-out” or mood-dependent approach
to their depression; that is, they passively wait for their
mood to improve before making behavioral changes.
BA therapists teach clients that when they feel down,
they cannot afford to wait for a better mood to strike
them. The goal is to get active when they feel down
(as hard as that is). Increasing activation will eventually
improve mood, even if not immediately, and it
will interrupt the pattern of secondary problems created
by withdrawal and avoidance. Addressing mooddependent
behavior (or talking about an outside-in vs.


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

inside-out approach) is a sensitive point in therapy, in
which a great deal of empathy for the experience of
feeling depressed is required. The therapist must skillfully
balance encouragement of action with validation
of the difficulty of activating when depressed. In addition,
strongly encouraging even the smallest signs
of increased activation (frequently with the use of significant
praise) is essential in supporting the process
of change.

mark: Yeah, I know. A lot of the time I might know
what I need to do, but I have no idea how to get
myself to do it. I’ve just dropped a lot of stuff, like
anything social in the evenings. I don’t try to make
plans. And, like I said, for almost a year I was going
to that writer’s book group every Thursday. But then
I said to myself, I’m not writing. This whole divorce
is wiping me out. What is the point of going? I have
nothing to add.” But it’s true that when I went, I
used to get a lot out of it. I’m just not interested now,
though.

tHeraPist: Yes, exactly. That’s where you and I will
work together. I want to come back to the social connections
and the routines around writing, but let’s
stick with the reading and nighttime TV for a bit longer
first, if that’s OK?

mark: Yeah, that makes sense.

tHeraPist: Let’s think through this book plan again.
Is there anything that might come up between here
and the bookstore that would derail that plan?

At this point, the therapist and Mark spend the remainder
of the session discussing particular books he
could purchase that would maximize his engagement,
and they discuss potential barriers that might arise to
derail him from the intended plan. They also continued
to review the Activity Record to identify other key
problems, including ruminating at work, withdrawing
from social networks, and experiencing disruptions
in routines that previously brought him pleasure (e.g.,
cooking, exercise). In each case, the therapist uses a
similar method that she used with the problem of TV
watching: defining the problem, identifying the antecedent
and consequences, and checking out hypotheses
about how the activity is related to mood with the client.
The therapist also frequently returns to the overall
BA model to help explain links between activities and
mood. In each case, they work to learn together what
possible targets will be most promising for activation.

Also, the therapist continues to emphasize that simply
deciding to “make myself do it” is not likely to
be an effective activation strategy for Mark, and that
it is essential to tie the activation plan to a clear understanding
of the function of the problem behaviors.
The therapist employs a combination of gentle questioning,
consistent validation of the roles of withdrawal
and avoidance through reliance on the BA model, and
repeated discussion of potential barriers to activation
plans. Importantly, the therapist also highlights for
Mark that compliance with the homework assignments
may not bring immediate relief.

“What will be really good this week is to see what
effect these things have on your mood. Even if they
have just a little bit of a positive effect, then we know
that we are on the right track. And, Mark, they might
not have an immediate positive effect on your mood.
It might be that the act of getting yourself to do it is
the success itself, and that you need to keep doing it
for a while before you start to feel better. But, it’s my
guess that some of this stuff will help your mood a
little bit, even in the short run.”

The session concluded with the therapist and Mark
reviewing the homework assignments, which included
purchasing a new book, starting to read it in the café,
and turning off the TV every night at 9:00 P.M. and
reading. In addition, they agreed that Mark would return
a telephone call of an old friend, Mary, who lived
in his neighborhood and had been trying to contact him
recently.

Session 4

Mark arrived at to Session 4 with little improvement
in the severity of his depression. He reported that he
had increased his social contact but was not feeling any
better. Mark also had delayed the task of purchasing the
new book and continued to watch TV late at night. The
therapist addressed both of these problems in a direct,
matter-of-fact way with curiosity and interest.

mark: It was a really bad weekend. I did call Mary and
ended up going to this kind of cocktail party at the
community pool that she had organized. I was kind
of shocked that I went, but I thought being outside
would do me good. I was thinking about what we
were talking about, and I thought about how much
I used to love swimming. I was actually a lifeguard


Behavioral Activation for Depression

during summers in college. But I think I felt worse
after I went. I suppose there were moments that were
fun, but I was so frustrated by it all. I just spent the
rest of the weekend holed up in my apartment.

tHeraPist: Would that be good to put on the agenda?
Doing things that you used to enjoy and not enjoying
them?

mark: Sure.

tHeraPist: And I want to make sure we check in about
how it went with the book versus the TV, too. Which
do you want to talk about first—calling Mary and
the party or the TV?

mark: I guess we can do the TV first. I just bought the
book today. On Friday, I was at that party, so I didn’t

get home and in bed until midnight.

tHeraPist: Did you watch TV then?

mark: No, I do think I was more tired from being out


side all night, so I just fell asleep when I got back.

tHeraPist: And what about Saturday and last night?

mark: It was kind of par for the course. I stayed up late

both nights.

Given the importance of attending consistently and
regularly to the completion of homework, here the therapist
assesses what interfered with Mark’s full completion
of the previous assignment.

tHeraPist: I’m glad you bought the book. That’s terrific!
I’m curious, too, though, about what got in the
way of getting it sooner. Am I recalling correctly
that you were going to buy it on the way back from
the session last week?

mark: Yeah, I was, but when I left, someone called me
from work about needing to meet, so I didn’t have as
much time as I thought. But I thought I could do it
after work, and then in the evening, I thought, “I’ll
get it on the weekend because I’ll have more time.”
I don’t know.

tHeraPist: If you go back to your leaving the session
last time, when you got the phone call from work,
was there anything else that derailed the plan?

mark: No, that was really it. I was still pretty optimistic
about getting the book. It was just that I didn’t
have as much time as I thought I would, and I had to
get to work.

tHeraPist: OK, that is good to know. So your plan was

to get the book on the weekend, and you just bought
it today. On the weekend, did you think about getting
it, or did it just come up again today?

mark: I did, but I felt so bad after the party I just
couldn’t get myself to do it.

tHeraPist: It sounds like you were really down. Do
you remember that diagram we used in our first session
to understand the big picture of depression? I
think it fits here, too.

mark: How so?

tHeraPist: So, if we think about the party as what
happened, then you felt really down and discouraged,
right? (Pulls out the model and writes in this
situation.)

mark: Definitely.

tHeraPist: And you pulled away by staying at home
over the weekend and not buying the book. My guess
is that this fueled feeling more discouraged. Is that
right?

mark: Totally. I thought, good heavens, I can’t even do
a simple thing like buy a damn book.

tHeraPist: That’s it, so there is that downward spiral
getting set into motion.

mark: It’s it exactly. I wanted to do less and less and I
felt worse and worse.

tHeraPist: It’s great that you can see how these are all
connected. I’m curious how it was that you got yourself
to get the book today. Are you feeling better, or
is it something else?

mark: I’m not feeling quite as bad, and given that I
was already out, it was easier to go get the book.
Plus I knew that we were going to meet and you were
probably going to ask me about it.

tHeraPist: That is so great to know! So one thing we
know is that I have got to keep following up about
these things because it helps you do them.

mark: (laughing a little) True, not that I enjoyed
imagining being called to task on it, but it did help,
I guess.

tHeraPist: And getting yourself out of the house to
buy a book this weekend was a lot harder than getting
yourself out this morning, since you were already
leaving to go to work. Being out already made
it easier to accomplish your task.

mark: Right. That sort of thing seems to happen a lot
lately.


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

tHeraPist: So one solution would be to not wait for
the weekend when you’ve got a specific task to do
because that seems to be a harder time for you to
accomplish things. The other thing would be for us
to set up a system of phone check-ins when you are
feeling particularly down, since it seems to help to
know that we will be following up on these tasks
when we meet. The other issue, though, is to figure
out what brought you down so much this weekend,
and what to do about that.

mark: I think that is the biggest thing.

tHeraPist: Shall we talk a bit about the party and the
weekend in order to figure out what is going to help
most? How does that sound? And we’ll make sure to
come back to the TV and reading plan.

mark: OK. I would like not to feel as lousy as I was
feeling.

tHeraPist: Why don’t we take a look at your Activity
Record? (Reviews the record.) It looks like your
mood ratings were moderate on Thursday and Friday
after we met. Then, Friday, at the party and for the
rest of the weekend, they were high—7’s, 8’s, and
9’s, too.

mark: I’m not sure this is for me, honestly. I think I
gave it a fair shot, calling Mary, going to the party.
I didn’t want to do either, but I did. And I felt worse
afterwards.

When clients report that they are increasing activation
and their mood is not improving, it is important to
assess a number of possible explanations. First, therapists
may consider whether the activation assignments
were too ambitious and did not incorporate successful
grading. In such cases, it is important for therapists to
acknowledge responsibility for this and recommend an
assignment based on smaller components of the task.
Second, therapists want to consider whether the functional
analysis was accurate. Is it possible that they are
activating the client in a domain that is unlikely to yield
improvements in mood? Third, therapists want to consider
whether ruminative thinking is interfering with
activation. In such cases, clients “physically” engage in
the activation assignments, whereas “mentally” they remain
disengaged from their context and are less likely
to have an opportunity to experience reward. Fourth,
it is possible that although activation may not immediately
improve mood, it may still be “on the right track,”
because clients are taking active steps toward solving
problems and addressing important life goals.

In Mark’s case, the therapist decided initially to
pursue the possibility that rumination was interfering
with activation, based on Mark’s comments in earlier
sessions about frequently ruminating about Diana and
their divorce.

tHeraPist: I guess one thing we could explore together
is what was on your mind during the party.
When you were standing by the pool talking to other
people, or even swimming in the water, what was on
your mind?

mark: You know, when I was diving into the water,
I do remember that those were the pleasurable moments
of the party. The sound of the water splashing,
the coolness, the silence under the water, that was
all great. That is what I used to love about swimming
too. But the other part—I think I was mentally
checking out. I was with a lot of people I really like.
Mary is great, and her whole family was back visiting
from the East Coast. I haven’t seen them in years
and I really enjoy all of them. They are great people.
But, it didn’t really matter. I just wasn’t there.

tHeraPist: Were you thinking about Diana or yourself
in relation to her?

mark: Yeah, that was mainly it.

tHeraPist: Were the other folks there conversing with
you?

mark: Yes, and I was talking with them. I mean, I
could hear the words coming out of my mouth, but I
was just not there.

tHeraPist: So you have one rating on this record for
the party, a 7. But, if we were to break these different
pieces apart—the swimming, when you were fully
engaged with the activity, and the talking, when your
mind was elsewhere—what would you rate each?

mark: The swimming . . . it was good. I guess that
would be a 3, if 0 is feeling good; I mean it didn’t
take it all away. But the talking . . . that was terrible,
a 9.

The therapist has successfully identified the problem
that was interfering with the potential benefits of activation.
She continues to assess the nature and scope of
the problem.

tHeraPist: I’m trying to figure out if when you are
actively engaged in an activity that kind of requires
some attention to it, are those the times that are more
enjoyable?


Behavioral Activation for Depression

mark: Yeah, that’s true.

tHeraPist: Is this a problem that also interferes with
your mood and accomplishment of tasks at work?

mark: Yes, exactly. I go into my office and it’s like
where does the time go? Hours go by and I haven’t
done a damn thing. I’m just wandering over and over
things that happened with Diana, what I said, what I
could have said. It’s awful.

tHeraPist: OK, so we know this is an important problem
to address. It’s interfering with your enjoyment
of times that have the potential to improve your
mood, and it’s interfering with managing your job
well. Can we spend a little more time on what hap


pened at the party?

mark: OK.

tHeraPist: How would you normally be when talking
with Mary’s family, if you were not thinking
about all these things? What would I see differently
in those times than what I might have observed on
Friday?

mark: I’d be talking to everyone. I wouldn’t be feeling
so bad.

tHeraPist: Yes, that is exactly true. What I’m really
curious about is, when you are not feeling so bad,
what would you be doing differently? Would you be
asking them more questions? Making more eye contact?
Responding differently?

mark: Yeah, all of those things. I’d be more active in
the conversation.

tHeraPist: So you would be more engaged.

mark: Yes, more engaged. Less of that heavy feeling;
you know, that “this really sucks” feeling.

In the preceding portion of the session, the therapist
has begun to define behaviorally what Mark does
in interpersonal interactions when he is not depressed.
Carefully specifying these behaviors is an important
step in developing some possible plans for targeted
change in how Mark approaches similar situations.

tHeraPist: Do you think that if you could practice
talking, when you weren’t feeling down, more like
you normally would with these people that you
might feel better?

mark: I don’t know.

tHeraPist: I think the key is to notice what you do in
response to the ruminating and to see whether that is

helping or not helping your mood, and then for us to
begin to explore what you may need to do differently.
It seems that at the party, what you were doing when
your mood was better, was to be more engaged.

mark: It’s true. But, when I’m like this, I don’t have
much to say.

tHeraPist: Yes, when you are depressed, you are more
quiet and withdrawn.

mark: Yes, because it’s painful. I see Mary’s parents
and I think, “They’ve been married for 30 years. I
could have had that with Diana.” Then, I start thinking
that she is with someone else. It just goes downhill
from there.

tHeraPist: You are absolutely right. There is a lot of
pain there. And what’s happened is that in response
to that pain, you have narrowed activity in your life.
So you not only feel the pain of being reminded of
that loss, but also there is not a lot else going on in
your life. And even when you are doing things, you
are not as engaged because you are feeling so much
pain. I think we need to get you back to doing the
things you did before you had the breakup, and before
the two of you got together. We need to get you
back to your baseline, and once we do that, we can
figure out how to get you feeling even better than
that.

mark: It sounds good.

tHeraPist: I know you are thinking this is like pie in
the sky, but we can figure out how to do this. The key
is to figure out some concrete and manageable steps
to help you engage more when you are doing some of
these activities, like going to the party. You are right.
It’s worlds harder to do when you are not feeling
well, but these behaviors are partly why you enjoyed
those occasions more in the past. We know that you
enjoyed Mary and her family in the past, and we
know that you got a lot of pleasure from swimming
when your mind was fully present with the activity.
So the trick is not only to call your friends, like you
did so wonderfully with Mary, but also to go to the
gathering, and to get yourself really to interact instead
of just being there at the party. For times when
you find yourself withdrawing into your thoughts,
we need to develop specific strategies to help you do
less of that. Can you think of anything that would
help you do that?

mark: I don’t know. I just don’t seem to have much to
say these days.


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

tHeraPist: I know it’s hard. There are a variety of
things you could try, such as asking more questions,
and then closely attending to the response. Or you
could focus on something more specific, such as
voice or facial expression, to keep your mind from
wandering. Sometimes it works just to notice that
you’ve drifted and to take a deep breath to refocus
on your goal in that moment.

mark: I suppose I could try it. My mind just seems to
keep wandering.

tHeraPist: I know. So your job here would be to practice
being more vigilant as to when that happens
because it will happen. The more you notice you’re
drifting, the more you can practice refocusing yourself
back on your friend. Does your mind wander in
here?

mark: I guess a little.

tHeraPist: Why don’t we try it in here? Let’s pick
something to focus on, and then you can practice
here.

mark: OK. What do I do?

tHeraPist: I’m going to time us for the next 5 minutes
and, as we talk, I want you to practice fully engaging
in our discussion. Your mind is going to wander,
particularly if we are talking about something that
reminds you of Diana, I would guess. So let’s pick
something you can focus on to bring your attention
back to our conversation. How about the sound of my
voice, like changes in tone, how I articulate words,
the pace of my speech?

mark: I can try.

tHeraPist: Great. So, let’s talk about some options for
social connections that you could make this weekend.

The therapist and Mark continued this discussion for
the next few minutes, at which time, the therapist interrupted
their conversation to ask Mark for feedback
about his experience.

tHeraPist: What did you notice?

mark: I don’t know, maybe you are talking kind of
softly.

tHeraPist: How engaged were you with our discussion?
Why don’t you give me a rating, with 0 being
not engaged at all and 10 being totally engaged?

mark: I guess maybe 7. It wasn’t that hard here because
I was really focused. I guess I did start to think

about Diana a little when we were talking about my
calling Mary. I did remind myself to pay attention
to your voice, and I guess you just sounded so interested.
It made it harder for me to wander off in my
thoughts when you seemed to be paying so much attention
to what we were talking about.

tHeraPist: That was my impression, too, that your
engagement was generally high, and that you did appear
to refocus your attention a couple times. That
is terrific!

mark: Yeah, but it was a little strange. I mean, usually
people aren’t that focused when they are just talking
about usual stuff.

tHeraPist: That is very true. I might have been paying
closer attention to what you were doing and saying
than other folks are in typical social interactions.
And this may feel pretty artificial now in general. My
guess, though, is that once you get more engaged in
social interactions, it won’t be necessary to concentrate
so hard. It will just come automatically again.

mark: That makes sense.

In this way, the therapist generates a strategy to block
avoidance (rumination) by substituting a new behavior
in the form of attending to direct and immediate experience.
Although, in this case, Mark experimented with
directing his attention to interpersonal stimuli, clients
may also be directed to experiment with attention to
other aspects of sensory stimuli, such as sights, smells,
and so forth. The in-session behavioral rehearsal is
very important in that it allows the client to practice
and receive direct feedback from the therapist, both of
which increase the likelihood of success outside of the
session. The therapist then returns to the specific task
of reviewing and developing behavioral assignments
for the next session.

tHeraPist: Let’s go back to your not getting out all
weekend. Do you think going out to buy the book
was too hard? Is there something easier you could’ve
done to help you get a little more engaged this weekend?


mark: I’m not sure. How hard is it to go out and buy
a book?

tHeraPist: Very hard, when you’re really down. Let’s
think about smaller steps. If you can do a smaller
step and get a little reinforcement for it, then it becomes
easier to move toward your goal.

%%%CUT%%%
Behavioral Activation for Depression

The therapist and client continue along these lines
with graded task assignment. Given that Mark has previously
enjoyed socializing, he and the therapist came
up with a plan that on the weekend, he would start by
returning some phone calls from friends and inviting
Mary for lunch. During lunch, he would focus specifically
on attending to their conversation. The therapist
also raised the possibility of swimming as an exercise
activity. Mark reported that he thought his plate was
full with the assignments they had already developed,
and they decided to table further discussion of swimming.
The therapist then uses the final moments of the
session to review the homework, to encourage progress,
to validate the difficulty of change, and to reinforce the
basic treatment model.

Session 5

At the outset of the session, Mark reports improvement
in his mood and the therapist includes this as an item
on the agenda. Their discussion allows the therapist to
emphasize an important point about maintaining new
behaviors in consistent and regular routines. In this session,
the therapist continues to emphasize the pattern of
social connections and to assess factors that increase
Mark’s vulnerability to exacerbated mood when alone.

tHeraPist: Let’s understand in more detail how it is
that you are feeling better?
mark: I think the reading plan is helping. I finished
the book.

tHeraPist: Great! So you probably need another book.

mark: (laughing) I guess that’s true. You don’t think
just the one cured the problem?

tHeraPist: (laughing) Oh, how I wish that were the
case! Seriously, though, Mark, I think that is such an
important question. There is a real temptation when
you start feeling a little better to back off from some
of the very things that are helping. It makes sense
because making these changes requires so much
effort, I know. But maintaining the routines are so
important.

mark: It’s true. I actually think I’ve been doing pretty
well with that this week. I’ve been reaching out more
to other people.

tHeraPist: This is fantastic.

mark: And Mary called me again. So, I guess I didn’t
do what we talked about in terms of calling her, but

I did ask her about lunch when she called. I didn’t
really want to because I was feeling down when
she called. I had just gotten a letter from the lawyer
about some new money stuff with Diana. But, I did
ask Mary, and I took the girls, too. I think they enjoyed
it a lot. I did really focus on asking them all a
lot of questions during lunch. I think that helped, too.

tHeraPist: Mark, you have definitely had more social
contact in the last few days! You are doing a huge
part of this treatment, which is acting in accordance
with the goals and plans that we are setting here, as
opposed to being directed by how you feel in the moment.


mark: I tried.

tHeraPist: You did it! You talked about having lunch
with your coworker. Did you do that?

mark: I did do that.

tHeraPist: You did a lot! That’s great. OK, I may be
pushing our luck here, but what do you think about
adding swimming to our agenda?

mark: I knew you were going to ask about that again.

tHeraPist: (laughing) You know me too well. What’s
your thought about it?

mark: It’s probably a good idea. There is actually a
swim lesson that the girls like to do on the weekends,
and I could take them and do laps at the same time
in the other pool.

tHeraPist: Fantastic! Do you have them with you this
weekend? Could we schedule that for the weekend?

mark: Yeah, I think that would help.

tHeraPist: Mark, do you think that reconnecting with
people and some of these activities, like reading, are
connected with your improved mood?

mark: Yes, that definitely had a lot to do with it. I am
still not sure that we are getting to the real problem
with all of this, but you are right that it does help.

tHeraPist: So we should talk about that, too. Before
we move to that, is there anything else that you think
is contributing to your positive mood, or is it mostly
having more social contact, which you find reinforcing?


mark: It’s the social contact and trying to distract myself
with the reading.

tHeraPist: That is so great! Good reminder, too. Let’s
talk some about another book and how to keep up
that schedule.


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

At this point, the therapist and Mark focus on developing
a specific plan for selecting and purchasing a new
book to continue the reading routine. Next, the therapist
returns to Mark’s comments about whether the interventions
are addressing what is most important.

tHeraPist: What you mentioned before about the real
problem . . . I’m curious what you meant.

mark: I guess I’m still thinking about Diana a lot. I
think that there is a part of me that has to let go, yet
just isn’t letting go. I am thinking, just asking myself,
“Is there still a chance for us? What did I do to screw
it all up so badly?” And then I start thinking, “Is
this all I have now—having lunch with people, reading
by myself at night?” You know, the kind of stuff
we’ve been focusing on . . . I don’t know. Is it really
going to fix anything?

tHeraPist: Mark, I know it feels like this stuff isn’t
really getting at the real problem in terms of your
thinking about Diana, and I agree that is really important
to talk about. At the same time, I don’t want
us to lose sight of the fact that this other stuff makes
a huge difference. It’s important for you to reconnect
with ways to buoy up your mood before you start
to tackle some of the past problems and those that
still come up with Diana. Also, I think we will find
that there are some similar patterns, so maybe the
ways you have tended to pull away from other people
since you’ve been down might have some connections
with what happened with Diana.

mark: That’s true. I guess they are not totally separate.

tHeraPist: Are you saying that it’s time now to start
focusing our time more directly on those topics?

mark: I think so. Maybe I’m more aware of it because
I’m feeling a little better. I guess I’m asking more
often, “Is this all there is now?” It just seems like a
damn lonely life to be leading, if this is it.

The therapist and Mark end the session by reviewing
the assignments. In addition, they agree on a plan to
return to Mark’s important questions in the next session.


Sessions 6–9

In this next series of sessions, the therapist and Mark
return to Mark’s question from Session 5. In repeated
sessions, he reports improvements in mood related
to making progress on projects at home, exercising,
and becoming more socially connected in casual and
friendship circles. These areas of progress are reflected
consistently on his Activity Record forms, which now
specifically target the areas of social engagement,
reading, and swimming (see Figure 9.4). (This version
of the Activity Record can be considered when the activation
targets are clear and well developed, and the
detailed information gained via hour-by-hour monitoring
is not as necessary. It can also be used for clients
who have difficulty with the more detailed Activity
Record.)

Even with clear areas of improved activation and
mood, Mark also reports that his mood is vulnerable to
his tendency to ruminate frequently about his ex-wife.
The therapist and Mark begin to explore the potential
function of rumination about his ex-wife. As they did
with respect to both TV watching and rumination dur-

Task
Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
Saturday
Sunday
Reading
Reaching
out
to
other
people
Swimming
Mood
5
5
5
6
8
3
3


figUre 9.4. Sample completed Activity Record (daily).


Behavioral Activation for Depression

ing social interactions, they develop some initial hypotheses
about the consequences of Mark’s ruminating
about his ex-wife.

TherapisT: Is it possible that ruminating might be a
form of avoidance itself? It’s like your mind gets
stuck in a broken record format. You keep replaying
what you did wrong, what you could have done, and
one of the effects is that you are actually avoiding
the painful emotions about the loss of the relationship,
and maybe also avoiding exploring new relationships?


Mark: It feels like I can’t stand the loss of it. That’s
what I can’t accept—that it is lost. I keep thinking
maybe there is a way to recapture it, even though I
know there simply is not. We can’t even communicate
about the kids’ health care without a lawyer.

TherapisT: So, in a way, ruminating may be a way to
avoid feeling grief and sadness. I wonder if part of
this comes from what you learned about how to cope
with major loss after your dad left. It seems like no
one talked about that and you got pretty caught up
in thinking about how you might have been responsible.
I wonder if it’s hard to know what to do emotionally
right now.

Mark: It’s certainly true about what happened when I
was a kid.

TherapisT: So one possibility we could experiment
with is taking time specifically to experience the
sadness and loss.

Mark: I don’t know. Thinking about her and what I’ve
lost seems overwhelming. I just want to be done with
it and move on.

TherapisT: I know. Exactly! The problem is that ruminating
seems to have the effect of keeping you
from moving on. Instead of moving onto other relationships
or pursuits in your life, your mind keeps
replaying what happened and didn’t happen with
Diana.

Mark: I just don’t know if I’m ready for other relationships.


TherapisT: So, if you weren’t ruminating as much, do
you think you might experience more fear?

Mark: When I think about getting into another relationship.
. . . You know, I think that there is actually a
person at work who is interested in dating, but that’s
been part of the reason that I’ve kind of held back

from doing things with her. She’s asked me to lunch
a couple of times. I just don’t want to be back in the
same place again 2 years from now. I can’t take this
whole thing again, and I don’t want to subject my
kids to it either.

TherapisT: So, it may be possible that ruminating has

the effect of keeping at bay not only feelings of loss

about Diana but also fears about future loss.

The therapist also emphasized the importance of
continuing with activation plans developed in earlier
sessions to maintain adaptive routines and improve
mood. In particular, they highlight the need for consistent
attention to social contact, exercise, and reading.
In addition, the therapist and Mark discuss his return to
the writers’ group into more detail, beginning to break
down that larger task into manageable pieces. Work on
these targets forms the majority of the middle of the
course of treatment. As Mark begins to address feelings
of loss more directly and continues his work on social
connections, exercise, and limiting TV watching, he
also begins to express interest in dating again.

Sessions 10–15

In this section of treatment, the therapist and Mark
begin to address directly the prospect of his developing
new intimate relationships in his life, specifically with
a woman at work to whom he is attracted. They explore
what is necessary to approach rather than avoid Mark’s
fear of starting a new relationship, and the therapist
hypothesizes in particular that Mark’s ruminative style
may have functioned to avoid learning from patterns in
past relationships. The therapist used the TRAP/TRAC
acronym as a simple way to help Mark recognize the
conditions under which he was likely to avoid (the
TRAP), and to then engage in more adaptive coping
behavior to get back on “TRAC.” For example, Mark
reported that he would see the woman at work (trigger),
begin to feel nervous (response), and either not
talk with her or restrict his conversation to perfunctory
work issues (the avoidance pattern). His alternative
coping under the same conditions involved asking her
if she would like to have coffee. Sessions then focus
heavily on examining in detail what Mark might learn
from his former marriage that would be instructive in
future relationships. The following dialogue provides
an example of the types of foci that these sessions target.



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

mark: One of the things that happened a lot with
Diana is I never felt like I was really present with her
or the girls. It was like they were in this little world
together and I was always on the outside somehow.
I often thought that I should put myself more in the
center, like say more of what I thought, but I just
didn’t. I never did.

tHeraPist: Did that cause conflict with her?

mark: Yes, absolutely. It was one of things that she
said when she ended things. Being on the outside is
a big thing for me.

tHeraPist: What does being on the outside involve
specifically? How would I know if you were doing
that?

mark: It’s just not being willing to speak up about
things. She always said it was like I wasn’t really
in or out on anything, just kind of on the fence the
whole time.

tHeraPist: Can you think of a specific example when
that was an issue?

mark: Well, my mother and brothers never really liked
Diana very much, but I didn’t do much to stand up
for her with them. I just kind of let things unfold. . . .

tHeraPist: So, that might have been a TRAP with
her? Was it a trigger that you thought she wanted
something from you in terms of your commitment?

mark: Yes, it was, because I ended up feeling really
overwhelmed by that.

tHeraPist: And the avoidance pattern was withdrawing.


mark: I did. I just backed off, and she had to handle
the whole scene with my family.

tHeraPist: So with your coworker, if you were to take
a stand with her now, what would that look like?
What would alternative coping be?

mark: I have no idea.

tHeraPist: Do you think there is a similar trigger?

mark: Maybe, because I think she is wondering what’s
up with me? Like am I interested or not?

tHeraPist: Have you been clear with her about being
interested in dating her?

mark: Not really. We talk often at work, but I can’t say
that I’ve really said much about it.

tHeraPist: Would you like to ask her out?

mark: Yes, I guess I would.

tHeraPist: Why don’t we think of some specific

things you could say as alternatives to withdrawing

and practice with some of them?

In these sessions, the therapist and Mark define, in
very specific and concrete terms, the types of behaviors
associated with decreased satisfaction and quality
in his former marriage. For instance, the therapist’s
following question to Mark is a central question asked
repeatedly over the course of BA: “What does being on
the outside involve specifically? What does it look like?
How would I know if you were doing that?” The therapist
emphasizes identifying clear, specific, and observable
behaviors when analyzing behaviors and defining
goals. Then, the therapist and Mark work to identify
specific strategies that he can use to practice alternative
behaviors in pursuing a future relationship. They continue
to use the TRAP/TRAC framework to examine
situations that arise and Mark’s response, and to guide
him toward a more engaged approach to intimate interpersonal
relationships. As Mark begins dating, they
have ample opportunity to revise and refine strategies
through activation assignments that target being direct
and present in intimate interactions.

Sessions 16–19

By Session 16, the therapist and Mark agree that the
bulk of the work of understanding and problem-solving
Mark’s depression in terms of his unique life context
and avoidant response patterns that maintain his depression
has been completed. Mark has successfully
activated in terms of his secondary problem behaviors
(e.g., increased reading, exercise, social contacts, and
projects around the house; decreased TV watching) and
he has taken steps toward solving the problems of grief
and fear of intimacy via initiating a new relationship.

Thus, the final sessions of treatment focused on reviewing
and consolidating primary themes and methods
used in therapy. Specifically, the therapist and
Mark identified the importance of continuing to practice
his new skills of blocking rumination by attending
to immediate goals and to his direct and immediate
experience, and being more direct and expressive with
his new partner. In addition, the therapist carefully reviewed
with Mark the ways he had learned to use the
BA fundamentals himself. Together they reviewed
ways that Mark would know when he was starting to
feel depressed or to engage in avoidance response patterns.
They also reviewed specific steps he could take


Behavioral Activation for Depression

to begin self-monitoring his mood and activities, and to
problem-solve alternative coping behaviors. They also
specifically identified a number of alternative behaviors
that were uniquely helpful in breaking the vicious cycle
of depression, avoidance, and withdrawal; these antidepressant
behaviors included, for example, exercise,
calling a friend, and reading. Mark reported that he felt
well equipped with these tools and the opportunities he
had had to practice them in therapy. He also reported
feeling encouraged about the positive changes he had
already made in his life. He ended treatment expressing
optimism about his future and warmly thanked the
therapist for all of their work together. Over time, Mark
continued to maintain the gains he made in treatment.
He established a new relationship with a woman, and
they became engaged over the course of the following
year. He continued to practice many of the skills
he had learned in therapy in the context of this new
relationship, with his children, and with his coworkers
and friends.

Case Summary

The course of treatment with Mark provides an example
of many of the core principles and strategies of BA. The
treatment followed from careful and ongoing functional
analysis of key problems that Mark presented, which
in turn allowed the therapist to develop the organizing
case conceptualization. This work was completed in
collaboration with Mark during sessions and was also
a focus of the ongoing clinical consultation team meetings,
of which Mark’s therapist was a member. During
treatment, the therapist used a range of specific strategies,
including goal setting, self-monitoring, graded
task assignment, problem solving, behavioral rehearsal,
and attention to experience. She also addressed a number
of important treatment targets frequently observed
in BA, including interpersonal avoidance, rumination,
and routine disruption.

Overall, the therapist worked as a coach throughout
therapy, helping Mark to problem-solve specific steps
to overcome patterns of avoidance and to engage in activities.
She also taught Mark to identify links between
activity and mood so that they could learn together
where to focus time and attention. She used the EN-
LIVEN strategies within each session. She maintained
the structure of each session and the overall course of
treatment, with a sustained focus on learning together
and taking action. She maintained a matter-of-fact,
nonjudgmental, problem-solving approach to the chal


lenge of treating depression and the difficulties that
arose during the course of Mark’s therapy, responding
with warmth, encouragement, and understanding. She
relied consistently on the BA model, acknowledging
the difficulty of change when depressed and the importance
of action, especially when mood is low. She returned
regularly and persistently to an activation focus
on the selected targets of change and worked as a team
with Mark to support him in learning how to build a life
that was rich and rewarding.

coNclusioN

This chapter provides the conceptual basics and the
how-to specifics that are required to use BA with depressed
clients. Evolving from the seminal foundation
established by the work of Ferster, Lewinsohn, and
Beck, BA highlights the power of direct and sustained
attention to behavior change. BA aims to help clients
become active and engaged in their lives in ways that
reduce current depression and help to prevent future
episodes. BA therapists help depressed clients to increase
activities that bring greater reward and to solve
important problems. Both outcome research and other
converging lines of empirical inquiry suggest that BA
holds promise as an efficacious treatment for depression
(Dimidjian et al., 2011). Future research will examine
in greater detail the process of change in BA and
the ease with which BA can be transported to a wide
range of clinical practice settings.

referenCes

Acierno, R., Rheingold, A., Amstadter, A., Kurent, J., Amella,
E., Resnick, H., et al. (2012). Behavioral activation
and therapeutic exposure for bereavement in older adults.

American Journal of Hospice and Palliative Medicine,
29(1), 13–25.

Addis, M. E., & Carpenter, K. M. (2000). The treatment
rationale in cognitive behavioral therapy: Psychological
mechanisms and clinical guidelines. Cognitive and Behavioral
Practice, 7(2), 147–156.

Addis, M. E., & Martell, C. R. (2004). Overcoming depression
one step at a time: The new behavioral activation
approach to getting your life back. Oakland, CA: New
Harbinger.

American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and
statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.). Arlington,
VA: Author.


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

Armento, M. E. A., & Hopko, D. R. (2007). The Environmental
Reward Observation Scale (EROS): Development,
validity, and reliability. Behavior Therapy, 38, 107–119.

Armento, M. E. A., & Hopko, D. R. (2009). Behavioral activation
of a breast cancer patient with coexistent major depression
and generalized anxiety disorder. Clinical Case
Studies, 8(1), 25–37.

Barraca, J., Pérez-Álvarez, M., & Lozano Bleda, J. H. (2011).
Avoidance and activation as keys to depression: Adaptation
of the Behavioral Activation for Depression Scale in
a Spanish sample. Spanish Journal of Psychology, 14(2),
998–1009.

Beck, A. T., Rush, A. J., Shaw, B. F., & Emery, G. (1979).
Cognitive therapy of depression. New York: Guilford
Press.

Beck, A. T., Steer, R. A., & Brown, G. K. (1996). Manual for
the BDI-II. San Antonio, TX: Psychological Corporation.

Bennett-Levy, J., Butler, G., Fennell, M., Hackman, A., Mueller,
M., & Westbrook, D. (2004). Oxford guide to behavioural
experiments in cognitive therapy. Oxford, UK: Oxford
University Press.

Borkovec, T. D., Newman, M. G., Pincus, A. L., & Lytle, R.
(2002). A component analysis of cognitive-behavioral
therapy for generalized anxiety disorder and the role of
interpersonal problems. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 70, 288–298.

Carvalho, J. P., Gawrysiak, M. J., Hellmuth, J. C., McNulty,

J. K., Magidson, J. F., Lejuez, C. W., et al. (2010). The
reward probability index: design and validation of a scale
measuring access to environmental reward. Behavior
Therapy, 42(2), 249–262.
Christopher, M. S., Jacob, K. L., Neuhaus, E. C., Neary, T. J.,
& Fiola, L. A. (2009). Cognitive and behavioral changes
related to symptom improvement among patients with a
mood disorder receiving intensive cognitive-behavioral
therapy. Journal of Psychiatric Practice, 15(2), 95–102.

Cuijpers, P., van Straten, A., & Warmerdam, L. (2007).
Behavioral activation treatments of depression: A metaanalysis.
Clinical Psychology Review, 27, 318–326.

Cullen, J. M., Spates, C. R., Pagoto, S. L., & Doran, N.
(2006). Behavioral activation treatment for major depressive
disorder: A pilot investigation. Behavior Analyst
Today, 7, 151–166.

Curran, J., Lawson, P., Houghton, S., & Gournay, K. (2007).
Implementing behavioural activation in inpatient psychiatric
wards. Journal of Mental Health Training, Education
and Practice, 2(2), 28–35.

Daughters, S. B., Braun, A. R., Sargeant, M. N., Reynolds, E.
K., Hopko, D. R., Blanco, C., et al. (2008). Effectiveness of
a brief behavioral treatment for inner-city illicit drug users
with elevated depressive symptoms: The Life Enhancement
Treatment for Substance Use (LETS Act!). Journal
of Clinical Psychiatry, 69(1), 122–129.

Dimidjian, S. (2011, July). Behavioral activation. Workshop
presentation at Sangath, Goa, India.

Dimidjian, S., Barrera, M., Jr., Martell, C., Muñoz, R. F., &
Lewinsohn, P. M. (2011). The origins and current status
of behavioral activation treatments for depression. Annual
Review of Clinical Psychology, 7, 1–38.

Dimidjian, S., Hollon, S. D., Dobson, K. S., Schmaling, K.
B., Kohlenberg, R. J., Addis, M., et al. (2006). Randomized
trial of behavioral activation, cognitive therapy, and
antidepressant medication in the acute treatment of adults
with major depression. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 74, 658–670.

Dobson, K. S., Hollon, S. D., Dimidjian, S., Schmaling, K.
B., Kohlenberg, R. J., Gallop, R., et al. (2008). Randomized
trial of behavioral activation, cognitive therapy, and
antidepressant medication in the prevention of relapse and
recurrence in major depression. Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 76(3), 468–477.

Ekers, D. M., Dawson, M. S., & Bailey, E. (2013). Dissemination
of behavioural activation for depression to mental
health nurses: training evaluation and benchmarked clinical
outcomes. Journal of Psychiatric and Mental Health
Nursing, 20(2), 186–192.

Ekers, D., Richards, D., & Gilbody, S. (2008). A metaanalysis
of randomized trials of behavioural treatment of
depression. Psychological Medicine, 38(5), 611–623.

Ekers, D., Richards, D., McMillan, D., Bland, J. M., & Gilbody,
S. (2011). Behavioural activation delivered by the
non-specialist: Phase II randomised controlled trial. British
Journal of Psychiatry, 198(1), 66–72.

Ferster, C. B. (1973). A functional analysis of depression.
American Psychologist, 28, 857–870.

Ferster, C. B. (1981). A functional analysis of behavior therapy.
In L. P. Rehm (Ed.), Behavior therapy for depression:
Present status and future directions (pp. 181–196). New
York: Academic Press.

First, M. B., Spitzer, R. L., Gibbon, M., & Williams, J. B. W.
(1997). User’s guide for the Structured Clinical Interview
for DSM-IV Axis I Disorders. Washington, DC: American
Psychiatric Press.

First, M. B., Spitzer, R. L., Gibbons, M., Williams, J. B. W., &
Benjamin, L. (1996). User’s guide for the Structured Clinical
Interview for DSM-IV Axis II Personality Disorders
(SCID-II). New York: Biometrics Research Department,
New York State Psychiatric Institute.

Foa, E. B., Rothbaum, B. O., & Furr, J. M. (2003). Augmenting
exposure therapy with other CBT procedures. Psychiatric
Annals, 33, 47–53.

Gawrysiak, M., Nicholas, C., & Hopko, D. R. (2009). Behavioral
activation for moderately depressed university students:
Randomized controlled trial. Journal of Counseling
Psychology, 56(3), 468–475.

Gloaguen, V., Cottraux, J., Cucherat, M., & Blackburn, I. M.
(1998). A meta-analysis of the effects of cognitive therapy
in depressed patients. Journal of Affective Disorders, 49,
59–72.

Gollwitzer, P. M. (1999). Implementation intentions: Strong


Behavioral Activation for Depression

effects of simple plans. American Psychologist, 54, 493–
503.

Gortner, E. T., Gollan, J. K., Dobson, K. S., & Jacobson, N.

S. (1998). Cognitive-behavioral treatment for depression:
Relapse prevention. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 66, 377–384.
Gros, D. F., & Haren, W. B. (2011). Open trial of brief behavioral
activation psychotherapy for depression in an integrated
Veterans Affairs primary care setting. Primary
Care Companion to CNS Disorders, 13(4).

Hamilton, M. A. (1960). A rating scale for depression. Journal
of Neurology, Neurosurgery, and Psychiatry, 23,
56–61.

Hayes, A. M., Castonguay, L. G., & Goldfried, M. R. (1996).
Effectiveness of targeting the vulnerability factors of depression
in cognitive therapy. Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 64(3), 623–627.

Hayes, S. C., Strosahl, K. D., & Wilson, K. G. (1999). Acceptance
and commitment therapy: An experiential approach
to behavior change. New York: Guilford Press.

Hopko, D. R., Armento, M. E. A., Robertson, S., Ryba, M. M.,
Carvalho, J. P., Colman, L. K., et al. (2011). Brief behavioral
activation and problem-solving therapy for depressed
breast cancer patients: Randomized trial. Journal of Consulting
and Clinical Psychology, 79(6), 834–849.

Hopko, D. R., Bell, J. L., Armento, M. E. A., Hunt, M. K.,
& Lejuez, C. W. (2005). Behavior therapy for depressed
cancer patients in primary care. Psychotherapy, 42(2),
236–243.

Hopko, D. R., Lejuez, C. W., & Hopko, S. D. (2004). Behavioral
activation as an intervention for coexistent depressive
and anxiety symptoms. Clinical Case Studies, 3(1),
37–48.

Hopko, D. R., Lejuez, C. W., LePage, J. P., Hopko, S. D., &
McNeil, D. W. (2003). A brief behavioral activation treatment
for depression: A randomized pilot trial within an
inpatient psychiatric hospital. Behavior Modification, 27,
458–469.

Hopko, D. R., Sanchez, L., Hopko, S. D., Dvir, S., & Lejuez,

C. W. (2003). Behavioral activation and the prevention
of suicidal behaviors in patients with borderline personality
disorder. Journal of Personality Disorders, 17(5),
460–478.
Houghton, S., Curran, J., & Saxon, D. (2008). An uncontrolled
evaluation of group behavioural activation for
depression. Behavioural and Cognitive Psychotherapy,
36(2), 235–239.

Hubley, S., Woodcock, E. A., Dimeff, L. A., & Dimidjian,

S. (in press). Disseminating behavioural activation for
depression via online training: Preliminary steps. Behavioural
and Cognitive Psychotherapy.
Jacobson, N. S., Dobson, K. S., Truax, P. A., Addis, M. E., Koerner,
K., Gollan, J. K., et al. (1996). A component analysis
of cognitive-behavioral treatment for depression. Journal
of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 64, 295–304.

Jacobson, N. S., Martell, C. R., & Dimidjian, S. (2001). Behavioral
activation treatment for depression: Returning to
contextual roots. Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice,
8, 255–270.

Jakupcak, M., Roberts, L. J., Martell, C., Mulick, P., Michael,
S., Reed, R., et al. (2006). A pilot study of behavioral activation
for veterans with posttraumatic stress disorder.
Journal of Traumatic Stress, 19(3), 387–391.

Kanter, J. W., Hurtado, G. D., Rusch, L. C., Busch, A. M.,
& Santiago-Rivera, A. (2008). Behavioral activation for
Latinos with depression. Clinical Case Studies, 7(6),
491–506.

Kanter, J. W., Mulick, P., Busch, A. M., Berlin, K. S., & Martell,
C. (2007). The Behavioral Activation for Depression
Scale (BADS): Psychometric properties and factor structure.
Journal of Psychopathology and Behavioral Assessment,
29(3), 191–202.

Kanter, J. W., Rusch, L. C., Busch, A. M., & Sedivy, S. K.
(2009). Validation of the Behavioral Activation for Depression
Scale (BADS) in a community sample with elevated
depressive symptoms. Journal of Psychopathology
and Behavioral Assessment, 31(1), 36–42.

Kanter, J. W., Santiago-Rivera, A. L., Rusch, L. C., Busch,

A. M., & West, P. (2010). Initial outcomes of a culturally
adapted behavioral activation for Latinas diagnosed with
depression at a community clinic. Behavior Modification,
34(2), 120–144.
Kroenke, K., Spitzer, R., & Williams, J. (2001). The PHQ-9:
Validity of a brief depression severity measure. Journal of
General Internal Medicine, 16, 606–613.

Lazzari, C., Egan, S. J., & Rees, C. S. (2011). Behavioral activation
treatment for depression in older adults delivered
via videoconferencing: A pilot study. Cognitive and Behavioral
Practice, 18(4), 555–565.

Lejuez, C. W., Hopko, D. R., Acierno, R., Daughters, S. B.,
& Pagoto, S. L. (2011). Ten year revision of the brief behavioral
activation treatment for depression: Revised treatment
manual. Behavior Modification, 35(2), 111–161.

Lejuez, C. W., Hopko, D. R., LePage, J. P., Hopko, S. D., &
McNeil, D. W. (2001). A brief behavioral activation treatment
for depression. Cognitive and Behavioral Practice,
8(2), 164–175.

Lewinsohn, P. M. (1974). A behavioral approach to depression.
In R. M. Friedman & M. M. Katz (Eds.), The psychology
of depression: Contemporary theory and research
(pp. 157–185). New York: Wiley.

Lewinsohn, P. M., Antonuccio, D. O., Steinmetz-
Breckenridge, J., & Teri, L. (1984). The Coping with Depression
Course: A psychoeducational intervention for
unipolar depression. Eugene, OR: Castalia.

Lewinsohn, P. M., Biglan, A., & Zeiss, A. S. (1976). Behavioral
treatment of depression. In P. O. Davidson (Ed.), The
behavioral management of anxiety, depression and pain

(pp. 91–146). New York: Brunner/Mazel.
Lewinsohn, P. M., & Graf, M. (1973). Pleasant activities and


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

depression. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,
41, 261–268.

Lewinsohn, P. M., Hoberman, H., Teri, L., Hautzinger, M.
(1985). An integrative theory of depression. In S. Reiss &

R. Bootzin (Eds.) Theoretical issues in behavior therapy,
(pp. 331–359). New York: Academic Press.
Lewinsohn, P. M., Sullivan, J. M., & Grosscup, S. J. (1980).
Changing reinforcing events: An approach to the treatment
of depression. Psychotherapy: Theory, Research,
Practice, and Training, 17, 322–334.

Linehan, M. M. (1993). Cognitive-behavioral treatment
of borderline personality disorder. New York: Guilford
Press.

Locke, E. A., & Latham, G. P. (2002). Building a practically
useful theory of goal setting and task motivation: A 35year
odyssey. American Psychologist, 57, 705–717.

MacPherson, L., Tull, M. T., Matusiewicz, A. K., Rodman,
S., Strong, D. R., Kahler, C. W., et al. (2010). Randomized
controlled trial of behavioral activation smoking cessation
treatment for smokers with elevated depressive symptoms.
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 78(1),
55–61.

Mairs, H., Lovell, K., Campbell, M., & Keeley, P. (2011).
Development and pilot investigation of behavioral activation
for negative symptoms. Behavior Modification, 35(5),
486–506.

Manos, R. C., Kanter, J. W., & Busch, A. M. (2010). A critical
review of assessment strategies to measure the behavioral
activation model of depression. Clinical Psychology Review,
30, 547–561.

Manos, R. C., Kanter, J. W., & Luo, W. (2011). The Behavioral
Activation for Depression Scale–Short Form: Development
and validation. Behavior Therapy, 42(4),
726–739.

Martell, C. R., Addis, M. E., & Jacobson, N. S. (2001). Depression
in context: Strategies for guided action. New
York: Norton.

Martell, C. R., Dimidjian, S., & Herman-Dunn, R. (2010).
Behavioral activation for depression: A clinician’s guide:
Guilford Press.

Mazzucchelli, T., Kane, R., & Rees, C. (2009). Behavioral
activation treatment of depression in adults: A metaanalysis
and review. Clinical Psychology: Science and
Practice, 16, 383–411.

McCauley, E., Schloredt, K., Gudmundsen, G., Martell, C.,
& Dimidjian, S. (2011). Expanding behavioral activation
to depressed adolescents: Lessons learned in treatment
development. Cognitive and Behavioral Practice, 18(3),
371–383.

Meeks, S., Looney, S. W., Van Haitsma, K., & Teri, L. (2008).
BE-ACTIV: A staff-assisted behavioral intervention for
depression in nursing homes. The Gerontologist, 48(1),
105–114.

Meeks, S., Teri, L., Van Haitsma, K., & Looney, S. (2006).

Increasing pleasant events in the Nursing Home Collaborative
Behavioral Treatment for Depression. Clinical Case
Studies, 5(4), 287–304.

Mohammadi, A., & Amiri, M. (2010). Behavioral Activation
for Depression Scale: Psychometric properties and confirmatory
factor analysis for Persian version. Iranian Journal
of Psychiatry and Clinical Psychology, 16, 65–73.

Mulick, P. S., & Naugle, A. E. (2004). Behavioral activation
for comorbid PTSD and major depression: A case study.
Cognitive and Behavioral Practice, 11(4), 378–387.

National Institute of Health and Clinical Excellence. (2009).
Depression: The treatment and management of depression
in adults. London: Author.

Nolen-Hoeksema, S. (2000). The role of rumination in depressive
disorders and mixed anxiety/depressive symptoms.
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 109, 504–511.

Pagoto, S., Bodenlos, J. S., Schneider, K. L., Olendzki, B.,
& Spates, C. R. (2008). Initial investigation of behavioral
activation therapy for co-morbid major depressive disorder
and obesity. Psychotherapy Theory Research and Practice,
45, 410–415.

Porter, J. F., Spates, C. R., & Smitham, S. (2004). Behavioral
activation group therapy in public mental health settings:
A pilot investigation. Professional Psychology: Research
and Practice, 35(3), 297–301.

Quijano, L. M., Stanley, M. A., Petersen, N. J., Casado, B. L.,
Steinberg, E. H., Cully, J. A., et al. (2007). Healthy IDEAS:
A depression intervention delivered by community-based
case managers serving older adults. Journal of Applied
Gerontology, 26(2), 139–156.

Raes, F., Hoes, D., Van Gucht, D., & Kanter, J. W. (2010).
The Dutch version of the behavioral activation for depression
scale (BADS): Psychometric properties and factor
structure. Journal of Behavior Therapy and Experimental
Psychiatry, 41, 246–250.

Reynolds, E. K., MacPherson, L., Tull, M. T., Baruch, D. E.,
& Lejuez, C. W. (2011). Integration of the brief behavioral
activation treatment for depression (BATD) into a college
orientation program: Depression and alcohol outcomes.
Journal of Counseling Psychology, 58(4), 555–564.

Ritschel, L. A., Ramirez, C. L., Jones, M., & Craighead,

W. E. (2011). Behavioral activation for depressed teens:
A pilot study. Cognitive and Behavioral Practice, 18(2),
281–299.
Ruggiero, K. J., Morris, T. L., Hopko, D. R., & Lejuez, C. W.
(2007). Application of behavioral activation treatment for
depression to an adolescent with a history of child maltreatment.
Clinical Case Studies, 6(1), 64–78.

Schneider, K. L., Pagoto, S. L., Handschin, B., Panza, E.,
Bakke, S., Liu, Q., et al. (2011). Design and methods for a
pilot randomized clinical trial involving exercise and behavioral
activation to treat comorbid type 2 diabetes and
major depressive disorder. Mental Health and Physical
Activity, 4(1), 13–21.


Behavioral Activation for Depression

Scogin, F., Jamison, C., & Gochneaur, K. (1989). Comparative
efficacy of cognitive and behavioral bibliotherapy for
mildly and moderately depressed older adults. Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 57, 403–407.

Segal, Z. V., Williams, J. M. G., & Teasdale, J. D. (2002).
Mindfulness-based cognitive therapy for depression. New
York: Guilford Press.

Snarski, M., Scogin, F., DiNapoli, E., Presnell, A., McAlpine,
J., & Marcinak, J. (2011). The effects of behavioral activation
therapy with inpatient geriatric psychiatry patients.
Behavior Therapy, 42(1), 100–108.

Sood, J. R., Cisek, E., Zimmerman, J., Zaleski, E. H., & Fillmore,
H. H. (2003). Treatment of depressive symptoms
during short-term rehabilitation: An attempted replication
of the DOUR project. Rehabilitation Psychology, 48(1),
44–49.

Spates, C. R., Kalata, A. H., Ozeki, S., Stanton, C. E., & Peters,
S. (2012). Initial open trial of a computerized behavioral
activation treatment for depression. Behavior Modification,
36(6), 1–39.

Spek, V., Cuijpers, P. I. M., Nyklicek, I., Riper, H., Keyzer,
J., & Pop, V. (2007). Internet-based cognitive behaviour
therapy for symptoms of depression and anxiety: A metaanalysis.
Psychological Medicine, 37(3), 319–328.

Spek, V., Cuijpers, P., Nyklicek, I., Smits, N., Riper, H.,
Keyzer, J., et al. (2008). One-year follow-up results of a
randomized controlled clinical trial on internet-based
cognitive behavioural therapy for subthreshold depression
in people over 50 years. Psychological Medicine, 38(5),
635–640.

Teri, L., Logsdon, R. G., Uomoto, J., & McCurry, S. M.
(1997). Behavioral treatment of depression in dementia
patients: A controlled clinical trial. Journals of Gerontology:
Psychological Sciences, 52, 59–66.

Uebelacker, L. A., Weisberg, R. B., Haggarty, R., & Miller,

I. W. (2009). Adapted behavior therapy for persistently
depressed primary care patients: An open trial. Behavior
Modification, 33(3), 374–395.

Van Voorhees, B. W., Fogel, J., Reinecke, M. A., Gladstone,
T., Stuart, S., Gollan, J., et al. (2009). Randomized clinical
trial of an internet-based depression prevention program
for adolescents (Project CATCH-IT) in primary care: 12week
outcomes. Journal of Developmental and Behavioral
Pediatrics, 30(1), 23–37.

Wagner, A. W., Zatzick, D. F., Ghesquiere, A., & Jurkovich,

G. J. (2007). Behavioral activation as an early intervention
for posttraumatic stress disorder and depression among
physically injured trauma survivors. Cognitive and Behavioral
Practice, 14(4), 341–349.
Ware, J. E., & Sherbourne, C. D. (1992). The MOS 36-Item
Short-Form Health Survey (SF-36), I: Conceptual framework
and item selection. Medical Care, 30, 473–483.

Warmerdam, L., Van Straten, A., Twisk, J., Riper, H., & Cuijpers,
P. (2008). Internet-based treatment for adults with
depressive symptoms: Randomized controlled trial. Journal
of Medical Internet Research, 10, e44.

Watson, D. L., & Tharp, R. G. (2002). Self directed behavior.
Belmont, CA: Wadsworth/Thomson Learning.

Weinstock, L. M., Munroe, M. K., & Miller, I. W. (2011). Behavioral
activation for the treatment of atypical depression:
A pilot open trial. Behavior Modification, 35(4), 403–424.

Weissman, M. M., & Bothwell, S. (1976). Assessment of social
adjustment by patient self-report. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 33(9), 1111–1115.

Zeiss, A. M., Lewinsohn, P. M., & Muñoz, R. F. (1979).
Nonspecific improvement effects in depression using interpersonal
skills training, pleasant activity schedules,
or cognitive training. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 47, 427–439.

Zettle, R. D., & Rains, J. C. (1989). Group cognitive and contextual
therapies in treatment of depression. Journal of
Clinical Psychology, 45(3), 436–445.


CHaPter 10

Borderline Personality Disorder

aNDraDa D. Neacsiu
Marsha M. liNehaN

This chapter presents one of the more remarkable developments in all of psychotherapy.
few therapists are willing to undertake the overwhelmingly difficult and wrenching task
of treating individuals with “borderline” characteristics, yet these people are among the
neediest encountered in any therapeutic setting. They also impose an enormous burden
on the health care system. over the past several decades, linehan and her colleagues
have developed a demonstrably effective treatment for individuals with borderline personality
disorder (BPD) that constitutes one of the most substantial contributions to the
armamentarium of the psychotherapist in recent times. What is even more interesting
is that this approach blends emotion regulation, interpersonal systems, and more traditional
cognitive‑behavioral approaches into a coherent whole. To this mix linehan adds
her personal experience with eastern philosophies and religions, yet the authors remain
true to the empirical foundations of their approach. The fascinating case study presented
in this chapter illustrates linehan’s therapeutic expertise and strategic timing in a way
that will be invaluable to all therapists who deal with personality disorders. The surprising
and tragic outcome underscores the enormous burden of clinical responsibility inherent
in any treatment setting, as well as the practical issues that arise when treatment
ultimately fails.—D. H. B.

Clinicians generally agree that clients with a diagnosis
of borderline personality disorder (BPD) are
challenging and difficult to treat. As a result, BPD
has become a stigmatized disorder resulting in negative
attitudes, trepidation, and concern with regard to
providing treatment (Aviram, Brodsky, & Stanley,
2006; Lequesne & Hersh, 2004; Paris, 2005). Perhaps
of greatest concern is the generally high incidence of
suicidal behavior among this population. Approximately
75% of clients who meet criteria for BPD have
a history of suicide attempts, with an average of 3.4 attempts
per individual (Soloff, Lis, Kelly, Cornelius, &
Ulrich, 1994). Suicide threats and crises are frequent,
even among those who never engage in any suicidal or

nonsuicidal self-injurious behavior (NSSI). Suicidal
ideation is also frequent and contributes to the onset
and maintenance of daily negative mood (Nisenbaum,
Links, Eynan, & Heisel, 2010). Although much of this
behavior is without lethal consequence, follow-up studies
of individuals with BPD have found suicide rates
of about 7–8%, and the percentage who eventually
commit suicide is estimated at 10% (for a review, see
Linehan, Rizvi, Shaw-Welch, & Page, 2000). Among
all individuals who have committed suicide, from 7 to
38% meet criteria for BPD, with the higher incidence
occurring primarily among young adults with the disorder
(e.g., Brent et al., 1994; Isometsa et al., 1994).
Lethality and frequency of suicidal behavior seem to

394


Borderline Personality Disorder

be strongly related to impulsivity (Chesin, Jeglic, &
Stanley, 2010) and poor psychosocial functioning (Soloff
& Chiappetta, 2012), which may make it difficult to
decide what to prioritize in treatment. Individuals with
BPD also have difficulties with anger and anger expression.
Not infrequently, intense anger is directed at their
therapists. The frequent coexistence of BPD with both
Axis I conditions (e.g., mood or anxiety disorders) and
other personality disorders clearly complicates treatment
further. In particular, comorbid posttraumatic
stress disorder (PTSD) results in greater impairment
in individuals with BPD (Harned, Rizvi, & Linehan,
2010).

The criteria for BPD, as defined in the fifth edition
of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders (DSM-5; American Psychiatric Association,
2013), reflect a pervasive pattern of instability and
dysregulation across all domains of functioning. An
additional popular measure for BPD is Zanarini’s Rating
Scale for BPD (ZAN-BPD; Zanarini, 2003). Other
assessment measures used to diagnose BPD include
the International Personality Disorders Examination
(IPDE; Loranger, 1995) and the Diagnostic Interview
for DSM-IV Personality Disorders (DIPD-IV; Zanarini,
Frankenburg, Sickel, & Yong, 1996). The Borderline
Symptom List (BSL; Bohus et al., 2001, 2007) and
the McLean Screening Instrument for Borderline Personality
Disorder (MSI-BPD; Zanarini et al., 2003) are
additional screening measures for BPD.

Linehan (1993a), followed by additional theorists,
proposed BPD to be a disorder of pervasive emotion
dysregulation (see also Conklin & Westen, 2005; Livesley,
Jang, & Vernon, 1998). Indeed, most DSM-5 BPD
criterion behaviors can be defined either as a direct
consequence of emotion dysregulation or as responses
that function to modulate the aversive emotional states
(Linehan, 1993b; McMain, Korman, & Dimeff, 2001).

More recent research is finding that problems with
emotion dysregulation are common in many other
DSM disorders (Kring & Sloan, 2010). Individuals diagnosed
with a variety of other mental health disorders
appear to have emotion dysregulation patterns that are
similar to those seen in BPD. Increased sensitivity and
reactivity, when compared to controls, has been connected
to generalized anxiety disorder (GAD; Mennin,
Heimberg, Turk, & Fresco, 2005), substance dependence
(Thorberg & Lyvers, 2006), and social anxiety
disorder (SAD) and specific phobias (Etkin & Wager,
2007). Furthermore, the transaction between vulnerability
and an insufficient coaching environment is

similar to the etiological theories presented in panic
disorder (Barlow, Allen, & Choate, 2004), GAD (Mennin,
2004), and some specific phobias (Cisler, Olatunji,
Feldner, & Forsyth, 2010). Thus, pervasive emotion
dysregulation is likely relevant to many other clinical
populations beyond BPD.

This chapter focuses primarily on describing dialectical
behavior therapy (DBT), as a treatment of BPD
(Linehan, 1993a, 1993b) and of pervasive emotion
dysregulation. Before describing DBT, we first review
other treatments for BPD and provide information on
their theoretical rationales and supporting data (when
such data are available). We then present the empirical
support for DBT as a treatment for BPD and for emotion
dysregulation. This is followed by a more in-depth
description of DBT—its philosophical roots, underlying
theory, and treatment protocols.

overview of other
treatMeNt aPProaches

Various approaches have been applied to the treatment
of BPD. Although it is not our purpose to present a
scholarly review of all the many treatments for BPD,
we believe it helpful to review briefly the status of other
treatments before presenting DBT in detail.

Psychodynamic

Psychodynamic approaches currently receiving the
most attention include those of Kernberg (1984; Kernberg,
Selzer, Koenigsberg, Carr, & Appelbaum, 1989),
Adler and Buie (1979; Adler, 1981, 1993; Buie & Adler,
1982), and Bateman and Fonagy (2004). Among these,
Kernberg’s (1984) theoretical contributions are clearly
prominent. His object relations model is comprehensive
as to theory and technique and has had considerable influence
on the psychoanalytic literature. His expressive
psychotherapy for clients with “borderline personality
organization” (BPO) or BPD, transference-focused
psychotherapy (TFP), emphasizes three primary factors:
interpretation, maintenance of technical neutrality,
and transference analysis. The focus of the therapy
is on exposure and resolution of intrapsychic conflict.
Treatment goals include increased impulse control and
anxiety tolerance, ability to modulate affect, and development
of stable interpersonal relationships. TFP
also uses a target hierarchy approach in the first year of
treatment. The targets are (1) containment of suicidal


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

and self-destructive behaviors, (2) therapy-destroying
behaviors, and (3) identification and recapitulation of
dominant object relational patterns, as experienced in
the transference relationship (Clarkin, Levy, Lenzenweger,
& Kernberg, 2007). Kernberg (1984) has also distinguished
a supportive psychotherapy for more severely
disturbed clients with BPO or BPD. Like expressive
psychotherapy, supportive psychotherapy also places
great emphasis on the importance of the interpersonal
relationship in therapy (transference); however, interpretations
are less likely to be made early in treatment,
and only the negative responses to the therapist and to
therapy (negative transference) are explored. Both expressive
and supportive psychotherapy are expected to
last several years, with primary foci on suicidal behaviors
and therapy-interfering behaviors. The data supporting
the use of TFP are not extensive. Clarkin and
colleagues (2007) conducted a multisite randomized
controlled trial (RCT) comparing TFP with the leading
evidence-based treatment (DBT) and with an additional
psychodynamic psychotherapy treatment designed to
exclude elements considered to be the mechanism of
change in TFP. A sample of mixed-gender individuals
with BPD was randomized to DBT (N = 30), TFP (N =
30), and dynamic supportive treatment (ST; N = 30).
Research therapists were supervised on a weekly basis,
and adherence ratings were assessed although not reported.
Results indicated that all three treatments demonstrated
improvement in depression, anxiety, global
functioning, and interpersonal adjustment. Only DBT
and TFP were associated with significant improvement
in suicidality (small effect sizes); similarly, only
the psychodynamic treatments resulted in significant
reductions in anger (medium effect sizes). According
to the Clarkin and colleagues, irritability, physical and
verbal assault, and impulsivity only changed in TFP.
These results represent within-condition changes, as
there were no differences between conditions. TFP was
superior to control conditions in a secondary analysis
including several measures of psychodynamic constructs,
such as metacognitive and social-cognitive
capacities, and reflective functioning (Levy & Scala,
2012). These results must be interpreted with caution.
While positive changes were evident in all conditions,
the mechanism of change proposed for TFP was not
supported, and the comparison condition was questionable
given that it is unclear whether the DBT therapists
were adherent to the model.

Doering and colleagues (2010), followed up with an
independent RCT comparing TFP with treatment by

behavioral and nonbehavioral community experts. One
hundred and four women diagnosed with BPD underwent
1 year of treatment. The authors reported that TFP
was superior in reducing suicidality, dropout, borderline
psychopathology, use of services, and poor global
functioning. Participants in TFP on average received
twice as many sessions. When researchers controlled
for the number of sessions attended, group differences
on suicide attempts and use of services were no longer
significant, although all other results remained
significant (Doering et al., 2010). This study has been
criticized for including all participants in the analyses
(regardless of whether they attended any therapy session)
and for choosing post hoc a statistical test that did
not accurately reflect the findings on suicidal behavior
(Kleindienst, Krumm, & Bohus, 2011).

Mentalization therapy, developed by Bateman and
Fonagy (2004), is an intensive therapy grounded in attachment
theory (i.e., BPD is viewed as an attachment
disorder), with a focus on relationship patterns and
nonconscious factors inhibiting change. “Mentalization”
refers to one’s perception or interpretation of the
actions of others and oneself as intentional. The treatment
is based on the theory that individuals with BPD
have an inadequate capacity for mentalization. Treatment,
therefore, focuses on bringing the client’s mental
experiences to conscious awareness, facilitating a more
complete, integrated sense of mental agency. The goal
is to increase the client’s capacity for recognizing the
existence of the thoughts and feelings he/she is experiencing.
Mentalization-based therapy (MBT) has been
successfully offered as an 18-month partial hospitalization
followed by 18-month biweekly therapy (Bateman
& Fonagy, 1999) or as an 18-month outpatient individual
and group intervention (Bateman & Fonagy, 2009).
MBT as a treatment for BPD has been tested with two
RCTs.

The first RCT compared 18 months of treatment
as usual (TAU) with MBT for 18 months in a partial
hospitalization setting, followed by 18 months of outpatient
MBT (Bateman & Fonagy, 1999). Clients were
randomly assigned to either standard psychiatric care
without individual psychotherapy (control condition)
or to partial hospitalization, a treatment program with
the following goals of therapy: (1) psychoanalytically
informed engagement of clients in treatment; (2)
reduction of psychopathology, including depression
and anxiety; (3) reduction of suicidal behavior; (4)
improvement in social competence; and (5) reduction
in lengthy hospitalizations. The experimental treat



Borderline Personality Disorder

ment group received once-weekly individual psychotherapy
provided by psychiatric nurses, once-weekly
psychodrama-based expressive therapy, thrice-weekly
group therapy sessions, a weekly community meeting,
a monthly meeting with a case administrator, and
a monthly medications review. At the end of the 18month
partial-hospitalization treatment, those receiving
MBT showed significant reductions in suicidal
behavior (suicide attempts and self-mutilation), inpatient
hospitalization stays, measures of psychopathology
(including depression and anxiety), and social
functioning relative to the control group. These gains
were maintained and increased during an 18-month
follow-up period consisting of twice-weekly group
therapy (Bateman & Fonagy, 2001). The researchers
noted that their program contains three characteristics
they hypothesize to be related to treatment effectiveness:
a consistent theoretical rationale for treatment,
a relationship focus, and consistent treatment
over time. Gains were maintained at a 5-year followup,
although participants in MBT continued to have
impairments in general social function (Bateman &
Fonagy, 2008).

The second RCT (Bateman & Fonagy, 2009) compared
18 months of outpatient MBT with a structured
clinical management (SCM) control condition.
MBT included individual and group psychotherapy,
as well as crisis phone coaching. SCM developed by
the authors to mirror best practices in the treatment
of BPD was primarily a supportive intervention, with
case management including both group and individual
therapy. It was unclear from the study description
whether participants in both conditions were offered a
similar amount of time in therapy. Assessments were
conducted at pretreatment, at 6 and 12 months during
treatment, and at the end of treatment. One hundred
and thirty-four men and women with a diagnosis
of BPD and a recent history of suicidal behavior were
included in the study. Analyses were conducted at each
assessment time point, and not longitudinally, which
makes results difficult to interpret. Nevertheless, substantial
improvements in both conditions was reported,
with MBT being superior to SCM in reducing suicide
attempts in the last 6 months, self-injury episodes in
the last 12 months, and hospitalization throughout the
treatment year. SCM was superior to MBT in reducing
self-harm episodes in the first 6 months of treatment.
MBT was also significantly better than SCM at increasing
general assessment of functioning, depression, and
social adjustment (Bateman & Fonagy, 2009).

Psychopharmacological


Reviews of the literature regarding drug treatments for
BPD highlight a dilemma for the prescribing pharmacotherapist:
BPD involves dysregulation in too many
domains for a single drug to serve as a panacea (Dimeff,
McDavid, & Linehan, 1999; Lieb, Zanarini, Linehan,
& Bohus, 2004; Nose, Cipriani, Biancosino, Grassi, &
Barbui, 2006). In general, results indicate that several
agents may be useful for improving global functioning,
cognitive-perceptual symptoms (e.g., suspiciousness,
ideas of reference, transitory hallucinations), emotion
dysregulation, or impulsive–behavioral dyscontrol (for
reviews, see Lieb et al., 2004; Nose et al., 2006).

Lieb, Völlm, Rücker, Timmer, and Stoffers (2010)
conducted a meta-analysis of 27 RCTs and organized the
evidence based on class of medications. They found that
for first-generation antipsychotics, evidence supports the
effectiveness of haloperidol in the reduction of anger
and flupentixol in the reduction of suicidal behavior.
Thiothixene was found not to be effective. For secondgeneration
antipsychotics, evidence supports aripiprazole’s
effectiveness in reducing pathological symptoms
of BPD, as well as comorbid psychopathology. Olanzapine
is accumulating increased evidence with regard to
its positive effect in reducing affective instability, anger,
and psychotic symptoms, although findings for its effect
on suicidal behavior are mixed (Lieb et al., 2010). In
addition to superiority to placebo, olanzapine has been
shown to decrease impulsive aggression and chronic
dysphoria more effectively than fluoxetine (Zanarini,
Frankenburg, & Parachini, 2004). Olanzapine is consistently
found to have a weight gain side effect. Ziprasidone
was found not to be effective (Lieb et al., 2010).

With regard to mood stabilizers and antidepressants,
valproate semisodium was found to have a significant
effect in reducing interpersonal problems and depression
in clients with BPD, including those with aggressive
and impulsive behavior (Stein, Simeon, Frenkel,
Islam, & Hollander, 1995). Lamotrigine is more effective
than placebo in reducing impulsivity, and topiramate
was found to reduce associated psychopathology
and anger. Topiramate was found to have a significant
side effect of weight loss. Antidepressants evidenced
limited effectiveness in the treatment of BPD problems.
Finally, omega-3 fatty acids were found to reduce
suicidality and depression above and beyond placebo
(Lieb et al., 2010).

In summary, some drug treatments may be effective
in treating aspects of the BPD psychopathology. Never



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

theless, caution is in order when considering pharmacotherapy
for BPD. Clients with BPD are notoriously
noncompliant with treatment regimens, may abuse
the prescribed drugs or overdose, and may experience
unintended effects of the drugs. With these caveats in
mind, carefully monitored pharmacotherapy may be a
useful and important adjunct to psychotherapy in the
treatment of BPD.

Cognitive‑Behavioral

Treatment of BPD has received increasing attention
from cognitive and behavioral theorists. The cognitive
approach views the problems of the client with BPD as
residing within both the content and the process of the
individual’s thoughts. Beck’s approach to treating BPD
(Beck & Freeman, 1990) is representative of cognitive
psychotherapy generally, with the focus of treatment on
restructuring thoughts and on developing a collaborative
relationship through which more adaptive ways of
viewing the world are developed. More specifically, it
focuses on decreasing negative and polarized beliefs
that result in unstable affect and destructive behaviors
(Brown, Newman, Charlesworth, Crits-Christoph,
& Beck, 2004). In an open clinical trial of cognitive
therapy for clients with BPD, decreases in problems associated
with BPD including depression, hopelessness,
and suicide ideation were found at the end of treatment
and during follow-up.

An RCT compared 1 year of cognitive therapy (CT)
and Rogerian supportive therapy (RST) for 65 men and
women who met diagnostic criteria for BPD. In this
study, participants were offered one session weekly
in each condition for 6 months, followed by 12 sessions
aimed at maintaining gains over the subsequent
6 months. Cottraux and colleagues (2009) found that
CT was superior to RST in retaining clients in therapy.
No additional differences between conditions were
found, although CT led to reductions in hopelessness
and impulsivity faster than RST. Follow-up analyses,
nevertheless, showed a significant difference between
conditions, with participants who underwent CT demonstrating
higher clinical global improvement than participants
treated with RST. Given the small sample size
and the large number of dropouts from this study, the effectiveness
of CT is still unclear (Cottraux et al., 2009).

The cognitive-behavioral therapies of Young, Klosko,
and Weishaar (2003; Kellogg & Young, 2006),
Pretzer (1990), Blum, Pfohl, St. John, Monahan, and
Black (2002), and Schmidt and Davidson (as cited in

Weinberg, Gunderson, Hennen, & Cutter, 2006) attempt
to address some of the difficulties experienced in
applying traditional cognitive approaches to the treatment
of BPD. Pretzer’s approach emphasizes modifying
standard CT to address difficulties often encountered in
treating clients with BPD, such as establishing a collaborative
relationship between therapist and client, maintaining
a directed treatment, and improving homework
compliance. Blum and colleagues developed a twiceweekly
outpatient group treatment that uses a psychoeducational
approach to teaching cognitive-behavioral
skills (e.g., distancing, goal setting, and problem solving)
to clients with BPD and to their support systems
(e.g., family, friends, other care providers). The treatment
is offered in a group setting and has been tested
under the acronym STEPPS (Systems Training for
Emotional Predictability and Problem Solving). The
treatment focuses on destigmatization of BPD, emotional
control, and behavioral control. Bos, van Wel,
Verbraak, and Appelo (2011) conducted the most recent
RCT on STEPPS. In their study, participants loosely
diagnosed with BPD, representative of routine clinical
practice, were randomized to either STEPPS and individual
therapy (N = 84) or TAU (N = 84). At the end of
the 18-week treatment, as well as at 6-month follow-up,
participants treated with STEPPS reported less general
and BPD-specific psychopathology, and more improvements
in quality of life. Treatment was offered weekly
for 18 sessions and also included a one-time follow-up
session within the third and sixth months in the study.
These findings, coupled with prior studies comparing
STEPPS and TAU with rigorously selected BPD
samples (Blum et al., 2008; Bos, van Wel, Verbraak, &
Appelo, 2010) supports the effectiveness and efficacy
of this intervention.

Young’s schema-focused therapy (SFT; Young et
al., 2003; also see Young, Rygh, Weinberger, & Beck,
Chapter 7, this volume) postulates that stable patterns
of thinking (“early maladaptive schemas”) can develop
during childhood and result in maladaptive behavior
that reinforces the schemas. SFT includes a variety of
interventions aimed at challenging and changing these
early schemas through the identification of a set of dysfunctional
schema modes that control the individual’s
thoughts, emotions, and behaviors (i.e., detached protector,
punitive parent, abandoned/abused child, angry/
impulsive child). Giesen-Bloo and colleagues (2006)
completed the first RCT of TFP and SFT. TFP was
compared to SFT in a study in which 86 participants
received 3 years of twice-weekly individual sessions of

