Social Anxiety Disorder

Social Phobia Scale (BSPS; Davidson et al., 1991,
1997). We routinely utilize the LSAS, so we describe
it here. This measure is completed at the second clinic
visit largely to avoid making the initial intake session
unduly lengthy. The LSAS separately evaluates Fear
and Avoidance of 11 interaction (e.g., talking to people
in authority) and 13 performance (e.g., working while
being observed) situations using 4-point Likert-type
scales.

Summing the Fear and Avoidance ratings for all 24
items yields an index of overall severity. The LSAS has
been shown to have good reliability and convergent/
discriminant validity (e.g., Cox et al., 1998; Heimberg
et al., 1999). It discriminates well between clients with
social anxiety disorder and those with generalized anxiety
disorder (Heimberg & Holaway, 2007). It has also
demonstrated sensitivity to cognitive-behavioral and
pharmacological treatment of social anxiety disorder
(e.g., Blanco et al., 2010; Heimberg et al., 1998). When
the LSAS is accompanied by detailed instructions, it
appears that it also has good reliability and validity as
a self-report instrument (Fresco et al., 2001; Rytwinski
et al., 2009).

Behavioral Assessment

Behavior tests, or role plays of social situations relevant
to the client, can be a very useful addition to the selfreport
and clinician-administered measures described
here. Although these tests may be quite anxietyprovoking
for the client, the information obtained during
a behavior test is unique and important in several
ways. Individuals with social anxiety disorder are likely
to describe their social behavior as inadequate (e.g.,
Rapee & Lim, 1992; Stopa & Clark, 1993) and their
anxiety as highly visible to others (e.g., Norton & Hope,
2001). However, behavior tests often demonstrate that
these reports are largely inaccurate and are essentially
examples of distorted beliefs. Furthermore, level of
anxiety and quality of performance exhibited by a client
during behavior tests may be used to calibrate the
difficulty of exposures and increase the likelihood that
the therapist creates a first exposure that provides both
a challenge and a successful experience for the client.

During behavior tests, the clinician may ask for anxiety
ratings before, at several points during, and after the
role play. Other assessments, such as asking clients to
rate the quality of their performance or list the thoughts
they had during the role play, are easily incorporated.
Affordable ambulatory physiological assessment de


vices, such as pulse monitors, are available and add a
useful dimension. The clinician can choose to test the
limits of a client’s ability to perform when anxious by
asking him/her to remain in the situation for a certain
period of time (typically 4–5 minutes). On the other
hand, the clinician may give the client explicit permission
to stop (e.g., Ries et al., 1998) when the anxiety is
excessive, and latency to escape the situation becomes
a measure of avoidance.

Behavior tests may either be standardized or individualized.
Standardized role plays allow for the observation
of differences across patients for a particular task.
Commonly used tasks include a conversation with a
same-sex stranger, a conversation with an opposite-sex
stranger, a conversation with two or more people, and a
speech to a small audience. In contrast, the advantage
of individualized behavior tests is that they may be designed
more precisely to target idiosyncratic fears. For
example, a client with a fear of displaying a hand tremor
when eating in front of others may experience little
anxiety during a one-on-one conversation. However, if
that client is asked to engage in a one-on-one conversation
while eating a bowl of soup, his or her anxiety is
more likely to be activated.

iNDiviDual cBt for social
aNxiety DisorDer

Principles and Logistics

For our studies on individual treatment of social anxiety
disorder, we have established guidelines to which
our therapists must adhere (Hope et al., 2010b). One
issue facing manualized treatments is that it is unclear
to what extent one may take liberties with how the
treatment is carried out and still expect outcomes similar
to those obtained during efficacy studies. Therefore,
although we recognize that this treatment may be applied
more flexibly in clinical settings, we present these
guidelines to help therapists understand the treatment
as it has been most thoroughly studied.

The treatment comprises 16 weekly 1-hour sessions
within a period of 16–20 weeks. Although completing
16 sessions within 16 weeks might be ideal, up to 20
weeks are allowed to take into consideration sessions
missed due to illness, vacations, holidays, and so forth.
Taking longer than 20 weeks to complete 16 sessions
may compromise the momentum of therapy. The two
to three pretreatment sessions described earlier, as well


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

as posttreatment assessment and feedback sessions, are
not counted as part of the 16-session treatment phase.

Our individual treatment requires that the client use
a workbook (Hope et al., 2010a) as he/she works with
the therapist during each session and for homework assignments.
This workbook comprises 13 chapters, but
the treatment program does not follow a one-chapterper-
session format. Rather, treatment is divided into
five segments, described below, and the therapist has
flexibility in terms of the pace and, to some extent, the
content of these segments. We ask clients to read assigned
chapters before coming to the session.

Clients are asked to bring their workbook to every
session. Therapists typically bring their own copy of
the workbook and/or a copy of the therapist guide to
session as well. The therapist also makes sure that
there is something to write on that therapist and client
can look at together during the session. In our clinic,
a newsprint easel or a dry-erase board mounted to the
wall is typically used (for ease, we refer to the use of an
easel hereafter). However, at times, we have also just
pulled two chairs side by side, so that both therapist and
client can write on and view the same piece of paper
on a clipboard. Importantly, every session introduces
key concepts that are written down (e.g., a therapist
may draw a continuum of anxiety in Session 1; client
automatic thoughts and rational responses are always
recorded). Writing things down during session helps
clients better to track and process the information being
covered and is a required component of the treatment.

The therapeutic relationship is actively fostered
throughout treatment. As Kendall, Chu, Gifford,
Hayes, and Nauta (1998) have pointed out, some critics
assume that the therapeutic relationship is not considered
relevant when a manual is utilized (see also Kendall,
Gosch, Furr, & Sood, 2008). To the contrary, our
therapist adherence manual (Hope, Van Dyke, Heimberg,
Turk, & Fresco, 2002) includes explicit ratings
of the therapeutic relationship within each segment of
treatment. Therapists are rated on how well they engage
in active listening, respond to verbal and nonverbal
cues, facilitate the client’s investment in treatment,
and communicate support of and investment in the client.
Additionally, therapists are expected to help clients
to experience and deepen affect as appropriate to the
situation at hand. For example, a therapist would be expected
to help a client both to be open to the experience
of anxiety during exposures and to process and grieve
losses that are a consequence of many years of social
avoidance. In other situations, the therapist would be

expected to help the client use uncomfortable feelings
as cues for additional cognitive coping practice. For
example, the therapist would help a client who experiences
a deep sense of shame after making a small
social mistake (e.g., spilling a drink, calling someone
by the wrong name) to engage in cognitive restructuring
to change the meaning of the event eliciting such
emotions. Therapists are actively supervised on these
aspects of treatment, and not attending to the therapeutic
relationship or appropriately responding to what is
going on in session is considered a serious failure to
follow protocol.

Recent data suggest that the therapeutic relationship
is indeed related to successful outcomes in our protocol
(Hayes, Hope, Van Dyke, & Heimberg, 2007). Clients’
ratings of the therapeutic alliance were positively related
to their perceptions of session helpfulness. Interestingly,
the relationship between the therapeutic alliance
and anxiety reduction during in-session exposures was
curvilinear; that is, when ratings of the alliance were
higher or lower, clients showed less anxiety reduction
than when the ratings of the alliance were moderate.
The effect for low ratings of the alliance may not require
explanation, but we have conjectured that if the
client feels too comfortable with the therapist, then this
may possibly interfere with anxiety evocation during
exposures and thereby, emotional processing. Maintaining
the “right” therapeutic alliance is important in
CBT for social anxiety disorder (Hayes et al., 2007).

Therapists are also expected to engage in efficient
time management. Our therapist adherence manual
rates therapists’ ability to cover required topics flexibly,
without rushing or boring the client by belaboring various
points (Hope et al., 2002). Two types of problems
that tend to crop up with regard to time management
may in turn negatively impact the therapeutic relationship.
Some therapists fall into the trap of turning each
session into a psychoeducational lecture, and this tendency
may be aggravated if the therapist is working
with a client who is very quiet in the early sessions.
The primary recommendation in this situation is to ask
open-ended questions that prompt the client to relate
his/her personal experiences to the material. The client’s
verbalizations in response to these questions are
then reinforced through the use of active listening
skills, which elicit more client verbalizations. The other
trap into which some therapists fall is allowing the client
to dominate the session with long, detailed stories
about experiences with social anxiety. In some cases,
the therapist may have inadvertently taught the client to


Social Anxiety Disorder

lead the session in this way, by indiscriminately using
active listening skills and nonverbal cues, even when
the client is discussing tangential or repetitive material.
In other cases, clients may be accustomed to dominating
sessions through prior experiences with traditional
talk therapy, or they may even intentionally attempt to
dominate the session to avoid difficult material, particularly
in-session exposures. In this situation, gentle
verbal redirection is required. In some cases, a straightforward
discussion of time management issues and negotiation
of session time may be beneficial.

Last, we want to emphasize our belief that manualized
treatments such as this one do not represent an
inflexible set of procedures applied indiscriminately
to all clients. Rather, we expect therapists to develop
an individualized conceptualization of each client’s
particular presenting problem, which is continually refined
over the course of treatment and incorporates the
unique characteristics of the client (e.g., cultural group,
sex, educational background). Treatment procedures
are then tailored to address the unique aspects of each
case.

Segment 1: Psychoeducation

Segment 1 covers the material in Chapters 1–4 of the
client workbook (Hope et al., 2010a). Establishing
a good working relationship is a critical goal for this
segment of therapy. If the therapist was not also the
initial interviewer, three to four sessions are typically
needed for the psychoeducation segment to allow adequate
attention to building rapport. If a good working
alliance has been established during the course of the
initial assessment and if the client is especially bright
and motivated, it may be possible to cover two chapters
per session, finishing this portion of treatment in
as little as 2 weeks. Therapists should not assign more
than two chapters per week at any point in therapy because
clients are unlikely to process the material fully
and make the most of the associated exercises and selfmonitoring
homework.

One or two chapters are assigned as homework at the
end of each session. Each chapter includes a variety of
forms that the client attempts to complete as well. At
the beginning of the next session, the therapist asks the
client for reactions to and questions about the readings,
and therapist and client review corresponding forms
completed by the client. If the client has not made an
attempt to complete a form, it is completed at the beginning
of the session during homework review.

Therapists are required to review certain topics from
each chapter in the client workbook in session; other
topics are optional depending on the needs of the individual
client. For Chapter 1, the therapist must review
two topics: (1) normal versus problematic social anxiety,
and (2) the investment that treatment will require.
The discussion of normal and problematic social anxiety
conveys to the client that social anxiety exists along
a continuum, with some people rarely experiencing any
social anxiety, other people frequently experiencing
intense social anxiety, and most people falling somewhere
between these extremes. People who fall in the
middle of the continuum experience social anxiety in
some situations, such as a first date or a job interview,
but the anxiety is typically manageable and decreases as
the person remains in the situation. Factors such as intensity
and duration of anxiety before and during social
situations, the number of situations eliciting anxiety,
and the degree of life impairment differentiate between
normal social anxiety and problematic social anxiety
for which a diagnosis may be assigned. By asking what
types of situations elicit social anxiety for many people
and what purpose social anxiety might serve, the
therapist can engage the client in illustrating the notion
that social anxiety has an adaptive value (e.g., caring
about what other people think might cause anxiety, but
it also helps people to treat each other more kindly). A
therapist typically uses this opportunity to discuss what
the client should expect in terms of treatment outcome.
First, the therapist points out that social anxiety is part
of the human condition; thus, it is impossible to remove
it completely, even if this were a desirable goal. Total
freedom from social anxiety is not a reasonable expectation
for treatment. However, it is reasonable to expect
to move down the continuum from problematic levels
of social anxiety to a level of social anxiety that is more
typical of most people. Not all clients are willing to accept
that social anxiety exists on a continuum or that it
can have an adaptive value this early in treatment. This
first session is merely an introduction to these concepts,
and arguing with a client about these issues is likely to
be unproductive. Rather, the therapist empathizes with
the client’s current worldview (e.g., “You feel you are
either calm or extremely anxious, and that no middle
ground is possible for you”) but does not agree with it.

The discussion of the required investment in treatment
involves instilling hope in the client that he/she
will be able to make significant changes and conveying
the time, effort, and emotional energy that treatment activities
require. Research has shown that positive expec



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

tancies are associated with more favorable outcomes in
CBT for social anxiety (Chambless et al., 1997; Safren,
Heimberg, & Juster, 1997). The therapist shares with
the client that in studies of individuals who completed
CBT, approximately 75–80% were rated by independent
clinical interviewers as having experienced meaningful
reductions in their social anxiety (e.g., Heimberg
et al., 1998). The therapist also emphasizes that attending
sessions regularly, doing homework, being willing
to experience anxiety during exposures, and being open
to new ways of looking at the world, other people, and
oneself are factors that substantially influence whether
someone becomes a treatment responder, and that these
factors are largely under the client’s control. During
this time, clients are encouraged to speak about their
fears regarding treatment and their goals for a better
life after treatment. Included is a motivational exercise
in which the client is asked to generate pros and cons
for working on his/her social anxiety and a similar list
for not doing so as a means to increase commitment to
the treatment process.

Next, the therapist reviews with the client the three
components of anxiety presented in Chapter 2 of the
client workbook (Hope et al., 2010a). Each of the three
components of anxiety is described: (1) The physiological
component comprises bodily reactions, such as a
pounding heart; (2) the cognitive component comprises
what a person thinks, such as “I look foolish”; and (3)
the behavioral component comprises what a person
does when he/she is anxious, such as avoiding eye contact.
When presenting the behavioral component, the
therapist emphasizes how escape and avoidance behaviors
may reduce anxiety in the short term but lead to
missed opportunities, a less satisfying life, and other
negative feelings, such as guilt and shame, in the long
term.

The therapist then helps the client to practice identifying
each of these components with a hypothetical
example. Over the years, we have found that initially
using a hypothetical example is much more conducive
to learning than starting with an example from the client’s
own experience. Issues such as fear of negative
evaluation, defensiveness, anxiety, and lack of objectivity
can result in a client having difficulty identifying
the three components from a personal experience this
early in treatment (e.g., “I wasn’t thinking anything”).
The default option for the therapist is simply to review
the hypothetical examples from the workbook that illustrate
the three components, but we generally recommend
using a different hypothetical example in session

to give the client more practice. Alternatively, we use
the example from the group treatment version (Heimberg
& Becker, 2002), in which the client is asked to
imagine a person waiting in the lobby to interview for
a job that is extremely attractive in terms of responsibilities,
pay, and hours. The client is told that the person
is feeling anxious about the interview and then is
asked what that person might be experiencing as he/she
anxiously waits to be called in to the office. Using the
easel, the therapist writes the client’s responses under
the appropriate heading (e.g., “feeling nauseous” is
written under “Physiological Component”). After classifying
the client’s spontaneous responses, the therapist
then asks questions to elicit several examples of each
of the three components (e.g., “Might the person have
any thoughts relating to her sweaty palms? What might
she say to herself about that?”). The therapist makes
an effort to draw out how each of the three components
interacts with the others, resulting in an escalating
spiral of anxiety (e.g., sweaty palms might lead to
the thought “The interviewer will think I am anxious,”
which might lead to a behavior of wiping sweaty hands
on one’s suit). The therapist concludes that treatment
involves learning ways to disrupt this spiral of anxiety.
Assuming that the client does reasonably well with this
exercise, the therapist then helps the client to repeat the
exercise with a recent, personal experience of social
anxiety. At this point in therapy, the therapist makes no
effort to help the client to challenge anxiety-provoking
cognitions, only to identify the three components of
anxiety and to understand how they interact with each
other. In addition to readings from the workbook, the
client is given the homework assignment of identifying
all three components of anxiety experienced in a social
situation during the week.

Referring to the material covered in Chapter 3 of
the client workbook, the therapist teaches the client
how to use the Subjective Units of Discomfort Scale
(SUDS; Wolpe & Lazarus, 1966) and construct a fear
and avoidance hierarchy. The assignment from the previous
week is repeated here and again over the next few
sessions to solidify learning in this important domain,
and weekly assessment of progress using the SASCI is
initiated.

Next, the therapist describes for the client factors
that are thought to be related to the development
of problematic social anxiety, which are presented in
Chapter 4 of the workbook. The therapist tells the client
that research suggests that genetics plays a role in the
etiology of social anxiety disorder. The therapist em



Social Anxiety Disorder

phasizes that what is inherited is probably a tendency
to be a sensitive and emotionally reactive individual
rather than a gene that inevitably results in social anxiety
(Barlow, 2002). This inherited sensitivity might not
be at all problematic, and it may even be a good thing.
For example, the person might be especially empathic
toward others and have a greater capacity to experience
joy, as well as anxiety. However, if a biologically sensitive
individual is exposed to important social experiences
during development and learns that others are
threatening and hurtful, then the biological vulnerability
may contribute to the development of problematic
social anxiety. The therapist might inquire whether
other family members seem to have problems with
social anxiety or other types of anxiety, suggesting a
genetic predisposition. The therapist then presents experiences
within the family as another potential factor
contributing to social anxiety. For example, a socially
anxious mother might teach a child that the opinions
of others are extremely important and that negative
evaluation is to be avoided at all cost. Alternatively, a
verbally abusive father might provide experiences that
teach the child that other people are dangerous, and that
avoidance is a good strategy for self-protection. Again,
the therapist asks the client whether this information
fits with his/her personal experiences. Last, the therapist
describes how experiences outside of the family
can similarly teach a person that others are a source of
threat. For example, teasing by peers seems to be related
to later social anxiety (Roth, Coles, & Heimberg,
2002). This discussion is facilitated by a homework assignment
completed in advance of the session, in which
the client answers a series of questions relevant to his/
her own personal experiences of social anxiety and
how they map onto these three major sources of input,
and completes a pie chart indicating his/her belief in
the relative importance of each. Throughout the discussion,
the therapist emphasizes the idea that because
social anxiety is largely learned through experience, it
can be changed through experience.

This discussion of the etiology of social anxiety
leads into a discussion of dysfunctional thoughts.
Therapists might ask clients what lessons they learned
about themselves and other people through a negative
early-life social experience, such as being teased (e.g.,
“I learned that I don’t fit in”). In this way, therapists
educate clients about the origins of many of their automatic
thoughts, which is important given that many
clients view their tendency to have negative cognitions
as a sign of inherent personal flaws rather than a logical

consequence of their experiences. They then ask clients
to think about how these dysfunctional ways of thinking
color the kinds of thoughts and reactions they now
have when confronting social situations (e.g., thoughts
of not fitting in at parties, expecting to be made fun
of by coworkers). At this point in therapy, clients are
asked simply to consider the possibility that changing
some of these automatic thinking biases might change
the experience of anxiety. Therapists then set forth the
rationale for primary interventions of cognitive restructuring,
exposures, and homework.

Segment 2: Training
in Cognitive Restructuring

Training in cognitive restructuring typically requires
two to three sessions. The material is presented in
Chapters 5 and 6 of the client workbook (Hope et al.,
2010a). After three sessions, a small minority of clients
may still be struggling to master the cognitive concepts
due to factors such as low educational attainment and/
or poor abstract thinking skills. Our experience suggests
that rather than forcing the issue with such clients,
it is better simply to move on to the next segment
of treatment after three sessions. In this circumstance,
Heimberg and Becker (2002) recommend that, for the
remainder of therapy, the cognitive portion of treatment
be deemphasized in favor of relying more heavily on
repeated exposure. Additionally, such clients may be
able to generate realistic self-statements (e.g., “I have
done this before”) or self-instructions (e.g., “Start by
introducing myself”) informally, with help from the
therapist, for use in anxiety-provoking situations rather
than relying on more formal cognitive restructuring.

As in the previous segment, each session begins
with a homework review and ends with homework assignment.
Homework assignments include readings
from the client workbook, associated forms, and selfmonitoring
exercises. Some clients begin to attempt in
vivo exposures spontaneously at this point in treatment,
without being specifically assigned to do so. If these exposures
go well, then they may be beneficial to the client.
However, therapists should not actively encourage
exposures as homework until completion of training in
cognitive restructuring and one in-session exposure. At
this point in treatment, clients still have few adaptive
strategies for managing anxiety or coping with social
situations that have disappointing outcomes. They are
also likely to escape a situation at the first sign of trouble.
Therefore, the possibility of a less than positive ex



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

posure experience at this phase of treatment could lead
to resistance to attempting future exposures.

In this segment of treatment, clients are explicitly introduced
to the basic tenet of the cognitive-behavioral
model, which proposes that emotional reactions occur
as a result of interpretations of situations, not situations
themselves. “Automatic thoughts” are defined as negative,
distorted, or irrational thoughts about oneself, the
world, or the future that lead to or increase the experience
of problematic anxiety. These concepts are first
demonstrated with a hypothetical example rather than
an emotionally charged example from the client’s own
life. The client workbook describes the very different
thoughts of two young men after meeting a woman.
Negative thoughts lead one man to give up any attempts
to get to know the woman better and to experience several
more unpleasant thoughts and emotions. The more
neutral and realistic thoughts of the other man facilitate
his continued efforts at making conversation. Additional
examples are provided for therapist and client to
examine whether the client appears to need further instruction
on the concept of automatic thoughts. Clients
are then asked to examine their own thoughts, first related
to a hypothetical social situation, then as recorded
on previously completed homework forms.

“Thinking errors” are defined as common categories
into which automatic thoughts may fall. Clients
often find that they are particularly prone to engage
in certain types of distorted thinking (e.g., mind reading,
fortune-telling, disqualifying the positive), and
identifying these habitual thinking errors can assist in
challenging automatic thoughts (e.g., “There I go, mind
reading again. I have no reason to assume that they are
thinking the worst”). Clients are introduced to an adaptation
of the list of thinking errors outlined by Judith
Beck (1995) in the first edition of her book Cognitive
Therapy: Basics and Beyond. Ideally, the client has reviewed
this list in the course of doing the readings for
homework, and therapist and client can briefly discuss
which thinking errors the client personally found most
relevant. If the client has not done the homework, each
thinking error is briefly reviewed by therapist and client
in session. The therapist and client can practice identifying
both the thinking errors in workbook examples
and the client’s automatic thoughts recorded as part of
previous homework assignments, and further examine
automatic thoughts the client might have about upcoming
situations. For homework, clients monitor their automatic
thoughts, their belief in the automatic thoughts
(on a 0- to 100-point scale), the thinking errors they

contain, and the emotions they cause in one or two naturally
occurring situations during the week.

The next steps in cognitive restructuring are to challenge
the automatic thoughts and develop rational responses
to them. The process of challenging automatic
thoughts is begun with the assistance of disputing questions,
originally adapted from the work of Sank and
Shaffer (1984). These generic questions can be brought
to bear on automatic thoughts (e.g., “Do I know for certain
that ?”; “What evidence do I have
that ?; What evidence do I have that the
opposite is true?”; “What is the worst that could happen?
How bad is that? How can I cope with that?”; “What
does mean? Does really
mean that I am a(n) ?”). Before having
the client apply these questions to his/her own thoughts,
however, the therapist and client review a hypothetical
example from the client workbook. Thereafter,
the therapist addresses the client’s automatic thoughts
examined in the earlier discussion of thinking errors.
Together client and therapist question the automatic
thoughts using the disputing questions to arrive at alternative,
more realistic ways of viewing the situation.
It is typically the case that the answers to disputing
questions themselves include automatic thoughts, and
these must be further disputed. This process, which we
have labeled the Anxious Self/Coping Self Dialogue,
ultimately helps the client arrive at answers to the original
disputing questions that are more believable and
acceptable to him/her. The output of this dialogue is
then summarized into one or two statements that serve
as rational responses. A rational response provides a
realistic and balanced view of the situation that is typically
more positive than that provided by the automatic
thoughts. For the next homework assignment, the clients
record their automatic thoughts from an anxietyprovoking
situation during the week, rate their belief
in the automatic thoughts, identify the thinking errors
they contain, dispute the automatic thoughts, develop a
rational response, and rate their belief in that rational
response. As can be seen, these homework assignments
build on previous ones, becoming increasingly complex
but increasingly empowering.

Toward the end of the final session in this segment,
the therapist informs the client that exposures will
begin the following week. To the extent that beginning
exposures cause the client to feel anxious, the client
is encouraged to “avoid avoidance” by coming to the
next session and to identify automatic thoughts related
to the exposure, challenge them, and arrive at a ratio



Social Anxiety Disorder

nal response. The therapist reassures the client that a
challenging, but not overwhelming, situation will be
used for the first exposure. More experienced therapists
often discuss a few possibilities for the first exposure
during this session. Therapists new to this treatment
approach often discuss details of the exposure with the
client the following week, after the therapist has had
supervision.

Segment 3: Exposures

Exposures should begin as early as Session 5 but no
later than Session 8, depending on the rate at which the
earlier material was covered. Chapter 7 from the client
workbook reviews the rationale for exposures and
introduces the concept of setting achievable behavioral
goals. The content of Chapter 7 is briefly touched upon;
many of these concepts have been covered earlier (e.g.,
why exposures are important), and the new material
is demonstrated during the exposure itself. Similarly,
therapists rarely devote an entire session to discussing
Chapter 8 (Ongoing Exposures) or the specific
topic chapters (Chapter 9, Interaction Fears; Chapter
10, Observational Fears; Chapter 11, Public Speaking
Fears) assigned during this segment. Rather, the content
is only briefly addressed during the homework review
and an in-session exposure is conducted. During
this phase of treatment, therapists strive to complete an
exposure almost every session. To follow protocol in
our research studies, a minimum of four in-session exposures
must be completed. More commonly, at least
six in-session exposures are completed, and the more
the better. Therefore, although the protocol allows the
therapist the freedom to a use a couple of sessions during
this segment to do cognitive restructuring alone or
to review a topic chapter in detail, our belief is that the
time is best devoted to repeated in-session exposures
integrating cognitive restructuring.

All exposure sessions follow the same basic format
(see Table 3.1). The session begins with a homework
review and ends with a homework assignment. The
homework assignment typically comprises in vivo exposure
tasks and associated cognitive restructuring that
logically build upon the in-session exposure. The first
in-session exposure typically includes a role play with
the therapist of a situation that the client assigned a
SUDS rating of at least 50. The rule of thumb is that clients
should perceive exposures as challenging but not
overwhelming or beyond their ability to use cognitive
coping skills. Therapists make exposures as realistic

table 3.1. outline of exposure sessions

1. Review homework from previous week.
2. Complete in-session exposure.
a. Exposure preprocessing
••
Briefly negotiate details of exposure
••
Elicit automatic thoughts
••
Client rates belief in automatic thoughts
••
Client labels thinking errors in automatic thoughts
••
Client disputes one or two automatic thoughts
••
Client develops rational response(s) and rates belief
in rational response(s)
••
Client sets nonperfectionistic, behavioral goals

b. Conduct role play for approximately 10 minutes
••
Request SUDS and the rational response every
minute
••
Client uses disputing questions and rational
responses as automatic thoughts occur
••
Track client’s progress on behavioral goals

c. Exposure post-processing
••
Review whether goals were attained
••
Review occurrence of automatic thoughts
••
Review use of rational response(s)
••
Discuss any unexpected or new automatic thoughts
••
Client, therapist, and role players react to client’s
performance
••
Graph and interpret SUDS ratings pattern
••
Examine evidence in relation to automatic thoughts

and rational response(s)
••
Client re-rates belief in automatic thoughts and
rational response(s)
••
Client summarizes what was learned from the
exposure experience

3. Assignment of homework
a. Related in vivo exposures with associated cognitive
restructuring
b. Other assignments as appropriate
as possible by rearranging furniture, using props, and
instructing role-play partners (i.e., therapist assistants
brought into session to assist with exposures) to behave
in particular ways. A bit of effort in making the situation
more realistic may mean the difference between
an exposure that elicits significant anxiety and one that
is too artificial to be relevant. Commonly used props
include food or drink for individuals with fears of eating,
drinking, or serving food in front of others, and
client-prepared notes for presentations. Careful attention
should be paid to aspects that make the situation
more or less anxiety-provoking. For example, a client
who fears eating in front of others may be more anxious


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

when eating something that is easy to spill (e.g., soup)
than when eating finger foods.

The essence of the treatment is the coordination
between the cognitive restructuring work and the exposure
(see Table 3.1). The therapist begins the exposure
preprocessing by briefly describing an exposure
situation. The client may suggest modifications or alternatives.
However, the therapist needs to balance approaching
the exposure task collaboratively with being
highly vigilant for overly detailed discussions that
largely serve to avoid getting started with the exposure.
The therapist then elicits the client’s automatic thoughts
regarding the chosen situation and records the thoughts
on the easel. The therapist picks one or two automatic
thoughts to dispute rather than attempting to help the
client to dispute all automatic thoughts. The client rates
his/her belief in the automatic thought and identifies
the thinking errors it contains. To the extent possible,
the client takes the lead in challenging the thoughts
with disputing questions and developing a rational response.
The therapist only assists as needed. The rational
response is written on a fresh sheet of paper, so that
the client may refer to it during the exposure, without
being distracted by automatic thoughts listed on the
same page.

Next, behavioral goals for the exposure are set.
Without guidance, clients with social anxiety disorder
tend to set unrealistic, perfectionistic goals (e.g., “I
won’t get anxious” or “I will never stumble over my
words”), or goals that are based on the reactions of
other people and not under their control (e.g., to make
a good impression). The therapist helps the client to develop
two or three measureable and observable goals
for the situation (e.g., asking at least three questions to
get to know the person better, stating an opinion, talking
about three different points during a speech). These
goals are recorded below the rational response, so that
the client can refer to them during the exposure.

During the exposure, the therapists requests SUDS
ratings at 1-minute intervals and whenever anxiety appears
to increase or decrease. At each SUDS prompt,
the client also reads his/her rational response aloud.
Clients quickly adjust to this disruption, particularly if
the role player(s) help to reorient them with a verbal
cue (e.g., “You were talking about .. . ”). The exposure
should continue until anxiety has begun to decrease or
plateau and the goals have been met, typically around
10 minutes. The therapist should be the one to end the
exposure to help the client overcome any tendencies to
escape the situation when it becomes difficult.

The postprocessing phase of the exposure includes a
review of goal attainment, with the therapist noting the
occurrence of automatic thoughts that were the focus
of cognitive restructuring before the exposure, a discussion
of the usefulness of the rational response, and
identification of any unexpected automatic thoughts
that should be addressed in the future. Rather than asking
the client about how the role play went from his/
her perspective, the therapist asks the whether the client’s
agreed-upon goals were accomplished, providing
no opening for the client to revert to a discussion about
failure to attain other goals, such as not becoming anxious.
The therapist also shares his/her opinion on goal
attainment, responding to concerns raised by the client
and not allowing the client to disqualify the positive. In
later exposures, outside role players may also be asked
to share their reactions and answer any questions the
client has about how the exposure went. Feedback from
the therapist and role players should emphasize information
that counters the client’s negative beliefs. For
example, the client might believe that he blushes bright
red, is boring, appears inadequate to others, and cannot
carry on a 10-minute conversation. Perhaps, objectively,
the client did blush at the beginning of the exposure,
only responded to questions from the role player, and
reported very high SUDS for the whole 10 minutes (90
or higher). However, the client met his goals of sharing
something about himself and staying in the exposure
until the therapist said to stop. In this situation, the
therapist would point out how the client met his goals
and how many of the client’s feared consequences (e.g.,
being too anxious to carry on a conversation) did not
occur. Additionally, only in rare cases do clients look
as anxious as they think they do, so it is often quite appropriate
to acknowledge that the client showed some
symptoms of anxiety, but that the anxiety was not as
noticeable as the client’s SUDS ratings might suggest,
the anxiety did not detract from enjoyment of the conversation,
and so forth. Therapists who deny seeing
any anxiety in a client who was obviously anxious risk
damaging their credibility. Especially early in treatment,
therapists should think seriously before providing
a laundry list of client behaviors that detracted from
the quality of the conversation (e.g., the client only responded
to questions and did not ask any, the client
could have engaged in more eye contact). Many clients
discount the positive aspects of the exposure and focus
only on the negative feedback. Therefore, it is better
to set this information aside temporarily and to make
sure that these behaviors are included as goals for the


Social Anxiety Disorder

next role play, particularly if the client does not spontaneously
suggest one of these problematic behaviors
as a goal. For clients who are self-critical during the
post-processing for an objectively poor behavior such
as never asking any questions, the most common strategy
is to share with the client the conceptualization
of the problematic behavior as an avoidance response
to significant anxiety (rather than as evidence of poor
social skills or some other inadequacy within the client).
Working from this conceptualization, the therapist
may then inquire about automatic thoughts leading
to the problematic behavior. The client’s responses are
often quite illuminating (e.g., “I might inadvertently
ask a question about a sensitive subject that will offend
the other person”). The therapist would then plan with
the client to work on these automatic thoughts and approach
the feared social behavior by including it as a
goal in a future exposure.

Next, the pattern of SUDS ratings is quickly graphed
for the client. Different SUDS patterns may be used to
make different points. The most common pattern is for
the initial SUDS ratings to be rather high, then to decline
over time. In these cases, the therapist can point
out that it seems like getting started is the hardest part,
and that if the client hangs in there, things seem to get
easier. If this pattern holds across future exposures, it
can lead to a new rational response (e.g., “It gets easier”;
“The hardest part is getting started”). For clients
with high SUDS ratings throughout the entire exposure
who still meet their goals, the therapist can point out
that a person may simultaneously be quite anxious and
still do what he/she needs to do in a given social situation
(e.g., “I can be anxious and still share my opinion”
might be a future rational response). The therapist also
inquires about any automatic thoughts that may have
interfered with habituation, so that these might be addressed
prior to the next exposure. Another common
pattern is decreasing or steady SUDS ratings that spike
to a high level when the client perceives a difficulty
arising during the exposure. Sometimes the therapist
is able to observe what led to the spike in anxiety (e.g.,
a pause in the conversation). At other times, it may not
be as obvious, and the client needs to explain what happened
(e.g., there was no pause, but the client had an automatic
thought that the discussion of the current topic
had reached its limits and feared that he/she would be
unable to continue the conversation). Such discussions
may lead to new goals (e.g., “Allow yourself to pause
twice during the conversation, so you learn that you can
recover from pauses and not to fear them”) and targets

for cognitive restructuring (i.e., the belief that pauses
reflect social incompetence might be challenged and
lead to a rational response, such as “Pauses are a normal
part of conversations” or “I am only 50% responsible
for ending a pause”). Clients are then asked to
rerate their degree of belief in their automatic thoughts
and rational responses, based specifically on their experience
of the in-session exposure. Finally, the client
is asked what he/she has learned from the exposure that
can be applied to life outside of the clinic.

Homework assignments are a very important part of
treatment in this segment because the client is asked to
enter situations similar to those that have been targeted
during in-session exposures. To assist them in engaging
in cognitive restructuring prior to the actual conduct
of the homework exposure, clients are provided copies
of the Be Your Own Cognitive Therapist (BYOCT)
worksheet, which is also discussed in session and exemplified
in the client workbook. This form leads clients
through each of the steps of cognitive restructuring
described earlier and is often used for in-session exposures,
as well as those assigned for homework. After
the homework exposure is completed, the second portion
of the BYOCT assists clients in completing a cognitive
debriefing and consolidating the learning that has
occurred during and after the homework experience.

Segment 4: Advanced Cognitive Restructuring

After three or four exposure sessions, the therapist and
client should begin to notice common themes in the
client’s automatic thoughts. This is an indication that
it will soon be time to move on to advanced cognitive
restructuring (Chapter 12 of the client workbook). This
segment assists the client in moving beyond situationspecific
automatic thoughts by applying the downward
arrow technique (see J. S. Beck, 1995) to thoughts that
have frequently recurred over the course of treatment.
To accomplish this task efficiently, client and therapist
review all previous written homework assignments
that involved the recording of automatic thoughts, as
well as the thoughts recorded in advance of in-session
exposures and work through the Peeling Your Onion
worksheet from the client workbook, which provides a
systematic approach to questioning automatic thoughts
and further probing the responses to these questions,
until the client’s core belief(s) have been identified.

The beginning of advanced cognitive restructuring
does not signal the end to exposures. Rather, the therapist
and client create in-session and in vivo exposures


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

to challenge core beliefs. For instance, if a client has a
core belief along the lines of “I need to be perfect to
be accepted by others,” the client might be engaged in
exposures that involve making mistakes or social missteps
(e.g., spilling a drink, turning in a report with an
error) and noticing whether others continue to be accepting.
Core beliefs may be challenged in other ways
as well. For instance, in addition to exposures, the client
may be asked to notice instances in which others’
mistakes actually make them easy to identify with or
more endearing. One session is typically devoted completely
to helping the client utilize the downward arrow
technique and challenge core beliefs. Additional sessions
not only continue to explore core beliefs but also
include an in-session exposure.

Segment 5: Termination

As treatment approaches Session 16, the issue of termination
and/or reevaluation of the treatment contract
will have been raised informally by the therapist several
times. After Session 15, Chapter 13 in the client
workbook is assigned. Session 16 formally focuses on
assessment of progress, relapse prevention, and the
issue of termination. The therapist and client go over a
worksheet in which the client reports things that he/she
has learned during treatment (e.g., how to identify and
challenge automatic thoughts, the importance of avoiding
avoidance). The therapist asks the client to provide
current ratings for all items from the fear and avoidance
hierarchy developed earlier in treatment; a discussion
follows regarding progress that has been made and
where further work is needed. When the therapist and
client mutually agree that termination is in order, risk
factors for relapse are discussed (e.g., social pressure
from others, new situations that arise as improvement
continues). Plans to deal with signs of relapse are also
made (e.g., the client can review chapters in the client
workbook or call the therapist). Mixed emotions (e.g.,
pride, sadness over the termination of the therapeutic
relationship) associated with termination are also processed.


In our clinic, the same measures administered at pretreatment
are repeated after Session 16. The client is
given feedback on these assessments, with data presented
in the context of the initial pretreatment assessment
results. At the end of 16 sessions, many clients still experience
problematic social anxiety in a few domains.
As we stated in the first session, elimination of social
anxiety is not the criterion for termination. Instead, if

the client has stopped avoiding key social situations,
has experienced a meaningful reduction of anxiety in
a few areas, and believes that he/she can use the skills
gained in therapy to continue to work independently,
then the client is ready to stop treatment. Most individuals
who respond to treatment in this way are likely to
continue to make progress after termination. Follow-up
appointments are recommended to monitor the client’s
clinical status (e.g., 1- and 6-months posttreatment).

For some individuals, treatment gains will be evident,
but the anxiety and avoidance continue to be too
severe and pervasive for the client to continue on alone.
This phenomenon is most common among clients with
severe social anxiety at treatment onset, typically, clients
with APD or those who fear many social situations.
Clients with significant comorbidities may also
take longer to make sufficient treatment gains. In such
cases, continued treatment is recommended. The new
treatment contract, as with the original one, should be
for 16 sessions or less, at which point another assessment
should occur. The treatment plan typically consists
of more cognitive restructuring and exposures, although
new domains are often introduced (e.g., moving
from working on friendships to dating relationships).

case stuDy

To illustrate better how individual CBT for social
anxiety disorder is implemented, a case example is
presented. First, background and pretreatment assessment
data are given, followed by a description of the
client’s progress through 16 weeks of treatment and her
status 1-year and 5-years posttreatment. Note that treatment
was conducted in accordance with the first edition
of the client workbook (Hope, Heimberg, Juster, &
Turk, 2000) and therapist guide (Hope, Heimberg, &
Turk, 2006), resulting in some differences in procedure
from the updated version of the protocol presented earlier.
We made this decision so that we could present a
case example including an examination of longer-term
follow-up information.

Josie, age 22, presented to treatment with significant
anxiety concerning both social interaction and performance
situations. She was a full-time student studying
music at a local college and living with a roommate.
She was not employed despite significant financial
need. Josie described herself as shy and having trouble
connecting with others. She socialized with her roommate
and her boyfriend, but she often turned down op



Social Anxiety Disorder

portunities to socialize with their friends because of
anxiety. Josie reported that she had no close friends
of her own and that her anxiety kept her from forming
close friendships, especially with women her age.
Josie’s social anxiety had also resulted in occupational
and academic impairment. For example, although Josie
had gone on numerous job interviews and had even
been offered positions, she was currently unemployed
because she had difficulty accepting job offers due to
her fears that she would get fired. She reported great
anxiety in her classes and did not participate unless directly
asked a question, even if participation was a significant
part of her grade. She often declined to enroll
in classes that interested her because of participation
requirements. In addition, Josie was required to do recitals
and in-class critiques of her music compositions
several times a semester. Although she never avoided
any of these events, she worried about them for weeks
in advance and suffered through them with great anxiety.
Josie feared that her social anxiety would cause
her even greater difficulty after graduation, when she
would need to go on job interviews and auditions.

Pretreatment Assessment

Josie came to the clinic seeking help for social anxiety,
but she also had difficulties with general worry and
tension, depression, and panic attacks. She was administered
the ADIS-IV-L and a series of self-report measures.
Based on this information, Josie was assigned a
diagnosis of social anxiety disorder, with an ADIS-IV-
L CSR of 5, which indicates moderate to severe symptoms.
She received additional diagnoses of generalized

anxiety disorder, recurrent major depressive disorder of
moderate severity, posttraumatic stress disorder related
to a recent automobile accident, and panic disorder
with agoraphobia.

With regard to measures of social anxiety, Josie’s
scores indicated significant fear in both social interaction
and performance/observation situations (see Table
3.2). Heimberg and colleagues (1992) suggested cutoff
scores of 34 for the full 20-item version of the SIAS
(interaction fears) and 24 for the SPS (performance/
observation fears) to differentiate between individuals
with and without social anxiety disorder. Josie’s scores
on both measures exceeded these cutoffs. Similarly, on
the LSAS, Josie reported fear and avoidance of both
social interaction and performance situations, and her
total score was well above the empirically derived cutoff
score for the presence of social anxiety disorder
(Mennin et al., 2002).

Ideally, treatment should result in symptom reduction
and improved functionality, as well as promote the
client’s overall sense of well-being and life satisfaction.
Safren, Heimberg, Brown, and Holle (1997) reported
a mean score of 0.8 on the Quality of Life Inventory
for clients with social anxiety disorder, which is significantly
lower than the mean score of the nonclinical
adult sample reported by Frisch (1994; M = 2.6, SD =
1.3). Josie’s score indicated that her degree of life satisfaction
was very low but similar to that of others with
social anxiety disorder.

The disruption in functioning caused by social anxiety
and the associated poor quality of life frequently
results in dysphoria. Josie’s score on the BDI-II indicated
a level of depression more severe than is typically

table 3.2. self-report and Clinician-administered assessments
at Pretreatment and 1-year and 5-year follow-Ups

Measure Pretreatment 1-year follow-up 5-year follow-up
Self-report
Brief Fear of Negative Evaluation Scale 49 23 29
Social Interaction Anxiety Scale 48 22 23
Social Phobia Scale 38 12 24
Beck Depression Inventory–II 25 8 8
Quality of Life Inventory –0.9 1.1 –0.6
Clinician-rated
ADIS-IV-L Clinician Severity Rating 5 3 3
Liebowitz Social Anxiety Scale—Total 48 37 31

Note. ADIS-IV-L, Anxiety Disorders Interview Schedule for DSM-IV—Lifetime Version.


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

seen among individuals in our treatment program (Elting,
Hope, & Heimberg, 1997). Josie did not endorse
having any thoughts of suicide. Based on clinical interview,
we determined that Josie’s current low mood was
related to recurrent major depression. This most recent
depressive episode had begun approximately 6 months
prior to her assessment and was associated with negative
social experiences while studying abroad. Josie
reported that her depressed mood was slightly less distressing
and impairing than her social anxiety. Thus,
the depression was judged to be secondary to her social
anxiety and unlikely to have an adverse impact on her
treatment. Similarly, we determined that her other diagnoses,
although clinically significant, did not rise to
a level of concern that might interfere with or derail the
treatment of her social anxiety disorder.

Treatment

Psychoeducational Segment

sessions 1–2

The first four sessions were devoted to laying the
groundwork for treatment, establishing rapport, educating
Josie about the cognitive-behavioral model of social
anxiety disorder, and outlining her goals for treatment.

In the first two meetings, Josie was very soft-spoken,
made little eye contact, and expressed feelings of hopelessness
about her ability to get better. She asked many
questions about how other clients had fared with the
treatment program, and the therapist stressed that outcome
is often dependent on the client’s ability to put
in consistent effort throughout treatment. The therapist
used some of Josie’s own experiences to parallel the
challenges and rewards she might face in treatment,
such as asking Josie how long she had been playing
piano and whether she had noticed any changes over
that time. Josie reported that when she started, the process
was very effortful, challenging, and even disheartening,
but that with ongoing practice and education, she
had reached a point where it was enjoyable and easy
for her. With this, Josie appeared to be very encouraged
about her prognosis, reporting that she was eager
to begin treatment and motivated to work very hard.
The majority of the first session was spent establishing
rapport and introducing psychoeducational material
about social anxiety and the components of treatment.
To encourage Josie to speak about her own experiences
with social anxiety, the therapist employed open-ended
questions, asked if the examples sounded familiar to

Josie, and requested that she describe some situations
in which her anxiety was better or worse than others.
For example, although Josie felt she had a significant
amount of anxiety when performing in front of an audience,
she felt that this anxiety was typical for most
people in that situation. However, her anxiety while
interacting with others at receptions before and after
performances was severe, and she often avoided these
situations by arriving at recitals at the last minute and
leaving as soon as she finished. By participating in the
session this way, Josie demonstrated an understanding
of the important concept that social anxiety exists on a
continuum.

session 3

In the third session, the development of Josie’s social
anxiety and how it was maintained over the years was
explored. After asking her mother, Josie learned that
she was very shy even as a young child, and that her
mother often had to push her to participate in social
activities with other children. Josie also reported that
her mother tended to keep to herself and limit interactions
with others, which Josie may have modeled from
a young age. In addition, Josie reported struggling with
feelings of falling short from a young age. For example,
she reported that she never qualified for elite youth soccer
teams, although she was a skilled athlete, and never
received more than third place or honorable mention in
recitals and competitions. The therapist discussed with
Josie how such experiences may have shaped her beliefs
that she was not good enough and also highlighted
how Josie’s tendency to view the negative aspects of
situations (e.g., not getting first place) often led her to
disqualify other successes (e.g., being among the top
five performers in a large competition).

sessions 4–5

In the early part of the fourth session, the therapist and
Josie completed a discussion from Session 3 on the
role that perfectionistic standards and low self-efficacy
played in Josie’s experience of social anxiety. The remainder
of this session and the next were spent developing
and refining Josie’s fear and avoidance hierarchy
(see Table 3.3). Josie reported that interacting with
people in person was easier than talking over the phone
because face-to-face contact allowed her to interpret
body language and facial expressions to determine how
the interaction was going for the other person. In addi



Social Anxiety Disorder

table 3.3. fear and avoidance Hierarchy with Pretreatment, Posttreatment,
and 1-year and 5-year follow-Up ratings

Situation Pretreatment Posttreatment 1-year follow-up 5-year follow-up
1 Riding public transportation
alone
Fear
Avoidance
100
100
20
20
9
6
90
85
2
3
Staying after recitals to
socialize
Fear
Avoidance
Going to recitals
Fear
Avoidance
95
95
90
70
7
8
7
8
3
0
3
0
55
60
45
15
4 Making phone calls to people I
used to be close with
Fear
Avoidance
75
60
5
5
3
1
65
60
5 Class critiques and talking
about my compositions in class
Fear
Avoidance
65
50
6
1
1
0
60
20
6 Talking with professors and
authority figures I respect
Fear
Avoidance
65
50
4
2
5
5
75
60
7 Making/maintaining
conversations with friends and
people I respect
Fear
Avoidance
60
60
3
1
4
2
25
10
8 Making the first phone call
Fear
Avoidance
55
5
2
0
4
1
65
35
9 Hanging out with boyfriend’s
friends’ girlfriends
Fear
Avoidance
50
85
6
2
3
0
40
15
10 Talking with old friends I’ve
lost touch with
Fear
Avoidance
40
70
7
4
4
2
30
45


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

tion, Josie felt that it was easier to interact with males
than with females, who she believed were more critical.
Josie was also more anxious around individuals she respected
and admired than she was with strangers.

Cognitive Restructuring Training Segment

session 6

In this session, Josie was introduced to cognitive restructuring.
Though she demonstrated an understanding
of the importance of thoughts in producing feelings
of anxiety, Josie reported difficulty identifying her own
automatic thoughts. Specifically, she tended to identify
questions that passed through her mind in anticipation
of or during anxiety-provoking situations. For example,
when recalling a recent anxiety-provoking situation in
which she had to present her work in front of a class,
Josie identified the thought, “What will other people
think of me?” The therapist helped Josie to restate this
question as a statement of what she feared, asking Josie
to let her “anxious self” answer the question. She was
able to come up with automatic thoughts, such as “Other
people will think I’m a moron” and “Other people will
think I am unprepared for this presentation.” She identified
other thoughts, such as “I am wasting their time,”
“They will get bored with me,” and “My professor will
be disappointed that I didn’t do a better job.” Many of
the automatic thoughts appeared to be related to a general
sense of letting others down. The therapist encouraged
Josie that, with continued practice, she would get
better at recognizing automatic thoughts.

session 7

In this session, Josie again struggled to identify automatic
thoughts, but with prompting, she was increasingly
able to do so. She also had some difficulty identifying
the thinking errors contained in her automatic
thoughts, often insisting that all the thoughts qualified
as unhelpful and unproductive thoughts—that is, true
but unhelpful. The therapist asked Josie some disputing
questions to illustrate that the thoughts were not true or
totally accurate, and that other thinking errors could
apply. By the end of session, Josie had a better handle
on thinking errors and was able to start using some disputing
questions successfully. Josie reported that the
cognitive restructuring work was much more challenging
than she expected, but that she was eager to put the
work into action during exposures.

session 8

The therapist decided to take an additional session to
continue work on cognitive restructuring before moving
onto exposures, so that Josie was maximally prepared.
Cognitive restructuring practice was focused on
a recent situation in which Josie turned down tickets,
offered by a professor at school, to a show by her favorite
artist. Josie was much better able to identify her
automatic thoughts related to this situation, which included
the following:

1. “Other students will be mad at me if I take the
tickets.”
2. “I will be too scared to go and would waste the
tickets.”
3. “I will not be able to take public transportation to
get there.”
4. “If I do take public transportation, I will get lost
and miss the show.”
5. “Other students want the tickets more than I do.”
Josie was able to identify thinking errors such as
fortune-telling, mind reading, and catastrophizing,
among others. However, there was evidence that Josie
was critical of herself and her occasional difficulty
grasping the concepts of cognitive restructuring. At
first, Josie struggled with labeling the thinking errors
in her automatic thoughts and searching for the right
rational response. The therapist suggested to Josie that
there was no right or wrong way to challenge automatic
thoughts or to develop a rational response, but
Josie continued to evaluate her suggestions as not good
enough. Furthermore, Josie grew extremely frustrated
and pessimistic when she used disputing questions to
challenge her automatic thoughts. Specifically, she had
trouble challenging the thought that getting lost on the
subway would have to lead to missing the show entirely.
She reported that she doubted her own ability to read
the subway map or ask for help and predicted that she
would get so lost that she would either turn around
and go home or arrive at the show after it had already
started. Josie’s anxiety about entering the performance
late would then, she predicted, lead her to go home anyway.
Josie reported that she would feel disappointed,
embarrassed, and ashamed if she lost her way on public
transportation because it would mean she had failed to
attend the performance and in doing so would anger
her classmates, who she predicted would feel as though
she wasted the opportunity. Josie grew increasingly


Social Anxiety Disorder

frustrated with the strength of her anxious thoughts
and reported that she felt stupid for not being able to
challenge them successfully. This highlighted some
patterns noted throughout treatment, including Josie’s
tendency to rely on perfectionist standards and all-ornothing
thinking (e.g., evaluating her thoughts and behavioral
responses as all right or all wrong) and impatience
with her own progress in treatment. Despite this,
she reported being willing to keep practicing and move
on to in-session exposures. The therapist worked with
Josie for the remainder of session to challenge her automatic
thoughts. It was particularly helpful for Josie to
identify that she had no evidence that she would get lost
and to recognize that even if she did get lost, it would
be important enough for her to attend the performance
that she would ask for additional help or directions.

Exposure Segment

session 9

During homework review, Josie reported that she was
able to use her cognitive restructuring skills when she
ran into an old roommate at a coffee shop. Josie reported
that the exchange had gone much more smoothly
than she anticipated and this encouraged her to feel
more confident in her understanding of and abilities
to use cognitive restructuring skills actively in social
situations. With regard to the in-session exposure,
the therapist wanted to choose a situation that would
seem relevant to her treatment goals, elicit a moderate
amount of anxiety, and in which Josie was likely
to perform reasonably well. The in-session exposure
was a follow-up to Josie’s recent interaction with her
classmate Anne, who mentioned to Josie that some
people from class would be getting together one weekend
to hang out. However, Anne did not call Josie to
make specific plans; neither did Josie follow through
with making plans to attend the event, and she ended
up missing it. Josie thought that Anne did not call because
she might have interpreted Josie’s anxiety symptoms
(e.g., shyness, quietness, lack of eye contact) as
disinterest in socializing. Josie’s exposure involved
her talking with Anne, whose role was played by the
therapist, about this misunderstanding. The following
excerpts are from the cognitive restructuring prior to
the exposure.

tHeraPist: First, let’s go to the BYOCT worksheet and
work through the situation before the exposure hap


pens. When you think about this situation happening
now? What kind of automatic thoughts come up for
you?

Josie: I’m not going to talk to her because I won’t know
what to say. Also, I shouldn’t say anything about her
not calling me because it would make everything
awkward. I should be really friendly and smile the
whole time.

tHeraPist: Are you making any predictions about
how this interaction will go?

Josie: Oh, yeah. I’m going to choke up, and she is going
to judge me. I think that’s it.

tHeraPist: OK, good job identifying those automatic
thoughts. Now what kinds of emotions come up
when you think those thoughts?

Josie: I feel sad. The anxiousness almost goes away,
and I just don’t feel like talking to her. I also feel a
little bit of anger and frustration at myself because
I can’t confront her about this and I don’t want to
make her feel uncomfortable.

tHeraPist: So it sounds like that kind of thinking
might lead to you not saying anything at all then,
avoiding the interaction?

Josie: Yeah, I’d definitely avoid it.

tHeraPist: Well this exposure will allow us to practice
confronting those automatic thoughts, but first
we need to do some cognitive restructuring practice.
Why don’t we start by identifying some thinking errors?


Josie: Right away I see should statements and fortunetelling.
And to think that she’s judging me, that’s
mind reading.

tHeraPist: Good job. Now let’s try to dispute some
of these thoughts. Let’s start with the automatic
thought: “I’m not going to talk to her because I won’t
have anything to say.” Do you know this for certain?

Josie: (smiling) No, actually I do want to talk with her,
and I could always ask her little things. I have no
evidence that I’ll have nothing to say.

tHeraPist: So you could come up with something to
say?

Josie: Yeah, even if it’s just small talk, I could come
up with something. I do want to ask her about what
happened, but I don’t want to come across as too aggressive
or confrontational. I feel bad when I confront
people.


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

tHeraPist: So let’s figure out some ways you’d feel
comfortable asking her to hang out, ways that allow
you to get your message across without feeling aggressive
or blunt. This can help us start to identify
some behavioral goals for the exposure. Let’s take a
look at what it is you want to ask her or tell her.

Josie: Well, I want to ask her if we can hang out some
other time, since she didn’t call me last time. But I
have the automatic thought that I shouldn’t say anything
because it will make things awkward. I guess if
I challenge that, I don’t really know that I will make
things awkward.

tHeraPist: What might be another outcome if you say
something?

Josie: She might apologize and ask me if I want to
come, and I can tell her that I’d love to come the next
time she invites me. She did invite me in the first
place. She just never called because she thought I
didn’t want to go.

tHeraPist: Good. So we identified some automatic
thoughts, and you said they made you feel sad and
frustrated. Then we challenged them and came up
with some coping thoughts. How do those thoughts
make you feel?

Josie: That’s better. I feel a lot better.

tHeraPist: How could we sum these up into a rational
response? Does anything stand out to you?

Josie: “Saying something might have a positive outcome”
really stands out to me. I’d feel better and
things might turn out better if I remind myself of
that. It will help me to challenge the thought that I’ll
choke up or run out of things to say.

The therapist selected that automatic thought for
cognitive restructuring, because it had been a recurrent
one for Josie in homework and seemed relevant
to the upcoming exposure. Also, the therapist made an
effort to take Josie through the cognitive restructuring
relatively quickly because the longer the exposure was
delayed, the more anxious she would get and the more
difficult it would be for her to focus on the cognitive
restructuring because of her anxiety. The next step was
to set goals for the exposure. Josie decided that her
achievable behavioral goals for this exposure would
include telling Anne that she was interested in the last
social event, letting Anne know that she would be interested
in hanging out some time soon, and giving Anne
her phone number.

The exposure began with both Josie and the therapist
standing up to simulate more closely the interaction
that might occur as they passed each other in the
hallway at school. Josie stood where she would be able
to see her rational response and behavioral goals written
on the easel.

tHeraPist: Josie, what is your initial SUDS rating?

Josie: About a 45.

tHeraPist: OK, and what is your rational response?

Josie: Saying something might have a positive outcome.


Josie and the therapist began to chat about class, and
Josie soon brought up the recently past social event.
The therapist let the exposure go on for approximately
5 minutes. Upon being prompted by the therapist, Josie
gave SUDS ratings at 1-minute intervals throughout the
interaction and read her rational response aloud. After
the exposure had ended, post-processing began.

tHeraPist: Did you reach your behavioral goals?

Josie: I told her I wanted to hang out and asked her to
call me again.

tHeraPist: So you met your goals. Great job. Did any
new automatic thoughts come up?

Josie: I noticed that I fidgeted a lot. I had the thought
“This is scary,” but also that she seemed pretty cool
about the interaction. I thought I really shouldn’t be
nervous.

tHeraPist: Did the thoughts we identified earlier
come up?

Josie: Yeah. I thought I wouldn’t know what to say, and
there was a pause in the conversation, but it was fine
when I said something. I worried that I’d make this
awkward for her, but I think it was more awkward for
me because I was so nervous.

tHeraPist: How did your rational response work?

Josie: It worked pretty well; it got easier to remember
and I believed it was true when I said it. It really
seemed to help me think more about rational
thoughts instead of anxious ones.

tHeraPist: Let’s take a look at your SUDS. You started
at a 45 and went up to 55 when conversation started.
When you said something to her about wishing she’d
call you, the SUDS went up to a 60. By the time she
told you what happened, the SUDS dropped to 40.


Social Anxiety Disorder

After some small talk, it went down to a 20. That’s a

pretty significant drop.
Josie: It was a lot better after I got over that bump,

when I told her I wanted to hang out.

tHeraPist: What thoughts do you remember having

then?
Josie: “I shouldn’t say anything,” “I should walk away,”

“I have to say something.”

tHeraPist: So what happened then?

Josie: I said my rational response when you asked,
right after I asked her about what happened, and I
felt a lot better. It felt like things were going to be
OK. I feel really good about how it went.

After processing the exposure, the therapist helped
Josie to plan an in vivo exposure to do on her own that
week. She planned to meet her old roommate for coffee,
using the BYOCT forms to guide her cognitive restructuring,
the exposure, and her own postprocessing
of the experience.

session 10

In the 10th session, Josie reported that she had a very
challenging but rewarding week. She recalled an inclass
critique of her work, and, though her anxiety was
intense, she was able to manage it and remain in class
by reminding herself of her rational response: “I can
learn something from their feedback.” Josie also noted
that she had completed two in vivo exposures, including
having coffee with her old roommate and a conversation
with her classmate Anne, just as she practiced in
last week’s session. Josie seemed very encouraged by
the outcomes of these situations and her ability to use
cognitive restructuring techniques before and during
anxiety-provoking events.

For exposure this session, Josie planned to interact
with two women playing the roles of her boyfriend’s
friends’ fiancées, to whom Josie felt she could not relate.
The therapist anticipated that this exposure would
be more difficult for Josie because it involved a fairly
unstructured interaction and likely a conversation
about topics with which Josie was relatively unfamiliar,
such as wedding planning. Josie reported the following
automatic thoughts in anticipation of the exposure:

1. “I’m not married yet, so what do I know about
relationships and weddings?”
2. “I will offend them with my views.”
3. “They are going to think I am weird.”
4. “They are going to think I act too young.”
5. “I’m not going to give the right answers to their
questions.”
As with the automatic thoughts in her first exposure,
Josie was able to identify thinking errors, including
fortune-telling, mind reading, labeling, and all-ornothing
thinking. By using the disputing questions,
Josie was able to challenge the automatic thoughts she
identified. In response to the first thought, Josie determined
that although she was not married, she had been
in a relationship for a number of years, so she would
be able to relate to the other women on that level. In
addition, she had helped her sister plan a wedding, so
she was familiar with some aspects of wedding planning.
Regarding her fear of being offensive, Josie noted
that she was not sure she would offend them with her
views and that her different perspective might lead to
an interesting conversation. The automatic thought
that the other women would think she was weird was
more difficult for Josie to challenge, but she was satisfied
when she determined that she would be able to
live with herself if they thought she was a little unusual
and that it was unlikely to affect her relationships with
them. In reference to her fears that they would think she
acts too young, Josie used the challenge that she was
only 2 years younger than these women, but she had
chosen a different path for herself that involved continued
education and saving marriage until she felt more
settled in life, a decision that she felt was very mature.
In response to the automatic thought that she would not
give the right answer to their questions, Josie argued
that perhaps there was no right or wrong answer, and
that even if she gave an answer that was inconsistent
with the other women’s views, she could recover from
those mistakes, and differences of opinion could lead to
interesting conversation.

Josie decided that an appropriate rational response
would be one that helped her feel that she could relate
to these women despite their different circumstances.
Her rational response for this exposure was “I’m not
so different.” Josie’s goals were to talk about her own
interests (e.g., music), ask a question, offer an opinion,
and stay in the conversation until the exposure was
over. Josie’s SUDS ratings started out at 45, decreased
to about 20 by the fourth minute of the exposure, and
went as low as 15 by the final minute of the 8-minute
exposure. Josie met all of her behavioral goals,
and though she was quiet compared to the role players


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

early in the conversation, she appeared to grow more
at ease as time passed. Josie reported that the exposure
went fairly well, and she was pleased that her sharing
a story during the conversation led to a change of subject
and additional conversation. Although Josie did not
share their experiences and opinions, she was able to
find a way to relate to them and to participate in the
conversation. She reported having thoughts of leaving
but convinced herself to stay by reminding herself that
she would benefit from staying in the situation. Josie’s
homework was to call an old music composition classmate,
have a conversation over the phone with him, and
ask him to listen to her practice a piece she was working
on for an upcoming show.

session 11

Prior to this session, Josie was very busy with class
work and preparation for an upcoming recital of her
compositions as part of a final exam. Consequently, she
had missed several sessions. Josie reported that over the
course of the past month, she had interviewed for a job
at a local bookstore, was offered the position, and accepted
it. She said she experienced a significant amount
of anxiety on the interview and in the first few days
of work, but that she was feeling much more confident
about things now. Although she had made dramatic
improvements in her self-reported anxiety and continued
to improve during the 1-month hiatus from regular
treatment, the therapist discussed the importance of
completing the remaining 5–6 weeks of the treatment
program. Josie committed to following through with
treatment and doing her homework more consistently.
Though Josie had not formally been doing her homework
and an in-session exposure was not conducted,
the therapist reviewed her progress so far in relation
to her fear and avoidance hierarchy. Socializing with a
group of friends and riding public transportation alone
were identified as areas for continued work. For homework,
Josie was assigned the task of handing out fliers
to friends and family for the upcoming recital, which
was to involve repeated social interactions and a discussion
of her work. She was also given the assignment
of reading the chapter in the client workbook related to
social interactions and making small talk.

session 12

In the Session 12 homework review, Josie said she interacted
with many people on campus and around town
while promoting an upcoming show, and that the con


versations had gone much more smoothly than anticipated.
She said it was helpful to remind herself that she
was an expert on her own musical compositions, so she
could talk at least some about the performance she was
advertising. The third in-session exposure, completed
in this session, was designed to help Josie work on
some of her automatic thoughts related to her upcoming
recital that weekend. The therapist had planned an
exposure during which Josie was to interact with audience
members at a reception following her recital, and
staff members from the clinic volunteered to play these
roles. Josie agreed that this exposure was very relevant
to her current concerns and would make her very anxious.
Josie reported the following automatic thoughts in
anticipation of the exposure:

1. “I’m going to sound pretentious if I talk confidently
about my performance.”
2. “They are only talking to me because they feel
bad for me.”
3. “I have to impress them.”
4. “They will think this is boring.”
5. “I won’t know what to say.”
Josie was able to identify thinking errors, including allor-
nothing thinking, labeling, fortune-telling, and mind
reading. During the cognitive restructuring, Josie was
encouraged to look at her successful experiences in the
two previous exposures as evidence that she had things
to say that were of interest to others. With the help of
the therapist, Josie arrived at this rational response: “I
can talk about my performance because I created it.”

Josie’s goals were to talk slowly, to provide information
about herself, to answer questions posed to her,
and to stay in a given interaction until the other person
ended it. Josie’s initial SUDS rating started out at 80,
but it had decreased to 30 within 3 minutes. At the end
of the 10-minute exposure, Josie’s SUDS rating was
below 20. Once again, Josie met her behavioral goals,
and her performance was objectively skilled. Josie said
that in addition to her rational response, it was helpful
to tell herself that she did not have to take everything
others said to heart. Josie thought the exposure went
very well and even reported having fun interacting with
the audience members and being the center of attention.
She felt that this practice was going to be very helpful
when she encountered the real situation at that weekend’s
recital. Josie’s homework was to use the BYOCT
worksheet before and after her actual recital to prepare
herself to cope with anxious thoughts that might arise
before, during, and after the performance.


Social Anxiety Disorder

session 13

Josie came to the session, reporting that her anxiety at
the reception following last week’s recital was much
more manageable than it had been in the past, and that
she was actually able to enjoy conversations she had
with family, music instructors, and fellow students.
She reported feeling confident about her performance,
which helped her to feel confident and comfortable
while interacting with others at the reception. Though
Josie did report experiencing significant anxiety as she
began to socialize with family and friends after the recital,
she said that her anxiety dropped substantially as
she continued to interact with others about her performance,
and at no point did she have thoughts of leaving
the reception. Josie felt that the recital and reception
were a success, and that her anxiety did not prevent her
from enjoying these situations as it had in the past.

For an in-session exposure, Josie said it would be
helpful to practice receiving feedback, both positive
and negative, about her musical and academic performances.
This situation was relevant because, as part
of a final exam in Josie’s music composition course,
she was to perform an original composition in front
of students and her instructor, then receive their feedback.
Though her ability to do this had improved on
a smaller scale during her coursework, this particular
class critique elicited a considerable amount of anxiety
for Josie, and she wanted some direct help with the cognitive
restructuring and behavioral practice. The therapist
decided to conduct two smaller exposures—one in
which Josie received neutral or positive feedback from
class members and her instructor, and another in which
she received negative feedback. Each exposure was
designed to go on for approximately 5–10 minutes to
allow Josie to discuss her composition and performance
adequately and to receive and respond to feedback. A
number of clinic staff members volunteered to assist
with this exposure.

Prior to the exposure, Josie identified the following
automatic thoughts for both exposures:

1. “I am going to mess this up.”
2. “I must appear professional.”
3. “I have to perform perfectly to impress them.”
4. “I won’t know what to say.”
5. “I won’t understand their questions.”
Josie was able to identify thinking errors such as
fortune-telling, all-or-nothing thinking, catastrophizing,
and should statements. She also noted how her per


fectionistic standards and feelings of low self-efficacy
were quickly elicited by this situation involving overt
evaluation of her performance and interaction skills.
After challenging her automatic thoughts, Josie decided
that a helpful rational response in each of the exposures
would be “I know my work because I did it,” which
she felt would encourage her to continue talking confidently
about her own composition and performance,
regardless of the feedback she received. Josie’s behavioral
goals were to answer questions posed to her and
to ask follow-up questions, if she needed clarification.

The exposures were set up to take place immediately
after a performance and began with Josie saying,
“Thank you, I’d like to hear your thoughts about the
piece.” In the first exposure, she received a mix of neutral
and positive feedback about her composition, her
performance, and her ability to conduct herself during
the critique. Josie’s SUDS score started at 45 and
dropped down to 15 within 3 minutes. She met all of
her behavioral goals. The second exposure began the
same way, but this time she received a mix of neutral
and negative feedback; listeners pointed out mistakes
she made in her performance, told her that she looked
nervous, and indicated that they did not like the music
she wrote. Josie’s SUDS score again started at a 45 and
went up as high as 60 when she received her first negative
comment. By the fifth minute of the exposure, her
SUDS score was 30, and by the end of the exposure, 20.
Josie again met her behavioral goals and reported that
she handled both situations very well. Josie noted that
although her anxiety peaked when she received negative
feedback, she felt she responded to the comments
politely and was even able to learn from them. She
felt the exposure was very helpful in preparing for her
upcoming feedback sessions in class. For homework,
Josie was asked to read the client workbook chapter on
core beliefs and to do an in vivo exposure that would
involve her taking public transportation to and from
school with a friend. She was also asked to complete a
BYOCT worksheet before and after her in-class performance
and evaluation.

Advanced Cognitive Restructuring Segment

session 14

Josie completed her homework exposure of riding the
bus to and from school with a friend and reported that
she was not very anxious. She said that next time she
would take the bus on her own and work toward going
places farther away and less familiar. Josie also report



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

ed that things went well with her in-class evaluation,
that her performance of the music she composed went
well, but that she thought she messed up once or twice.
However, she noted that no students gave her feedback
indicating that they noticed the mistake. Josie reported
feeling incredibly anxious after she finished playing
and that right before the feedback session she even had
thoughts of excusing herself for a few minutes. Reminding
herself of her rational response, “I can learn
something from their feedback,” encouraged Josie to
stay in class and complete the evaluation. Though she
received some challenging questions about how she
composed the music and who had influenced her, Josie
thought she had done a decent job, although she had
stumbled over her words a few times. She noted that a
few students commented about not particularly liking
the style of music she chose, but Josie said she did not
take these comments personally. Overall Josie felt that
she had learned a lot from the students’ and instructor’s
feedback and that, although anxious, felt it was an
acceptable level of anxiety given the performance and
evaluation aspects of the situation.

Josie did not read the chapter on core beliefs, so the
therapist spent time in session introducing this concept.
Josie worked hard in this session to identify her core
beliefs, using the Peeling Your Onion worksheet. She
realized that her most common automatic thoughts
across situations were related to labeling herself, feeling
as though she would not live up to others’ expectations,
and fears that others would judge her negatively
because of her social or performance skills. Josie felt
that the theme of “not measuring up” was familiar and
related potentially to her beliefs about never measuring
up to her parents’ standards and not doing anything
right, which led to more generalized perfectionism.
Josie identified the thought, “I’m not measuring up,” as
related to a fear that she would not be successful in life,
and that to be successful, she felt she must be perfect.
Identifying this chain of thinking left her feeling sad,
frustrated, and disappointed. From here, Josie worked
through the worksheet and identified the core belief, “If
I’m not perfect, I’m worthless.” Time was spent brainstorming
exposures Josie could do on her own to test
and challenge this core belief. For homework, the therapist
asked Josie to mess up intentionally while playing
the piano for some family members, so as to challenge
her core belief that anything short of perfectionism
represents a failure. Josie also identified another situation
in which she could intentionally mess up, while
using the intercom system at her job. The therapist also

challenged Josie to identify ways that her imperfections
might actually contribute to her value as a person. Josie
was hesitant to do this but agreed when she reminded
herself of the importance of facing feared situations.

session 15

Josie arrived at the 15th session and reported that she
had been unable to make a mistake intentionally in her
musical performance in front of family members, but
she was able to make a mistake while using the intercom
system at work. The therapist continued to use
cognitive restructuring to explore Josie’s core belief,
“If I’m not perfect, I’m worthless.”

tHeraPist: So, last week we started to talk about some
core issues, and I felt like you left here feeling a little
overwhelmed. How are you feeling about things
now?

Josie: It was a difficult session because I was feeling
really good about overcoming hard stuff in the
beginning, like learning how to pick out automatic
thoughts, see how they were wrong, then finding a
really good, challenging response to them and actually
believing it. I felt good because I can do that
now, almost automatically, or at least without too
much effort. I felt like I was done, and then we ended
up having to face some really scary stuff again. I feel
like I took a giant step up, to a harder level of work.

tHeraPist: The things we talked about last week were
harder. That’s a good sign that we’ve really worked
our way to your core beliefs because it feels so different.
But remember all the work and practice that you
put into identifying and challenging every other automatic
thought or situation that we’ve worked on. It
didn’t all happen right away. In terms of core beliefs,
we’re going to do the same thing. All we’ve done is
identify it. Now we will spend time challenging it
and testing out the thought, “If I’m not perfect, I’m
worthless.” We’ll start here in session today, but this
is work you’ll continue on your own. What might be
some thinking errors? What’s limiting in thinking
that anything less than 100% is a failure?

Josie: That’s catastrophizing. Probably also a should
statement because I feel like I must be perfect. And
also maybe fortune-telling because I feel like I’m assuming
things will go wrong eventually. That’s it.

tHeraPist: What about all-or-nothing thinking?


Social Anxiety Disorder

Josie: Oh yeah, definitely. In my mind, it’s like there’s
0% success or 100% success.

tHeraPist: So what are some ways we can challenge
this? It won’t be easy, but let’s try.

Josie: Umm, I guess simple challenges, like “How do I
know I’m going to be worthless if I’m not perfect?” I
don’t know. I guess not being perfect doesn’t have to
equal being worthless.

tHeraPist: Tell me more about that.

Josie: Some things are maybe valuable even when
they’re not perfect. Like people. Or art.

tHeraPist: So sometimes people’s flaws, or quirks,
make them more interesting?

Josie: Yeah, that’s what I like best about my boyfriend.
Those things other people are bothered by I find endearing.
I like things that are imperfect, that have
their own personality to them that’s not quite right. I
don’t really have a problem when the imperfection is
with someone else. But with me, it’s different.

tHeraPist: Are you a harsher critic of yourself than
others?

Josie: Definitely. Too bad I can’t see myself the way I
see others.

tHeraPist: Maybe you can, maybe we can try that. It’s
hard because you’ve been looking at yourself critically
for a long time. It’s going to be a change, and it
will take testing and practice. But what might be the
reward for trying something besides being a harsher
judge of yourself than others?

Josie: I guess the work will pay off, like it did with
everything else. With practice, I even had fun at my
show. I didn’t believe that I was going to be a failure.
I believed I could do it. It was a huge success.

tHeraPist: Were there any minor flaws with the evening?
Things that went wrong, but that you coped
with?

Josie: Oh, yeah, tons. Like I forgot my friend’s name
when I was introducing her to my parents. But it
didn’t ruin the evening. Overall things were good,
and I felt good about it. I could skip over those flaws
and just enjoy it.

tHeraPist: So when thinking about that situation, how
true does it feel that if you are not perfect, you are
worthless?

Josie: When I came in, I felt overwhelmed by everything;
now that we can see all the work I’ve done, I

feel better. I think I can challenge this. I don’t think
it feels totally true anymore.

tHeraPist: OK, so what’s some evidence that this core
belief may not be true?

Josie: Well, it’s OK for everyone else to not be perfect.
Maybe a little less OK for me, but I guess it’s still
somewhat OK. And some people are more valuable
to me because of their imperfections. I guess being
perfect is boring. Being perfect is impossible.

tHeraPist: So that seems like a high standard to hold
yourself to.

Josie: (Laughs.) Yeah. I don’t know anyone who’s perfect.
Everyone makes mistakes. Even me. Especially
me. Everyone in the history of the world has been
imperfect.

tHeraPist: Right. Now let’s get back to you, not just
others. Do we have evidence that you may be valuable
even if you’re imperfect? Are there upsides of
imperfection?

Josie: I’ll be more unique, more of an individual. It
makes for interesting challenges; it could make for a
really interesting life. I could learn a lot about different
ways to do things, try out all kinds of new things.
Make lots of mistakes, and just learn to do things
better the next time. Not perfect, but just better. And
make room for failure.

tHeraPist: So how much do you believe that if you’re
not perfect, you’re worthless?

Josie: Maybe like 20%. Right now, at least, only 20%.

tHeraPist: So how can we sum up some of these challenges
that have gotten you to believing this only
about 20%? What might be a rational response to
this core belief, “If I’m not perfect, I’m worthless.”

Josie: I don’t know; this is hard. If I’m not perfect, I’m
worthy? I don’t believe it, but it makes me laugh. I
guess maybe it’s OK if I’m not perfect.

tHeraPist: Does that feel convincing?

Josie: Not really. I’m drawing a blank with coming up
with the right rational response.

tHeraPist: What if we recognized that this rational
response won’t be perfect? Maybe we need to find
one that’s good enough for now. So let’s keep at this.

Josie: Oh I see, there’s the perfectionistic thinking
again. I guess really, it is not humanly possible to be
perfect. And I don’t think I would even want to be
that person who finally was perfect.


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

tHeraPist: So it seems like a lot of work to be chasing
perfection when it kind of doesn’t exist. It sounds
like no matter how hard you try, there would always
be the attempt to do better than perfect.

Josie: Yeah, like no matter what, I’d never be able to
be perfect. It’s not humanly possible. I guess if I
had to make this a rational response, I’d tell myself
something like “There is no such thing as perfect.” I
like that. I think that will work for now. I’m going to
think about this more. This is a challenge, but I want
to spend time on this.

tHeraPist: OK, so maybe we can try out this rational
response this week by having you do some exposures
that will allow you to challenge the core belief, “If
I’m not perfect, I’m worthless.”

Josie: Yeah. I need to do that every day, challenge
this, become more accepting of my imperfections. It
might be fun to mess up on purpose. But a lot of the
time I mess up just naturally, but I guess even then
I’m not worthless. Mistakes are going to happen because
there is no such thing as perfect.

For homework this session, Josie was assigned the
task of intentionally making mistakes in conversation
(e.g., “forgetting” people’s names, asking them to repeat
something they have said), at work (e.g., pressing
the wrong button when using the intercom, asking for
help with a task), and in performances (e.g., playing the
wrong notes while playing the piano for her family and
friends).

Termination Segment

session 16

In the final session, Josie and the therapist discussed
her progress and the challenges that lay ahead. Josie
rerated her fear and avoidance hierarchy, and the decrease
in her ratings was considered significant and
meaningful (see Table 3.3). She reported that, over the
course of treatment, she learned new skills such as recognizing
and challenging automatic thoughts and seeing
all aspects of herself—including imperfection—as
acceptable. The most important change she noted was
being able to get and to keep a job at a bookstore, where
she must interact with customers and coworkers all day.
Josie reported that as a result of her treatment, for the
first time she was able to see herself as equal rather
than inferior to others, and she was optimistic about her
future goals, both personal and professional.

Session‑by‑Session Assessment

Figure 3.2 displays Josie’s session-by-session scores on
the SASCI and the BFNE.

Recall that a score of 16 on the SASCI corresponds to
no change, with lower scores indicative of increasingly
greater improvement relative to baseline levels. Josie
started to show modest improvement after Session 3.
Her score spiked at Session 8, and then began a steady
decline, reaching the minimum score of 4 by Session
12 and remaining there until the end of treatment. For
the BFNE, Weeks and colleagues (2005) reported a
mean score of 46.91 (SD = 9.27) in a large sample with
social anxiety disorder and a mean of 26.81 (SD = 4.78)
among normal controls. Early in treatment, Josie’s session
scores exceeded the mean of the clinical sample
by as much as 10 points. However, her scores declined
consistently thereafter, and by the end of treatment
were just below the mean of the control sample.

One‑Year Follow‑Up Assessment

After 1 year with no treatment, Josie showed considerable
improvement on all self-report and clinicianadministered
measures compared to her pretreatment
assessment (see Table 3.2). In fact, she no longer met
diagnostic criteria for social anxiety disorder. She was
considering applications to graduate programs to continue
her study of music and had plans to audition for
the local orchestra. Josie reported that she had been
making friends at her job and felt that she now had a
core of social supports on which she could rely.

Five‑Year Follow‑Up Assessment

Approximately 5 years after the conclusion of her treatment,
we had the opportunity to check in with Josie
and discuss how things had gone for her since she completed
CBT as described herein. She had received no
additional therapy, other than a brief period of some
premarital counseling with a member of the clergy.
Josie had gotten married, moved to a large city, and had
a child; she experienced an episode of postpartum depression
that resolved without treatment. She had completed
a prestigious music fellowship program where
she gained additional experience and confidence as a
composer and performer. At the time of our check-in,
Josie was hoping to devote more time to her music, perhaps
as a teacher. Josie was very proud to report that


Social Anxiety Disorder


figUre 3.2. Weekly scores on the (a) Social Anxiety Session Change Index (SASCI) and (b) Brief Fear of Negative
Evaluation Scale (BFNE).

she has been successful in pushing herself to engage
in social situations that were difficult at first and that
she has learned that things often are not as difficult as
she first feared. Josie reported a return of some anxiety
symptoms, as reflected in ratings on her fear and avoidance
hierarchy, which were higher than those reported
at the 1-year follow-up but generally lower than those at
the pretreatment assessment (Table 3.3). However, she

reported that this did not significantly interfere with
her daily functioning, as reflected in her scores on the
majority of self-report and clinician-administered measures
(See Table 3.2). As at the 1-year follow-up, Josie
did not meet criteria for social anxiety disorder. However,
she experienced some distress in social situations
that were not relevant to her life at the time of treatment.
For instance, socializing with other children’s


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

parents at school and church was a new challenge that
had led to some anxiety and avoidance in recent years.
Josie thought she might benefit from some booster sessions,
but she reported that she continues to review her
client workbook and therapy notes from time to time to
maintain her CBT skills.

cliNical PreDictors of success
aND failure

Josie’s treatment turned out well, as it does for many
clients. However, treatment response is a variable phenomenon,
and researchers have investigated a number
of predictors of CBT outcome (see more in the review
of this topic by L. Magee, Erwin, & Heimberg, 2009).

Expectancy for improvement, subtype of social
anxiety disorder, and comorbidity with other anxiety or
mood disorders, as well as APD, have been discussed
in other sections of this chapter. Here we briefly review
three other variables—adherence to assigned CBT
homework, anger, and cognitive change.

Adherence to prescribed homework assignments has
been associated with positive treatment outcome, and
evidence suggests that adherence to particular components
of CBT homework assignments may be differentially
predictive of outcome. For instance, adherence to
between-session cognitive restructuring and exposure
assignments predicts posttreatment outcome better than
adherence to assignments related more to psychoeducation
early in treatment (Leung & Heimberg, 1996).
Other studies have not replicated these effects immediately
after treatment (Edelmann & Chambless, 1995;
Woody & Adessky, 2002). However, 6-month followup
assessments revealed that homework-compliant individuals
reported fewer avoidant behaviors, less fear
of negative evaluation, and less anxiety when giving a
speech compared to less compliant clients (Edelman &
Chambless, 1995).

Anger is a significant predictor of CBT outcome as
well. In a study by Erwin, Heimberg, Schneier, and
Liebowitz (2003), individuals with high levels of trait
anger were more likely to terminate treatment prematurely.
Also, levels of state and trait anger and anger
suppression before treatment were significantly correlated
with posttreatment severity of social anxiety.

Finally, in a study comparing group CBT, exposure
group therapy, and waiting-list control conditions,
changes in estimated social cost, or negative cognitive
appraisal, mediated pretreatment to posttreatment

changes in both active treatment groups (Hofmann,
2004). Furthermore, only the group receiving cognitive
techniques, in addition to exposure, continued to
show improvement from posttreatment to the 6-month
follow-up assessment. Continued benefit was associated
with an overall reduction in estimated social cost
from pre- to posttreatment assessments, suggesting
that the cognitive-behavioral intervention is associated
with greater treatment gains that are mediated through
changes in estimated social cost (Hofmann, 2004).
More recently, Boden and colleagues (2012) demonstrated
that changes in interpersonal core beliefs mediated
the effect of CBT on social anxiety symptoms, and
Goldin and colleagues (2012) showed that increased
belief in one’s ability to engage in cognitive reappraisal
did the same.

suMMary aND coNclusioNs

Our primary purpose in this chapter was to provide a
step-by-step analysis of the conduct of individual CBT
for social anxiety disorder from initial assessment to
long-term follow-up. Procedural difficulties that may
arise in the conduct of CBT for social anxiety disorder
were not be discussed in detail here because of space
limitations, but they are discussed thoroughly by Heimberg
and Becker (2002). Individuals like Josie, who
make dramatic improvements in their lives, provide the
impetus for continued research on the treatment of social
anxiety disorder—a potentially debilitating disorder
with an increasingly encouraging prognosis.

referenCes

Acarturk, C., de Graaf, R., van Straten, A., ten Have, M., &
Cuijpers, P. (2008). Social phobia and number of social
fears, and their association with comorbidity, healthrelated
quality of life and help seeking. Social Psychiatry
and Psychiatric Epidemiology, 43, 273–279.

Aderka, I. M. (2009). Factors affecting treatment efficacy in
social phobia: The use of video feedback and individual vs.
group formats. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 23, 12–17.

Aderka, I. M., Hofmann, S. G., Nickerson, A., Hermesh, H.,
Gilboa-Schectman, E., & Marom, S. (2012). Functional
impairment in social anxiety disorder. Journal of Anxiety
Disorders, 26, 393–400.

American Psychiatric Association. (1980). Diagnostic and
statistical manual of mental disorders (3rd ed.). Washington,
DC: Author.


Social Anxiety Disorder

American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and
statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.). Arlington,
VA: Author.

Antony, M. M., Coons, M. J., McCabe, R. E., Ashbaugh, A.,
& Swinson, R. P. (2006). Psychometric properties of the
Social Phobia Inventory: Further evaluation. Behaviour
Research and Therapy, 44, 1177–1185.

Barlow, D. H. (2002). Anxiety and its disorders: The nature
and treatment of anxiety and panic (2nd ed.). New York:
Guilford Press.

Beck, A. T., Steer, R. A., & Brown, G. K. (1996). Beck Depression
Inventory manual (2nd ed.). San Antonio, TX:
Psychological Corporation.

Beck, J. S. (1995). Cognitive therapy: Basics and beyond.
New York: Guilford Press.

Beidel, D. C., Turner, S. M., Stanley, M. A., & Dancu, C. V.
(1989). The Social Phobia and Anxiety Inventory: Concurrent
and external validity. Behavior Therapy, 20, 417–427.

Blanco, C., Heimberg, R. G., Schneier, F. R., Fresco, D. M.,
Chen, H., Turk, C. L., et al. (2010). A placebo-controlled
trial of phenelzine, cognitive behavioral group therapy and
their combination for social anxiety disorder. Archives of
General Psychiatry, 67, 286–295.

Blanco, C., Xu, Y., Schneier, F., Okuda, M., Liu, S.-M., &
Heimberg, R. G. (2011). Predictors of persistence of social
anxiety disorder: A national study. Journal of Psychiatric
Research, 45, 1557–1563.

Boden, M. T., John, O. P., Goldin, P. R., Werner, K., Heimberg,
R. G., & Gross, J. J. (2012). The role of maladaptive
beliefs in cognitive behavioral therapy: Evidence from social
anxiety disorder. Behaviour Research and Therapy,
50, 287–291.

Brown, E. J., Heimberg, R. G., & Juster, H. R. (1995). Social
phobia subtype and avoidant personality disorder: Effect
on severity of social phobia, impairment, and outcome of
cognitive-behavioral treatment. Behavior Therapy, 26,
467–486.

Brown, E. J., Turovsky, J., Heimberg, R. G., Juster, H. R.,
Brown, T. A., & Barlow, D. H. (1997). Validation of the
Social Interaction Anxiety Scale and the Social Phobia
Scale across the anxiety disorders. Psychological Assessment,
9, 21–27.

Brown, T. A., Di Nardo, P. A., & Barlow, D. H. (1994). Anxiety
Disorders Interview Schedule for DSM-IV. New York:
Oxford University Press.

Brown, T. A., Di Nardo, P. A., & Barlow, D. H. (2013). Anxiety
and Related Disorders Interview Schedule for DSM-5:
Lifetime version (ADIS-5–L). Manuscript in preparation.

Brown, T. A., Di Nardo, P. A., Lehman, S. L., & Campbell,

L. A. (2001). Reliability of DSM-IV anxiety and mood
disorders: Implications for the classification of emotional
disorders. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 110, 49–58.
Brozovich, F., & Heimberg, R. G. (2008). An analysis of
post-event processing in social anxiety disorder. Clinical
Psychology Review, 28, 891–903.

Bruce, S. E., Yonkers, K. A., Otto, M. W., Eisen, J. L., Weisberg,
R. B., Pagano, M., et al. (2005). Influence of psychiatric
comorbidity on recovery and recurrence in generalized
anxiety disorder, social phobia, and panic disorder: A
12–year prospective study. American Journal of Psychiatry,
162, 1179–1187.

Bruch, M. A., Fallon, M., & Heimberg, R. G. (2003). Social
phobia and difficulties in occupational adjustment. Journal
of Counseling Psychology, 50, 109–117.

Bruch, M. A., Gorsky, J. M., Collins, T. M., & Berger, P.
(1989). Shyness and sociability reexamined: A multicomponent
analysis. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
57, 904–915.

Carleton, R. N., Collimore, K. C., Asmundson, G. J. G., Mc-
Cabe, R. E., Rowa, K., & Antony, M. M. (2009). Refining
and validating the Social Interaction Anxiety Scale and
the Social Phobia Scale. Depression and Anxiety, 26, E71–
E81.

Chambless, D. L., Fydrich, T., & Rodebaugh, T. L. (2008).
Generalized social phobia and avoidant personality disorder:
Meaningful distinction or useless duplication? Depression
and Anxiety, 25, 8–19.

Chambless, D. L., & Ollendick, T. H. (2001). Empirically
supported psychological interventions: Controversies and
evidence. Annual Review of Psychology, 52, 685–716.

Chambless, D. L., Tran, G. Q., & Glass, C. R. (1997). Predictors
of response to cognitive-behavioral group therapy for
social phobia. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 11, 221–240.

Clark, D. M., Ehlers, A., Hackmann, A., McManus, F., Fennell,
M., Grey, N., et al. (2006). Cognitive therapy versus
exposure and applied relaxation in social phobia: A randomized
controlled trial. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 74, 568–578.

Clark, D. M., Ehlers, A., McManus, F., Hackmann, A., Fennell,
M., Campbell, H., et al. (2003). Cognitive therapy
versus fluoxetine in generalized social phobia: A randomized
placebo-controlled trial. Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 71, 1058–1067.

Clark, D. M., & Wells, A. (1995). The cognitive model of social
phobia. In R. G. Heimberg, M. R. Leibowitz, D. A.
Hope, & F. R. Schneier (Eds.), Social phobia: Diagnosis,
assessment, and treatment (pp. 69–93). New York: Guilford
Press.

Collins, K. A., Westra, H. A., Dozois, D. J. A., & Stewart, S.

H. (2005). The validity of the brief version of the Fear of
Negative Evaluation Scale. Journal of Anxiety Disorders,
19, 345–359.
Connor, K. M., Davidson, J. R. T., Churchill, E., Sherwood,
A., Foa, E. B., & Weisler, R. H. (2000). Psychometric properties
of the Social Phobia Inventory (SPIN): A new selfrating
scale. British Journal of Psychiatry, 176, 379–386.

Connor, K. M., Kobak, K. A., Churchill, E., Katzelnick, D.,
& Davidson, J. R. T. (2001). Mini-SPIN: A brief screening
assessment for generalized social anxiety disorder. Depression
and Anxiety, 14, 137–140.


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

Cox, B. J., Pagura, J., Stein, M. B., & Sareen, J. (2009). The
relationship between generalized social phobia and avoidant
personality disorder in a national mental health survey.
Depression and Anxiety, 26, 354–362.

Cox, B. J., Ross, L., Swinson, R. P., & Direnfeld, D. M.
(1998). A comparison of social phobia outcome measures
in cognitive-behavioral group therapy. Behavior Modification,
22, 285–297.

Davidson, J. R. T., Miner, C. M., De Veaugh-Geiss, J., Tupler,

L. A., Colket, J. T., & Potts, N. L. (1997). The Brief Social
Phobia Scale: A psychometric evaluation. Psychological
Medicine, 27, 161–166.
Davidson, J. R. T., Potts, N. L., Richichi, E. A., Ford, S. M.,
Krishnan, R. R., Smith, R. D., et al. (1991). The Brief
Social Phobia Scale. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry,
52(Suppl. 11), 48–51.

Di Nardo, P. A., Brown, T. A., & Barlow, D. H. (1994). Anxiety
Disorders Interview Schedule for DSM-IV: Lifetime
version (ADIS-IV-L). New York: Oxford University Press.

Edelmann, R. E., & Chambless, D. L. (1995). Adherence during
session and homework in cognitive-behavioral group
treatment of social phobia. Behaviour Research and Therapy,
33, 537–577.

Elting, D. T., Hope, D. A., & Heimberg, R. G. (1997). Interrelationships
among measures commonly used in research
on social phobia. Depression and Anxiety, 4, 246–248.

Erwin, B. A., Heimberg, R. G., Juster, H. R., & Mindlin, M.
(2002). Comorbid anxiety and mood disorders among persons
with social phobia. Behaviour Research and Therapy,
40, 19–35.

Erwin, B. A., Heimberg, R. G., Schneier, F. R., & Liebowitz,

M. R. (2003). Anger experience and expression in social
anxiety disorder: Pretreatment profile and predictors of
attrition and response to cognitive-behavioral treatment.
Behavior Therapy, 34, 331–350.
Fergus, T. A., Valentiner, D. P., McGrath, P. B., Gier-Lonsway,

S. L., & Kim, H.-S. (2012). Short forms of the Social Interaction
Anxiety Scale and the Social Phobia Scale. Journal
of Personality Assessment, 94, 310–320.
Feske, U., Perry, K. J., Chambless, D. L., Renneberg, B., &
Goldstein, A. J. (1996). Avoidant personality disorder as a
predictor for severity and treatment outcome among generalized
social phobics. Journal of Personality Disorders,
10, 174–184.

Fresco, D. M., Coles, M. E., Heimberg, R. G., Liebowitz, M.
R., Hami, S., Stein, M. B., et al. (2001). The Liebowitz
Social Anxiety Scale: A comparison of the psychometric
properties of self-report and clinician-administered formats.
Psychological Medicine, 31, 1025–1035.

Frisch, M. B. (1994). Manual and treatment guide for the
Quality of Life Inventory. Minneapolis, MN: National
Computer Systems.

Gaston, J. E., Abbott, M. J., Rapee, R. M., & Neary, S. A.
(2006). Do empirically supported treatments generalize
to private practice?: A benchmark study of a cognitive


behavioural group treatment programme for social phobia.
British Journal of Clinical Psychology, 45, 33–48.

Gilbert, P. (2001). Evolution and social anxiety: The role of
attraction, social competition, and social hierarchies. Psychiatric
Clinics of North America, 24, 723–751.

Goldin, P. R., Ziv, M., Jazaieri, H., Werner, K., Kraemer,
H., Heimberg, R. G., et al. (2012). Cognitive reappraisal
self-efficacy mediates the effects of individual cognitivebehavioral
therapy for social anxiety disorder in a randomized
controlled trial. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 80, 1034–1040.

Hackmann, A., Clark, D. M., & McManus, F. (2000). Recurrent
images and early memories in social phobia. Behaviour
Research and Therapy, 38, 601–610.

Hackmann, A., Surawy, C., & Clark, D. M. (1998). Seeing
yourself through others’ eyes: A study of spontaneously
occurring images in social phobia. Behavioural and Cognitive
Psychotherapy, 26, 3–12.

Hambrick, J. P., Turk, C. L., Heimberg, R. G., Schneier, F. R.,
& Liebowitz, M. R. (2003). The experience of disability
and quality of life in social anxiety disorder. Depression
and Anxiety, 18, 46–50.

Hayes, S. A., Hope, D. A., Van Dyke, M., & Heimberg, R.

G. (2007). Working alliance for clients with social anxiety
disorder: Relationship with session helpfulness and
within-session habituation. Cognitive Behaviour Therapy,
36, 34–42.
Hayes, S. A., Miller, N. A., Hope, D. A., Heimberg, R. G., &
Juster, H. R. (2008). Assessing client progress session-bysession:
The Social Anxiety Session Change Index. Cognitive
and Behavioral Practice, 15, 203–211.

Heimberg, R. G. (1994). Cognitive assessment strategies and
the measurement of outcome of treatment for social phobia.
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 32, 269–280.

Heimberg, R. G., & Becker, R. E. (2002). Cognitivebehavioral
group therapy for social phobia: Basic mechanisms
and clinical strategies. New York: Guilford Press.

Heimberg, R. G., Brozovich, F. A., & Rapee, R. M. (2010).
A cognitive-behavioral model of social anxiety disorder:
Update and extension. In S. G. Hofmann & P. M. DiBartolo
(Eds.), Social anxiety: Clinical, developmental, and
social perspectives (2nd ed., pp. 395–422). New York:
Academic Press.

Heimberg, R. G., Dodge, C. S., Hope, D. A., Kennedy, C. R.,
Zollo, L. J., & Becker, R. E. (1990). Cognitive-behavioral
group treatment for social phobia: Comparison with a
credible placebo control. Cognitive Therapy and Research,
14, 1–23.

Heimberg, R. G., & Holaway, R. M. (2007). Examination of
the known-groups validity of the Liebowitz Social Anxiety
Scale. Depression and Anxiety, 24, 447–454.

Heimberg, R. G., Holt, C. S., Schneier, F. R., Spitzer, R. L.,
& Liebowitz, M. R. (1993). The issues of subtypes in the
diagnosis of social phobia. Journal of Anxiety Disorders,
7, 249–269.


Social Anxiety Disorder

Heimberg, R. G., Hope, D. A., Dodge, C. S., & Becker, R. E.
(1990). DSM-III-R subtypes of social phobia: Comparison
of generalized social phobics and public speaking phobics.
Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 178, 172–179.

Heimberg, R. G., Horner, K. J., Juster, H. R., Safren, S. A.,
Brown, E. J., Schneier, F. R., et al. (1999). Psychometric
properties of the Liebowitz Social Anxiety Scale. Psychological
Medicine, 29, 199–212.

Heimberg, R. G., Liebowitz, M. R., Hope, D. A., Schneier, F.
R., Holt, C. S., Welkowitz, L. A., et al. (1998). Cognitive
behavioral group therapy vs. phenelzine therapy for social
phobia: 12–week outcome. Archives of General Psychiatry,
55, 1133–1141.

Heimberg, R. G., Mueller, G. P., Holt, C. S., Hope, D. A., &
Liebowitz, M. R. (1992). Assessment of anxiety in social
interaction and being observed by others: The Social Interaction
Anxiety Scale and the Social Phobia Scale. Behavior
Therapy, 23, 53–73.

Heimberg, R. G., Salzman, D. G., Holt, C. S., & Blendell,

K. A. (1993). Cognitive-behavioral group treatment for social
phobia: Effectiveness at five-year followup. Cognitive
Therapy and Research, 17, 325–339.
Heimberg, R. G., & Turk, C. L. (2002). Assessment of social
phobia. In R. G. Heimberg & R. E. Becker (Eds.),
Cognitive-behavioral group therapy for social phobia:
Basic mechanisms and clinical strategies (pp. 107–126).
New York: Guilford Press.

Herbert, J. D., Bellack, A. S., & Hope, D. A. (1991). Concurrent
validity of the Social Phobia and Anxiety Inventory.
Journal of Psychopathology and Behavioral Assessment,
13, 357–368.

Herbert, J. D., Hope, D. A., & Bellack, A. S. (1992). Validity
of the distinction between generalized social phobia and
avoidant personality disorder. Journal of Abnormal Psychology,
101, 332–339.

Hofmann, S. G. (2004). Cognitive mediation of treatment
change in social phobia. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 72, 392–399.

Hofmann, S. G., Newman, M. G., Becker, E., Taylor, C.
B., & Roth, W. T. (1995). Social phobia with and without
avoidant personality disorder: Preliminary behavior
therapy outcome findings. Journal of Anxiety Disorders,
9, 427–438.

Hope, D. A., Heimberg, R. G., & Bruch, M. A. (1995). Dismantling
cognitive-behavioral group therapy for social
phobia. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 33, 637–650.

Hope, D. A., Heimberg, R. G., Juster, H., & Turk, C. L.
(2000). Managing social anxiety: A cognitive-behavioral
therapy approach (client workbook). New York: Oxford
University Press.

Hope, D. A., Heimberg, R. G., & Turk, C. L. (2006). Managing
social anxiety: A cognitive-behavioral therapy approach
(therapist guide). New York: Oxford University
Press.

Hope, D. A., Heimberg, R. G., & Turk, C. L. (2010a). Man


aging social anxiety: A cognitive-behavioral therapy approach
(Client Workbook, 2nd ed.). New York: Oxford
University Press.

Hope, D. A., Heimberg, R. G. , & Turk, C.L. (2010b). Managing
social anxiety: A cognitive-behavioral therapy
approach (Therapist Guide, 2nd ed.). New York: Oxford
University Press.

Hope, D. A., Herbert, J. D., & White, C. (1995). Diagnostic
subtype, avoidant personality disorder, and efficacy of
cognitive behavioral group therapy for social phobia. Cognitive
Therapy and Research, 19, 399–417.

Hope, D. A., Van Dyke, M., Heimberg, R. G., Turk, C. L.,
& Fresco, D. M. (2002). Cognitive-behavioral therapy for
social anxiety disorder: Therapist adherence scale. Unpublished
manuscript, available from Richard G. Heimberg,
Adult Anxiety Clinic, Department of Psychology,
Temple University, Philadelphia, PA 19122–6085.

Huppert, J. D., Strunk, D. R., Ledley, D. R., Davidson, J. R. T.,
& Foa, E. B. (2008). Generalized social anxiety disorder
and avoidant personality disorder: Structural analysis and
treatment outcome. Depression and Anxiety, 25, 441–448.

Kabat-Zinn, J. (1990). Full catastrophe living: Using the wisdom
of your body and mind to face stress, pain, and illness.
New York: Dell.

Katzelnick, D. J., Kobak, K. A., DeLeire, T., Henk, H. J., Greist,
J. H., Davidson, J. R. T., et al. (2001). Impact of generalized
social anxiety disorder in managed care. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 158, 1999–2007.

Kendall, P. C., Chu, B., Gifford, A., Hayes, C., & Nauta, M.
(1998). Breathing life into a manual: Flexibility and creativity
with manual-based treatments. Cognitive and Behavioral
Practice, 5, 177–198.

Kendall, P. C., Gosch, E., Furr, J. M., & Sood, E. (2008).
Flexibility within fidelity. Journal of the American Academy
of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 47, 987–993.

Kessler, R. C., Berglund, P. D., Demler, O., Olga, J. R., Merikangas,
K. R., & Walters, E. E. (2005). Lifetime prevalence
and age-of-onset distributions of DSM-IV disorders
in the National Comorbidity Survey Replication. Archives
of General Psychiatry, 62, 593–602.

Koszycki, D., Benger, M., Shlik, J., & Bradwejn, J. (2007).
Randomized trial of a meditation-based stress reduction
program and cognitive behavior therapy in generalized social
anxiety disorder. Behaviour Research and Therapy,
45, 2518–2526.

Kupper, N., & Denollet, J. (2012). Social anxiety in the general
population. Introducing abbreviated versions of the
SIAS and SPS. Journal of Affective Disorders, 136, 90–98.

Leary, M. R. (1983). A brief version of the Fear of Negative
Evaluation Scale. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin,
9, 371–375.

Leary, M. R., Kowalski, R. M., & Campbell, C. D. (1988).
Self-presentational concerns and social anxiety: The role
of generalized impression expectancies. Journal of Research
in Personality, 22, 308–321.


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

Ledley, D. R., Heimberg, R. G., Hope, D. A., Hayes, S. A..,
Zaider, T. I., Van Dyke, M., et al. (2009). Efficacy of a
manualized and workbook-driven individual treatment for
social anxiety disorder. Behavior Therapy, 40, 414–424.

Leung, A. W., & Heimberg, R. G. (1996). Homework compliance,
perceptions of control, and outcome of cognitivebehavioral
treatment for social phobia. Behaviour Research
and Therapy, 34, 423–432.

Liebowitz, M. R. (1987). Social phobia. Modern Problems in
Pharmacopsychiatry, 22, 141–173.

Liebowitz, M. R., Heimberg, R. G., Fresco, D. M., Travers,
J., & Stein, M. B. (2000). Social phobia or social anxiety
disorder: What’s in a name? Archives of General Psychiatry,
57, 191–192.

Liebowitz, M. R., Heimberg, R. G., Schneier, F. R., Hope,

D. A., Davies, S., Holt, C. S., et al. (1999). Cognitivebehavioral
group therapy versus phenelzine in social
phobia: Long-term outcome. Depression and Anxiety, 10,
89–98.
Lincoln, T. M., Rief, W., Hahlweg, K., Frank, M., von
Witzleben, I., Schroeder, B., et al. (2003). Effectiveness
of an empirically supported treatment for social phobia
in the field. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 41, 1251–
1269.

MacLeod, C., & Mathews, A. (1991). Biased cognitive operations
in anxiety: Accessibility of information or assignment
of processing priorities? Behaviour Research and
Therapy, 29, 599–610.

Magee, L., Erwin, B. A., & Heimberg, R. G. (2009). Psychological
treatment of social anxiety disorder and specific
phobia. In M. M. Antony & M. B. Stein (Eds.), Handbook
of anxiety and the anxiety disorders (pp. 334–349). New
York: Oxford University Press.

Magee, W. J., Eaton, W. W., Wittchen, H.-U., McGonagle, K.
A., & Kessler, R. C. (1996). Agoraphobia, simple phobia,
and social phobia in the National Comorbidity Survey. Archives
of General Psychiatry, 53, 159–168.

Mannuzza, S., Schneier, F. R., Chapman, T. F., Liebowitz, M.
R., Klein, D. F., & Fyer, A. J. (1995). Generalized social
phobia: Reliability and validity. Archives of General Psychiatry,
52, 230–237.

Marques, L., Porter, E., Keshaviah, A., Pollack, M. H., Van
Ameringen, M., Stein, M. B., et al. (2012). Avoidant personality
disorder in individuals with generalized social
anxiety disorder: What does it add? Journal of Anxiety
Disorders, 26, 665–672.

Mattick, R. P., & Clarke, J. C. (1998). Development and validation
of measures of social phobia scrutiny fear and social
interaction anxiety. Behaviour Research and Therapy,
36, 455–470.

Mattick, R. P., & Peters, L. (1988). Treatment of severe social
phobia: Effects of guided exposure with and without cognitive
restructuring. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 56, 251–260.

McEvoy, P. M. (2007). Effectiveness of cognitive behavioural
group therapy for social phobia in a community clinic: A
benchmarking study. Behaviour Research and Therapy,
45, 3030–3040.

McEvoy, P. M., Nathan, P., Rapee, R. M., & Campbell, B. N.

C. (2012). Cognitive behavioural group therapy for social
phobia: Evidence of transportability to community clinics.
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 50, 258–265.
Mennin, D. S., Fresco, D. M., Heimberg, R. G., Schneier, F.
R., Davies, S. O., & Liebowitz, M. R. (2002). Screening
for social anxiety disorder in the clinical setting: Using
the Liebowitz Social Anxiety Scale. Journal of Anxiety
Disorders, 16, 661–673.

Mörtberg, E., Clark, D. M., & Bejerot, S. (2011). Intensive
group cognitive therapy and individual cognitive therapy
for social phobia: Sustained improvement at 5–year
follow-up. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 25, 994–1000.

Narrow, W. E., Rae, D. S., Robins, L. N., & Regier, D. A.
(2002). Revised prevalence estimates of mental disorders
in the United States: Using a clinical significance criterion
to reconcile two surveys’ estimates. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 59, 115–123.

Norton, P. J., & Hope, D. A. (2001). Kernels of truth or distorted
perceptions: Self and observer ratings of social
anxiety and performance. Behavior Therapy, 32, 765–786.

Ougrin, D. (2011). Efficacy of exposure versus cognitive
therapy in anxiety disorders: Systematic review and meta
analysis. BMC Psychiatry, 11, 200.

Peters, L., Sunderland, M., Andrews, G., Rapee, R. M., &
Mattick, R. P. (2012). Development of a short form Social
Interaction Anxiety (SIAS) and Social Phobia Scale (SPS)
using nonparametric item response theory: The SIAS-6
and the SPS-6. Psychological Assessment, 24, 66–76.

Piet, J., Hougaard, E., Hecksher, M. S., & Rosenberg, N. K.
(2010). A randomized pilot study of mindfulness-based
cognitive therapy and group cognitive-behavioral therapy
for young adults with social phobia. Scandinavian Journal
of Psychology, 51, 403–410.

Pontoski, K., Heimberg, R. G., Turk, C. L., & Coles, M. E.
(2010). Psychotherapy for social anxiety disorder. In D.
Stein, E. Hollander, & B. Rothbaum (Eds.), American
Psychiatric Publishing textbook of anxiety disorders (2nd
ed., pp. 501–521). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric
Press.

Powers, M. B., Sigmarsson, S. R., & Emmelkamp, P. M. G.
(2008). A meta-analytic review of psychological treatments
for social anxiety disorder. International Journal of
Cognitive Therapy, 1, 94–113.

Rapee, R. M., & Heimberg, R. G. (1997). A cognitivebehavioral
model of anxiety in social phobia. Behaviour
Research and Therapy, 35, 741–756.

Rapee, R. M., & Lim, L. (1992). Discrepancy between self-
and observer ratings of performance in social phobics.
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 101, 728–731.


Social Anxiety Disorder

Ries, B. J., McNeil, D. W., Boone, M. L., Turk, C. L., Carter,

L. E., & Heimberg, R. G. (1998). Assessment of contemporary
social phobia verbal report instruments. Behaviour
Research and Therapy, 36, 983–994.
Rodebaugh, T. L. (2009). Social phobia and perceived
friendship quality. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 23, 872–
878.

Rodebaugh, T. L., Heimberg, R. G., Brown, P. J., Fernandez,

K. C., Blanco, C., Schneier, F. R., et al. (2011). More reasons
to be straightforward: Findings and norms for two
scales relevant to social anxiety. Journal of Anxiety Disorders,
25, 623–630.
Rodebaugh, T. L., Woods, C. M., & Heimberg, R. G. (2007).
The reverse of social anxiety is not always the opposite:
The reverse-scored items of the Social Interaction Anxiety
Scale do not belong. Behavior Therapy, 38, 192–206.

Rodebaugh, T. L., Woods, C. M., Thissen, D. M., Heimberg,

R. G., Chambless, D. L., & Rapee, R. M. (2004). More
information from fewer questions: The factor structure
and item properties of the original and Brief Fear of
Negative Evaluation Scale. Psychological Assessment, 16,
169–181.
Roth, D. A., Coles, M. E., & Heimberg, R. G. (2002). The
relationship between memories for childhood teasing and
anxiety and depression in adulthood. Journal of Anxiety
Disorders, 16, 149–164.

Rytwinski, N. K., Fresco, D. M., Heimberg, R. G., Coles, M.
E., Liebowitz, M. R., Cissell, S., et al. (2009). Screening
for social anxiety disorder with the self-report version of
the Liebowitz Social Anxiety Scale. Depression and Anxiety,
26, 34–38.

Safren, S. A., Heimberg, R. G., Brown, E. J., & Holle, C.
(1997). Quality of life in social phobia. Depression and
Anxiety, 4, 126–133.

Safren, S. A., Heimberg, R. G., & Juster, H. R. (1997). Client
expectancies and their relationship to pretreatment symptomatology
and outcome of cognitive-behavioral group
treatment for social phobia. Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 65, 694–698.

Sanderson, W. C., Di Nardo, P. A., Rapee, R. M., & Barlow,

D. H. (1990). Syndrome comorbidity in patients diagnosed
with a DSM-III-R anxiety disorder. Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 99, 308–312.
Sank, L. I., & Shaffer, C. S. (1984). A therapist’s manual for
cognitive behavior therapy in groups. New York: Plenum
Press.

Schneier, F. R., Heckelman, L. R., Garfinkel, R., Campeas,
R., Fallon, B. A., Gitow, A., et al. (1994). Functional impairment
in social phobia. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry,
55, 322–331.

Schneier, F. R., Johnson, J., Hornig, C. D., Liebowitz, M. R.,
& Weissman, M. M. (1992). Social phobia: Comorbidity
and morbidity in an epidemiologic sample. Archives of
General Psychiatry, 49, 282–288.

Scholing, A., & Emmelkamp, P. M. G. (1993). Exposure with
and without cognitive therapy for generalized social phobia:
Effects of individual and group treatment. Behaviour
Research and Therapy, 31, 667–681.

Segal, Z. V., Williams, J. M., & Teasdale, J. D. (2002).
Mindfulness-based cognitive therapy for depression: A
new approach to preventing relapse. New York: Guilford
Press.

Stangier, U., Heidenreich, T., Peitz, M., Lauterbach, W., &
Clark, D. M. (2003). Cognitive therapy for social phobia:
Individual versus group treatment. Behaviour Research
and Therapy, 41, 991–1007.

Stangier, U., Schramm, E., Heidenreich, T., Berger, M., &
Clark, D. M. (2011). Cognitive therapy vs. interpersonal
therapy in social anxiety disorder. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 68, 692–700.

Stopa, L., & Clark, D. M. (1993). Cognitive processes in social
phobia. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 31, 255–
267.

Taylor, S., Woody, S., McLean, P. D., & Koch, W. J. (1997).
Sensitivity of outcome measures for treatments of generalized
social phobia. Assessment, 4, 181–191.

Turner, S. M., Beidel, D. C., Dancu, C. V., & Stanley, M. A.
(1989). An empirically derived inventory to measure social
fears and anxiety: The Social Phobia and Anxiety Inventory.
Psychological Assessment, 1, 35–40.

Turner, S. M., Beidel, D. C., & Townsley, R. M. (1992). Social
phobia: A comparison of specific and generalized subtype
and avoidant personality disorder. Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 101, 326–331.

Turner, S. M., Beidel, D. C., Wolff, P. L., Spaulding, S., &
Jacob, R. G. (1996). Clinical features affecting treatment
outcome in social phobia. Behaviour Research and Therapy,
34, 795–804.

Vriends, N., Becker, E. S., Meyer, A., Michael, T., & Margraf,

J. (2007). Subtypes of social phobia: Are they of any use?
Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 21, 59–75.
Vriends, N., Becker, E. S., Meyer, A., Williams, S. L., Lutz,
R., & Margraf, J. (2007). Recovery from social phobia in
the community and its predictors: Data from a longitudinal
epidemiological study. Journal of Anxiety Disorders,
21, 320–337.

Wallace, S. T., & Alden, L. E. (1991). A comparison of social
standards and perceived ability in anxious and nonanxious
men. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 15, 237–254.

Watson, D., & Friend, R. (1969). Measurement of socialevaluative
anxiety. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 33, 448–457.

Weeks, J. W., Heimberg, R. G., Fresco, D. M., Hart, T. A.,
Turk, C. L., Schneier, F. R., et al. (2005). Empirical validation
and psychometric evaluation of the Brief Fear of
Negative Evaluation Scale in patients with social anxiety
disorder. Psychological Assessment, 17, 179–190.

Weeks, J. W., Heimberg, R. G., & Rodebaugh, T. L., & Nor



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

ton, P. J. (2008). Exploring the relationship between fear of
positive evaluation and social anxiety. Journal of Anxiety
Disorders, 22, 386–400.

Weeks, J. W., Spokas, M. E., & Heimberg, R. G. (2007). Psychometric
evaluation of the Mini–Social Phobia Inventory
(Mini-SPIN) in a treatment-seeking sample. Depression
and Anxiety, 24, 382–391.

Wenzel, A. (2002). Characteristics of close relationships in
individuals with social phobia: A preliminary comparison
with nonanxious individuals. In J. H. Harvey & A. Wenzel
(Eds.), A clinician’s guide to maintaining and enhancing
close relationships (pp. 199–214). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.

Wlazlo, Z., Schroeder-Hartwig, K., Hand, I., Kaiser, G., &
Münchau, N. (1990). Exposure in vivo vs. social skills

training for social phobia: Long-term outcome and differential
effects. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 28,
181–193.

Wolpe, J., & Lazarus, A. A. (1966). Behavior therapy techniques.
New York: Pergamon.

Wong, J., Gordon, E. A., & Heimberg, R. G. (2012). Social
anxiey disorder. In P. Sturmey & M. Hersen (Eds.), Handbook
of evidence-based practice in clinical psychology:
Volume II, Adult disorders (pp. 621–649). New York:
Wiley.

Woody, S. R., & Adessky, R. S. (2002). Therapeutic alliance,
group cohesion, and homework compliance during
cognitive-behavioral group treatment of social phobia. Behavior
Therapy, 35, 5–27.


C H a P t e r 4 C H a P t e r 4
obsessive–Compulsive Disorder

MartiN e. fraNkliN
eDNa B. foa

it will not take the reader long to see that successful therapy for obsessive–compulsive
disorder (oCD) is markedly different in both structure and content from the usual therapeutic
approaches. for this reason, regrettably, few therapists feel self‑efficacious enough
to undertake this therapy, yet this approach is clearly the treatment of choice for the most
beneficial short‑ and long‑term effects in oCD according to clinical trials. The information
provided in this detailed chapter should be sufficient for any reasonably well‑trained
mental health professional to undertake this treatment, particularly if few other options
are available. The suffering involved with oCD can be extraordinary, and even imperfect
attempts at therapy can relieve much of this suffering. This chapter describes the detailed
conduct of intensive daily sessions involving both imaginal and direct in vivo practice.
Also noticeable is the ingenuity required of therapists (e.g., Where do you find dead animals?).
The importance of involving significant others continues a theme first described
by Craske and Barlow in Chapter 1 of this volume, in which spouses/partners or other
people close to the individual with the problem become an important and integral part
of treatment. finally, this chapter contains an up‑to‑date review of the current status of
psychological and pharmacological approaches to oCD.—D. H. B.

Advances in cognitive-behavioral and pharmacological
treatments in the last four decades have greatly
improved the prognosis for patients with obsessive–
compulsive disorder (OCD). In this chapter we first
discuss diagnostic and theoretical issues of OCD and
review the available treatments, then describe assessment
procedures and illustrate in detail how to implement
intensive cognitive-behavioral treatment (CBT)
involving exposure and ritual prevention (EX/RP) for
OCD. Throughout the chapter, we use case material to
illustrate interactions that occur between therapist and
patient to demonstrate the process that occurs during
treatment.

DefiNitioN

In the fifth edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5; American Psychiatric
Association, 2013), OCD is characterized by
recurrent obsessions and/or compulsions that interfere
substantially with daily functioning. Obsessions are
“persistent thoughts, urges, or images that are experienced,
at some time during the disturbance, as intrusive
and unwanted, and that in most individuals cause
marked anxiety or distress” (p. 237). Common obsessions
are repeated thoughts about causing harm to others,
contamination, and doubting whether one locked

155


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

the front door. Compulsions are “repetitive behaviors
or mental acts that the individual feels driven to perform
in response to an obsession or according to rules
that must be applied rigidly” (p. 237). Common compulsions
include handwashing, checking, and counting.
In DSM-5, OCD is categorized among obsessive–
compulsive and related disorders (e.g., Stein et al.,
2010), which highlights the formal and functional similarity
between OCD and several other disorders that involve
intense anxiety and associated compulsions (e.g.,
body dysmorphic disorder), as well as those involving
repetitive behaviors that appear to be driven by appetitive
urges (e.g., trichotillomania [hair pulling], excoriation
[skin picking] disorder; American Psychiatric
Association, 2013).

In DSM, the functional link between obsessions and
compulsions is emphasized: “Obsessions” are defined
as thoughts, images, or impulses that cause marked
anxiety or distress, and “compulsions” are defined as
overt (behavioral) or covert (mental) actions that are
performed in an attempt to reduce the distress brought
on by obsessions or according to rigid rules. This modification
is supported by findings from the DSM-IV field
trial on OCD, in which over 90% of participants reported
that the aim of their compulsions was either to
prevent harm associated with their obsessions or to reduce
obsessional distress (Foa et al., 1995).

Data from the DSM-IV field study also indicated
that the vast majority (over 90%) of individuals with
OCD manifest both obsessions and behavioral rituals.
When mental rituals are also included, only 2% of the
sample report “pure” obsessions (Foa et al., 1995). Behavioral
rituals (e.g., handwashing) are equivalent to
mental rituals (e.g., silently repeating special prayers)
in their functional relationship to obsessions: Both
serve to reduce obsessional distress, to prevent feared
harm, or to restore safety. Thus, whereas all obsessions
are indeed mental events, compulsions can be either
mental or behavioral. Identification of mental rituals is
an especially important aspect of treatment planning
because obsessions and compulsions are addressed via
different techniques. For example, we once treated a
patient who described himself as a “pure obsessional,”
who would experience intrusive and unwanted images
of harm coming to his girlfriend by an animal attack.
The patient would quickly and intentionally insert his
own image into the scene to become the victim of the
animal mauling, thereby reducing his distress and, in
his estimation, reducing the likelihood that some future
harm would come to his girlfriend. The substitution

of his own image into the scene constituted a mental
ritual, and the success of imaginal exposure exercises
required that the patient refrain from this form of compulsion.


A growing consensus about a continuum of insight
in individuals with OCD (e.g., Foa et al., 1995; Insel &
Akiskal, 1986) led to the inclusion in DSM-IV (American
Psychiatric Association, 1994) of a subtype of
OCD “with poor insight” to include individuals who
indeed have obsessions and compulsions but fail to recognize
their senselessness. In DSM-5, individuals are
classified as having good or fair insight, poor insight,
or absent insight/delusional beliefs, reflecting an even
greater recognition of a continuum of insight in OCD
(Leckman et al., 2010). Clinically it is important to
evaluate the degree of insight prior to initiating CBT
because fixed belief about the consequences of refraining
from compulsions and avoidance behaviors has
been found to be associated with attenuated treatment
outcome (e.g., Foa, Abramowitz, Franklin, & Kozak,
1999; Neziroglu, Stevens, Yaryura-Tobias, & McKay,
2000).

To be diagnosed with OCD, obsessions and/or compulsions
must be found to be of sufficient severity to
cause marked distress, be time-consuming, and interfere
with daily functioning. If another Axis I disorder
is present, the obsessions and compulsions cannot be
restricted to the content of that disorder (e.g., preoccupation
with food in the presence of eating disorders).

PrevaleNce aND course of ocD

Once thought to be an extremely rare disorder, the 12month
prevalence of OCD was estimated at 1.0% in
the recent National Comorbidity Survey Replication
involving over 9,000 adult participants in the United
States (Kessler et al., 2005). Epidemiological studies
with children and adolescents suggest similar lifetime
prevalence rates in these samples (e.g., Flament et al.,
1988; Valleni-Basille et al., 1994). Slightly more than
half of adults suffering from OCD are female (Rasmussen
& Tsuang, 1986), whereas a 2:1 male to female
ratio has been observed in several pediatric clinical
samples (e.g., Hanna, 1995; Swedo, Rapoport, Leonard,
Lenane, & Cheslow, 1989). Age of onset of the disorder
typically ranges from early adolescence to young
adulthood, with earlier onset in males; modal onset is
ages 13–15 in males, and ages 20–24 in females (Rasmussen
& Eisen, 1990). However, cases of OCD have


Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder

been documented in children as young as age 2 (Rapoport,
Swedo, & Leonard, 1992).

Development of the disorder is usually gradual, but
acute onset has been reported in some cases. Although
chronic waxing and waning of symptoms are typical,
episodic and deteriorating courses have been observed
in about 10% of patients (Rasmussen & Eisen, 1989).
In some cases of pediatric OCD and tic disorders, onset
is very sudden and associated with streptococcal infection;
treatment of the infection is associated with
substantial reduction of symptoms, but recurrence of
infection is again associated with symptom exacerbation
(Swedo et al., 1998). Presentation of OCD in these
cases, which is much more typical in males than in
females, came to be known as pediatric autoimmune
neuropsychiatric disorders associated with streptococcal
infection (PANDAS) and has more recently been
revised and broadened under the umbrella term “pediatric
autoimmune neuropsychiatric syndrome” (PANS;
Swedo, Leckman, & Rose, 2012); the prevalence of
PANDAS or PANS has yet to be determined. OCD
is frequently associated with impairments in general
functioning, such as disruption of gainful employment
(Koran, 2000; Leon, Portera, & Weissman, 1995) and
interpersonal relationship difficulties (Emmelkamp, de
Haan, & Hoogduin, 1990; Riggs, Hiss, & Foa, 1992).
Adolescents identified as having OCD (Flament et al.,
1988) reported in a subsequent follow-up study that
they had withdrawn socially to prevent contamination
and to conserve energy for obsessive–compulsive behaviors
(Flament et al., 1990). Many individuals with
OCD suffer for years before seeking treatment. In one
study, individuals first presented for psychiatric treatment
over 7 years after the onset of significant symptoms
(Rasmussen & Tsuang, 1986). The disorder may
cause severe impairment in functioning that results in
job loss and disruption of marital and other interpersonal
relationships. Marital distress is reported by approximately
50% of married individuals seeking treatment
for OCD (Emmelkamp et al., 1990; Riggs et al.,
1992).

coMorBiDity

Convergent epidemiological and clinical data indicate
that OCD rarely occurs in isolation: Although the rates
of comorbidity differ across studies due to selection of
population and methodology, comorbidity is generally
high. For example, Weissman and colleagues (1994)

found that 49% of individuals diagnosed with OCD suffered
from a comorbid anxiety disorder and 27% from
comorbid major depressive disorder (MDD). Among
studies conducted specifically within anxiety clinics,
there is great variability, but comorbid conditions are
generally common (for a review, see Ledley, Pai, &
Franklin, 2007). In the largest of the studies conducted
in the context of an anxiety clinic, Brown, Campbell,
Lehman, Grisham, and Mancill (2001) found that 57%
of 77 adults with a principal diagnosis of OCD had
a current comorbid Axis I condition; the rate rose to
86% for lifetime comorbid Axis I conditions. Notably,
when OCD co-occurs with other anxiety disorders, it
is typically the principal diagnosis (e.g., the diagnosis
of greatest severity; see Antony, Downie, & Swinson,
1998). It also appears to be the case that MDD onset
tends to follow that of OCD, suggesting that depression
might be a response to OCD symptoms (Bellodi,
Sciuto, Diaferia, Ronchi, & Smeraldi, 1992; Diniz et
al., 2004).

The data are equivocal with respect to the influence
of comorbidity on OCD presentation. In one study,
Denys, Tenney, van Megen, de Geus, and Westenberg
(2004) found that comorbidity did not influence OCD
symptom severity, whereas others (Angst, 1993; Tukel,
Polat, Ozdemir, Aksut, & Turksov, 2002) found a relationship
between comorbidity and OCD symptom severity.
A more consistent finding is that comorbidity
is associated with poorer quality of life, particularly
in the case of comorbid depression (Lochner & Stein,
2003; Masellis, Rector, & Richter, 2003).

With respect to the effect of comorbid anxiety and
depression on treatment outcome, the influence of depression
has received more empirical attention to date.
Some studies have found that higher levels of depression
at pretreatment are related to poorer outcome (e.g.,
Keijsers, Hoogduin, & Schaap, 1994; Steketee, Chambless,
& Tran, 2001), whereas others have found little
or no effect (Mataix-Cols, Marks, Greist, Kobak, &
Baer, 2002; O’Sullivan, Noshirvani, Marks, Monteiro,
& Lelliott, 1991; Steketee, Eisen, Dyck, Warshaw, &
Rasmussen, 1999). Some have suggested that, more
specifically, the severity of the comorbid depression
might influence its effects on OCD treatment outcome:
Abramowitz, Franklin, Street, Kozak, and Foa (2000)
found that only severely depressed patients were less
likely to respond to EX/RP therapy for OCD. Similarly,
highly depressed patients with OCD seem to be at
greater risk for relapse following treatment discontinuation
(Abramowitz & Foa, 2000; Basoglu, Lax, Kasvi



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

kis, & Marks, 1988). The influence of comorbid anxiety
disorders on outcome has received less attention
thus far: One study reported that patients with OCD
and comorbid generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) terminate
OCD treatment at higher rates than other patients
(Steketee et al., 2001), and another found that the
presence of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) in patients
with OCD attenuated response to EX/RP (Gershuny,
Baer, Jenike, Minichiello, & Wilhelm, 2002).
Within pediatric OCD specifically, comorbidity other
than a second anxiety disorder (e.g., externalizing disorder,
mood disorder) was associated with poorer acute
response to CBT (Storch et al., 2008), and another recent
report indicated that comorbid attention-deficit/
hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) specifically attenuated
CBT outcomes at follow-up among children and adolescents
(Farrell, Waters, Milliner, & Ollendick, 2012).
Notably, the mechanisms by which these comorbid
conditions influence outcome have yet to be explored.

Tourette syndrome and other tic disorders also appear
to be related to OCD, although not sufficiently to
be grouped within obsessive–compulsive and related
disorders in DSM-5. Estimates of the comorbidity of
Tourette syndrome and OCD range from 28 to 63%
(Comings, 1990; Kurlan et al., 2002; Leckman & Chittenden,
1990; Pauls, Towbin, Leckman, Zahner, &
Cohen, 1986). Conversely, up to 17% of patients with
OCD are thought to have Tourette syndrome (Comings,
1990; Kurlan et al., 2002; Rasmussen & Eisen, 1989).
In a recent report, tic comorbidity was associated with
poorer treatment outcome in general (Matsunaga et
al., 2005), yet in a recent pediatric study was found to
influence pharmacotherapy treatment outcome but not
CBT response (March et al., 2007).

DiffereNtial DiaGNosis

The high comorbidity of OCD with other disorders
noted earlier, as well as the similarity between the criteria
for OCD and other DSM disorders, can pose diagnostic
quandaries. Below we review some of the more
common diagnostic difficulties likely to confront clinicians
and provide recommendations for making these
difficult diagnostic judgments.

Obsessions versus Depressive Rumination

It is sometimes difficult to differentiate between depressive
ruminations and obsessions. The distinction
rests primarily on thought content and the patient’s re


ported resistance to such thoughts. Unlike obsessions,
ruminations are typically pessimistic ideas about the
self or the world, and ruminative content frequently
shifts. Additionally, depressive ruminators tend to not
make repeated attempts to suppress their ruminations
the way individuals with OCD try to suppress obsessions.
When depression and OCD co-occur, both phenomena
may be present, but only obsessions should be
targeted with exposure exercises. We have also found
clinically that the generally pessimistic presentation of
depressed patients can undermine hopefulness about
improvement during EX/RP; thus, these beliefs may
require therapeutic intervention even though they are
not obsessional.

Anxiety Disorders

OCD was previously classified as an anxiety disorder
in DSM-IV, and it often co-occurs with anxiety disorders.
Diagnostic criteria are sometimes similar among
these related (anxiety) disorders, but the symptoms
associated with each diagnosis can usually be distinguished.
For example, the excessive worries characteristic
of GAD may appear similar to those in OCD
but, unlike obsessions, worries are excessive concerns
about real-life circumstances and are experienced by
the individual as appropriate (ego-syntonic). In contrast,
obsessive thinking is more likely to be unrealistic
or magical, and obsessions are usually experienced by
the individual as inappropriate (ego-dystonic). There
are, however, exceptions to this general rule: Individuals
with either GAD or OCD may worry about everyday
matters, such as their children getting sick. However,
when worried about their children catching cold,
parents with GAD might focus their concern on the
long-term consequences (e.g., falling behind in school,
development of a lifelong pattern of debilitation),
whereas parents with OCD might focus more on the
contamination aspect of illness (e.g., their child being
infested with “cold germs”). The problem of distinguishing
between obsessions and worries in a particular
patient is most relevant when the patient exhibits
no compulsions, but, as we mentioned earlier, pure obsessionals
comprise only about 2% of individuals with
OCD (Foa et al., 1995).

In the absence of rituals, the avoidance associated
with specific phobias may also appear similar to OCD.
For example, excessive fear of germs and specific phobia
both may result in persistent fear of dogs. However,
unlike an individual with OCD, a person with a specific
phobia can successfully avoid dogs for the most part, or


Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder

reduce distress quickly by escaping dogs when avoidance
is impractical. In contrast, the individual with
OCD who is obsessed with “dog germs” continues to
feel contaminated even after the dog is gone, and sometimes
knowing that a dog was in the vicinity several
hours earlier can also produce obsessional distress even
if there is no possibility that the dog will return. This
distress often prompts subsequent avoidance behaviors
(e.g., taking off clothing that might have been near the
contaminating dog) not typically observed in specific
phobias.

Body Dysmorphic Disorder

The preoccupation with imagined physical defects of
body dysmorphic disorder (BDD) is formally similar
to the obsessions of OCD, and BDD is grouped with
obsessive–compulsive and related disorders in DSM-5.
The best way to differentiate between this disorder and
OCD is to examine for content specificity of the fearprovoking
thoughts. Most individuals with BDD are
singly obsessed, whereas most individuals with OCD
have multiple obsessions.

Tourette Syndrome and Tic Disorders

To differentiate the stereotyped motor behaviors that
characterize Tourette syndrome and tic disorders from
compulsions, the functional relationship between these
behaviors and any obsessive thoughts must be examined.
Motor tics are generally experienced as involuntary
and are not aimed at neutralizing distress brought
about by obsessions. There is no conventional way to
differentiate them from “pure” compulsions, but OCD
with “pure” compulsions is extremely rare (Foa et al.,
1995). As noted earlier, there appears to be a high rate
of comorbidity between OCD and tic disorders (e.g.,
Pauls et al., 1986); thus, both disorders may be present
simultaneously in a given patient. Interestingly, tics
were similarly responsive to an EX/RP protocol when
compared in a randomized study to habit-reversal training
in which a competing response is substituted for the
tic; this finding suggests that the conceptual model underlying
the treatment of tics might require modification
(Verdellen, Keijsers, Cath, & Hoogduin, 2004).

Delusional Disorder and Schizophrenia

Individuals with OCD may present with obsessions of
delusional intensity (for a review, see Kozak & Foa,
1994). Approximately 5% of patients with OCD report

complete conviction that their obsessions and compulsions
are realistic, with an additional 20% reporting
strong but not fixed conviction. Therefore, it is important
to consider the diagnosis of OCD “with poor insight”
even if these beliefs are very strongly held. The
differentiation between delusional disorder and OCD
can depend on the presence of compulsions in OCD
(Eisen et al., 1998). In OCD, obsessions of delusional
intensity are usually accompanied by compulsions.

It is also important to recognize that the content of
obsessions in OCD may be quite bizarre, as in the delusions
of schizophrenia, but bizarreness in and of itself
does not preclude a diagnosis of OCD. For example,
one patient seen at our center was fearful that small bits
of her “essence” would be forever lost if she passed too
close to public trash cans. This patient did not report
any other symptoms of formal thought disorder, such
as loose associations, hallucinations, flat or grossly inappropriate
affect, and thought insertion or projection.
Following a course of EX/RP that focused on exercises
designed to expose the patient to the loss of her “essence”
(e.g., driving by the city dump), her OCD symptoms
were substantially reduced. On occasion patients
do meet diagnostic criteria for both OCD and schizophrenia,
and a dual diagnosis is appropriate under these
circumstances. Importantly, EX/RP with such patients
should proceed only if the associated treatment exercises
do not exacerbate the comorbid thought disorder
symptoms.

coGNitive aND Behavioral MoDels

Mowrer’s (1939) two-stage theory for the acquisition
and maintenance of fear and avoidance behavior has
been commonly adopted to explain phobias and OCD.
As elaborated by Mowrer (1960), this theory proposes
that in the first stage, a neutral event becomes associated
with fear by being paired with a stimulus that by
its nature provokes discomfort or anxiety. Through
conditioning processes, objects, as well as thoughts and
images, acquire the ability to produce discomfort. In
the second stage of this process, escape or avoidance
responses are developed to reduce the anxiety or discomfort
evoked by the various conditioned stimuli and
are maintained by their success in doing so. Dollard
and Miller (1950) adopted Mowrer’s two-stage theory
to explain the development of phobias and obsessive–
compulsive neurosis. As noted earlier, because of the
intrusive nature of obsessions, many situations that
provoke obsessions cannot readily be avoided. Passive


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

avoidance behaviors, such as those utilized by phobics,
are also less effective in controlling obsessional distress.
Active avoidance patterns in the form of ritualistic
behaviors are then developed and maintained by
their success in alleviating this distress.

In light of equivocal empirical support for the twostage
theory and its limitations in explaining the etiology
of obsessions, several cognitive explanations were
proposed to account for the development and maintenance
of OCD symptoms (e.g., Beck, 1976; Carr,
1974). Salkovskis (1985) offered a more comprehensive
cognitive analysis of OCD. He posited that intrusive
obsessional thoughts are stimuli that may provoke
certain types of negative automatic thoughts. Accordingly,
an intrusive thought leads to mood disturbances
only if it triggers negative automatic thoughts through
interaction between the unacceptable intrusion and the
individual’s belief system (e.g., only bad people have
sexual thoughts). According to Salkovskis, exaggerated
senses of responsibility and self-blame are the central
themes in the belief system of a person with OCD.
Neutralization, in the form of behavioral or cognitive
compulsions, may be understood as an attempt to reduce
this sense of responsibility and to prevent blame.
In addition, frequently occurring thoughts regarding
unacceptable actions may be perceived by the individual
with OCD as equivalent to the actions themselves,
so, for example, even if the person has not sinned, the
thought of sinning is as bad as sinning itself.

Salkovskis (1985) further proposed that five dysfunctional
assumptions characterize individuals with OCD
and differentiate them from persons without OCD:

(1) Having a thought about an action is like performing
the action; (2) failing to prevent (or failing to try
to prevent) harm to self or others is the same as having
caused the harm in the first place; (3) responsibility is
not attenuated by other factors (e.g., low probability of
occurrence); (4) not neutralizing when an intrusion has
occurred is similar or equivalent to seeking or wanting
the harm involved in that intrusion to actually happen;
(5) one should (and can) exercise control over one’s
thoughts. (p. 579)
Thus, while the obsession may be ego-dystonic, the
automatic thought it elicits will be ego-syntonic. By
extension, this model suggests that treatment of OCD
should largely focus on identifying the erroneous assumptions
and modifying the automatic thoughts. This
theory paved the way for various elaborations on the
cognitive models, experimental studies of the model,

and the development of cognitive therapies that derive
from the central role of these key cognitive factors.

Salkovskis’s (1985) theory sparked examination of
the role of responsibility in the psychopathology of
OCD (Ladoucer et al., 1995; Rachman, Thordarson,
Shafran, & Woody, 1995; Rhéaume, Freeston, Dugas,
Letarte, & Ladoucer, 1995). Further attention has been
paid to what Rachman (1998) referred to as thought–
action fusion (TAF), wherein individuals believe that
simply having an unacceptable thought increases the
likelihood of the occurrence of a feared outcome, and
that thoughts of engaging in repugnant activities are
equivalent to actually having done so. Contemporary
cognitive theorists would then suggest that obsessive–
compulsive beliefs such as TAF, exaggerated responsibility,
and intolerance of uncertainty likely result in
increased and ultimately futile efforts at thought suppression
and other ill-advised mental control strategies,
which would then yield increased frequency of
such thoughts and associated distress (Purdon & Clark,
2002). Hence, a vicious cycle of avoidance maintains
and strengthens the OCD, and the cognitive therapies
that derive from these contemporary models would directly
target these obsessive–compulsive beliefs in an
effort to break the cycle.

In an integrated cognitive-behavioral account, Foa
and Kozak (1985) conceptualized anxiety disorders in
general as specific impairments in emotional memory
networks. Following Lang (1979), they view fear as an
information network existing in memory that includes
representation about fear stimuli, fear responses, and
their meaning. With regard to the fear content, Foa
and Kozak suggested that fear networks of individuals
with anxiety disorders are characterized by the presence
of erroneous estimates of threat, unusually high
negative valence for the feared event, and excessive
response elements (e.g., physiological reactivity), and
are resistant to modification. This persistence may reflect
failure to access the fear network because of either
active avoidance or because the content of the fear
network precludes spontaneous encounters with situations
that evoke anxiety in everyday life. Additionally,
anxiety may persist because of some impairment in the
mechanism of extinction. Cognitive defenses, excessive
arousal with failure to habituate, faulty premises, and
erroneous rules of inference are all impairments that
would hinder the processing of information necessary
for modifying the fear structure to reduce fear behavior.

Foa and Kozak (1985) suggested that several forms
of fear occur in individuals with OCD. The patient


Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder

who fears contracting venereal disease from public
bathrooms and washes to prevent such harm has a fear
structure that includes excessive associations between
the stimuli (e.g., bathroom) and the anxiety/distress
responses, as well as mistaken beliefs about the harm
related to the stimulus. For other individuals with OCD,
fear responses are associated with mistaken meaning
rather than with a particular stimulus. For example,
some patients who are disturbed by perceived asymmetry,
and who reduce their distress by rearranging objects,
do not fear the objects themselves, nor do they anticipate
disaster from the asymmetry. Rather, they are
upset by their view that certain arrangements of stimuli
are “improper.”

Like Reed (1985), Foa and Kozak (1985) proposed
that in addition to the pathological content of the obsessions,
OCD is distinguished from other disorders by
pathology in the mechanisms underlying information
processing. Specifically, they suggested that patients
with OCD experience impairments in considering the
rules for making inferences about harm, often concluding
that a situation is dangerous based on the absence
of evidence for safety, and that they often fail to make
inductive leaps about safety from information about the
absence of danger. Consequently, rituals performed to
reduce the likelihood of harm can never provide safety
and must be repeated. In an elaboration on emotional
processing theory and the mechanism by which exposure
works, Foa, Huppert, and Cahill (2006) suggested
that in vivo exposure to the feared stimulus in the absence
of the anticipated harm corrects the exaggerated
probability estimates; imaginal exposure not only corrects
the exaggerated cost but also strengthens the discrimination
between “thoughts about harm” and “real
harm,” thus altering the associations between threat
meaning of stimulus and/or response elements in the
fear structure.

In contrast to the more general theories of OCD described
earlier, some theorists have posed more specific
hypotheses to account for the pathology observed in
certain OCD subtypes. For example, clinical observations
led some investigators to hypothesize that memory
deficits for actions underlie compulsive checking
(e.g., Sher, Frost, & Otto, 1983). However, the results
of experimental investigations of this hypothesis are
equivocal. Some support for an action–memory deficit
was found in nonclinical individuals with checking
rituals (e.g., Rubenstein, Peynircioglu, Chambless,
& Pigott, 1993; Sher et al., 1983). In contrast, a study
using a clinical sample found that compared to nonpa


tients, patients with OCD with checking rituals better
recalled their fear-relevant actions (e.g., plugging in an
iron, unsheathing a knife), but not fear-irrelevant actions
(e.g., putting paper clips in a box; Constans, Foa,
Franklin, & Mathews, 1995). From these data, it appears
that checking is not motivated primarily by memory
problems; hence, teaching mnemonic strategies to
patients with OCD with checking rituals is probably
not the optimal clinical strategy; rather, having patients
repeatedly confront the low-risk situations that provoke
obsessional distress, while simultaneously refraining
from checking behavior or mental reviewing of actions,
is preferred.

treatMeNts

Exposure and Ritual Prevention

The prognostic picture for OCD has improved dramatically
since Victor Meyer (1966) first reported on two
patients who responded well to a treatment that included
prolonged exposure to obsessional cues and strict
prevention of rituals. This procedure, known at the
time as exposure and ritual prevention (EX/RP), was
later found to be extremely successful in 10 of 15 cases
and partly effective in the remainder. Patients treated
with this regimen also appeared to maintain their treatment
gains: At a 5-year follow-up, only two of these patients
had relapsed (Meyer & Levy, 1973; Meyer, Levy,
& Schnurer, 1974).

As was the case with Meyer’s program, current EX/
RP treatments typically include both prolonged exposure
to obsessional cues and procedures aimed at
blocking rituals. Exposure exercises are often done in
real-life settings (in vivo), for example, by asking the
patient who fears accidentally causing a house fire by
leaving the stove on, to leave the house without checking
the burners. When patients report specific feared
consequences of refraining from rituals, these fears
may also be addressed via imaginal exposure. In fact, in
vivo and imaginal exposure exercises are designed specifically
to prompt obsessional distress. It is believed
that repeated, prolonged exposure to feared thoughts
and situations provides information that disconfirms
mistaken associations and evaluations held by the patients
and thereby promotes habituation (Foa & Kozak,
1986). Exposure is usually done gradually by confronting
situations that provoke moderate distress before
confronting more upsetting ones. Exposure homework


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

is routinely assigned between sessions, and patients are
also asked to refrain from rituals.

Since Meyer’s (1966) initial positive report of the efficacy
of EX/RP, many subsequent studies of EX/RP
have indicated that most EX/RP treatment completers
make and maintain clinically significant gains. Randomized
controlled trials (RCTs) have indicated that
EX/RP is superior to a variety of control treatments,
including placebo medication (Marks, Stern, Mawson,
Cobb, & McDonald, 1980), relaxation (Fals-Stewart,
Marks, & Schafer, 1993), and anxiety management
training (Lindsay, Crino, & Andrews, 1997). Foa and
Kozak’s (1996) review of 12 outcome studies (N = 330)
reporting treatment responder rates indicated that 83%
of EX/RP treatment completers were classified as responders
at posttreatment. In 16 studies reporting longterm
outcome (N = 376; mean follow-up interval of
29 months), 76% were responders. Moreover, several
studies have now indicated that these encouraging findings
for EX/RP are not limited to highly selected RCT
samples (Franklin, Abramowitz, Kozak, Levitt, & Foa,
2000; Rothbaum & Shahar, 2000; Valderhaug, Larsson,
Gotestam, & Piacentini, 2007; Warren & Thomas,
2001).

In general, EX/RP has been found quite effective in
ameliorating OCD symptoms and has produced great
durability of gains following treatment discontinuation.
In our review of the literature, it also was apparent that
among the many variants of EX/RP treatment, some
are relevant for outcome and others are not. We review
the literature on the relative efficacy of the ingredients
that comprise EX/RP to help clinicians decide which
EX/RP components are most essential.

EX/RP Treatment Variables

exPosUre VersUs riTUAl PreVenTion
VersUs ex/rP

To separate the effects of exposure and ritual prevention
on OCD symptoms, Foa, Steketee, Grayson, Turner,
and Latimer (1984) randomly assigned patients with
washing rituals to treatment by exposure only (EX),
ritual prevention only (RP), or their combination (EX/
RP). Each treatment was conducted intensively (15
daily 2-hour sessions conducted over 3 weeks) and followed
by a home visit. Patients in each condition were
found to be improved at both posttreatment and followup,
but EX/RP was superior to the single-component
treatments on almost every symptom measure at both

assessment points. In comparing EX and RP, patients
who received EX reported lower anxiety when confronting
feared contaminants than did patients who had
received RP, whereas the RP group reported greater
decreases in urge to ritualize than did the EX patients.
Thus, it appears that EX and RP affected different
OCD symptoms. The findings from this study clearly
suggest that EX and RP should be implemented concurrently;
treatments that do not include both components
yield inferior outcome. It is important to convey
this information to patients, especially when they are
experiencing difficulty either refraining from rituals or
engaging effectively in exposure exercises during and
between sessions.

iMPleMenTATion of riTUAl PreVenTion

Promoting abstinence from rituals during treatment
is thought to be essential for successful treatment outcome,
but the preferred method of RP has changed over
the years. In Meyer’s (1966) EX/RP treatment program,
hospital staff members physically prevented patients
from performing rituals (e.g., turning off the water
supply in a patient’s room). However, physical intervention
by staff or family members to prevent patients
from ritualizing is no longer typical nor recommended.
It is believed that such prevention techniques are too
coercive to be an accepted practice today. Moreover,
physical prevention by others may actually limit generalizability
to nontherapy situations in which others
are not present to intercede. Instead, instructions and
encouragement to refrain from ritualizing and avoidance
are now recommended. As noted earlier, although
exposure in itself can reduce obsessional distress, it is
not so effective in reducing compulsions. To maximize
treatment effects, the patient needs to refrain voluntarily
from ritualizing while engaging in systematic exposure
exercises. The therapist should strongly emphasize
the importance of refraining from rituals and help the
patient with this difficult task by providing support,
encouragement, and suggestions about alternatives to
ritualizing.

Use of iMAginAl exPosUre

Treatment involving imaginal plus in vivo EX/RP at
follow-up was superior to an in vivo EX/RP program
that did not include imaginal exposure (Foa, Steketee,
Turner, & Fischer, 1980; Steketee, Foa, & Grayson,


Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder

1982). However, a second study did not find that the
addition of imaginal exposure enhanced long-term efficacy
compared to in vivo exposure only (De Araujo,
Ito, Marks, & Deale, 1995). The treatment program in
the former study differed from that of De Araujo and
colleagues on several parameters (e.g., 90-minute vs.
30-minute imaginal exposures, respectively); thus, the
source of these studies’ inconsistencies cannot be identified.


In our clinical work, we have found imaginal exposure
to be helpful for patients who report that disastrous
consequences will result if they refrain from rituals.
Because many of these consequences cannot be readily
translated into in vivo exposure exercises (e.g., burning
in hell), imaginal exposure allows the patient an opportunity
to confront these feared thoughts. Also, the
addition of imagery to in vivo exposure may circumvent
the cognitive avoidance strategies used by patients
who intentionally try not to consider the consequences
of exposure while confronting feared situations in vivo.
In summary, although imaginal exposure does not appear
essential for immediate outcome, it may enhance
long-term maintenance and be used as an adjunct to in
vivo exercises for patients who fear disastrous consequences.
For patients who only report extreme distress
as a consequence of refraining from rituals and avoidance
behaviors, imaginal exposure may not be needed.

grADUAl VersUs ABrUPT exPosUres

No differences in OCD symptom reduction were detected
in a study comparing patients who confronted
the most distressing situations from the start of therapy
to those who confronted less distressing situations
first, yet patients preferred the more gradual approach
(Hodgson, Rachman, & Marks, 1972). However, because
patient motivation and agreement with treatment
goals are core elements of successful EX/RP, situations
of moderate difficulty are usually confronted first, followed
by several intermediate steps, before the most
distressing exposures are attempted. Thus, we emphasize
that exposure will proceed at a pace that is acceptable
to the patient, and that no exposure will ever be
attempted without the patient’s approval. At the same
time, it is preferable to confront the highest item on the
treatment hierarchy relatively early in treatment (e.g.,
within the first week of intensive treatment) to allow
sufficient time to repeat these difficult exposures over
the later sessions.

DUrATion of exPosUre

Duration of exposure was once believed to be important
for outcome in that prolonged, continuous exposure
was found to be more effective than short, interrupted
exposure (Rabavilas, Boulougouris, & Perissaki,
1979). Indeed, reduction in anxiety (habitation) across
sessions has been associated with improvement following
exposure-based treatments for OCD and for
PTSD (e.g., Jaycox, Foa, & Morral, 1998; Kozak, Foa,
& Steketee, 1988; van Minnen & Hagenaars, 2002).
However, several studies have not found a strong relationship
between within-session habituation and fear
and symptom reduction (Jaycox et al., 1998; Kozak et
al., 1988; Mathews, Johnston, Shaw, & Gelder, 1974;
Rowe & Craske, 1998). In an elaboration on emotional
processing theory, Foa and colleagues (2006)
found that the recent deemphasis on the relationship
between within-session habituation and outcome is
not critical to emotional processing theory because the
proposed mechanism underlying symptom reduction
is the modification of the relevant erroneous associations
through disconfirming information, not through
habituation per se. In practical terms, this means patients
should be instructed that although, optimally,
they should persist with exposure until the anxiety is
substantially reduced, the more important factor is repeating
the same exposures, to promote reduction of
associated anxiety over time. Patients with OCD might
be particularly vulnerable to fears of ending exposures
“too soon,” hence, doing the treatment incorrectly, so
this new instruction might help encourage patients to
go about their business without ritualizing or avoiding,
regardless of whether anxiety still lingers on from an
exposure task. The deemphasis on the critical importance
of habituation in the moment is more pronounced
procedurally when using acceptance and commitment
therapy (e.g., Twohig et al., 2010), but generally speaking
this viewpoint appears to be gaining acceptance
among cognitive-behavioral therapists as well. For example,
clinically we often remind patients that whether
or not they are anxious is less relevant than what they
do (or do not do) when they are anxious, since ritualizing
and avoidance will maintain fear down the line.

freqUenCy of exPosUre sessions

Optimal frequency of exposure sessions has yet to
be established. Intensive exposure therapy programs
that have achieved excellent results (e.g., Foa, Kozak,


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

Steketee, & McCarthy, 1992) typically involve daily
sessions over the course of approximately 1 month, but
quite favorable outcomes have also been achieved with
more widely spaced sessions (e.g., Abramowitz, Foa, &
Franklin, 2003; De Araujo et al., 1995; Franklin et al.,
1998). A recent RCT in pediatric OCD found no difference
between intensive and weekly treatment (Storch et
al., 2007). Clinically, we have found that less frequent
sessions may be sufficient for highly motivated patients
with mild to moderate OCD symptoms, who readily
understand the importance of daily exposure homework.
Patients with very severe symptoms or those who
for various reasons cannot readily comply with EX/RP
tasks between sessions, are typically offered intensive
treatment.

THerAPisT‑AssisTeD VersUs self‑exPosUre

Evaluations of the presence of a therapist during exposure
have yielded inconsistent results. In one study,
patients with OCD receiving therapist-assisted exposure
were more improved immediately posttreatment
than those receiving clomipramine and self-exposure,
but this difference was not evident at follow-up (Marks
et al., 1988). However, these results are difficult to interpret
in light of the study’s complex design. A second
study using patients with OCD also indicated that
therapist-assisted treatment was not superior to selfexposure
at posttreatment or at follow-up (Emmelkamp
& van Kraanen, 1977), but the number of patients in
each condition was too small to render these findings
conclusive. In contrast to the negative findings
of Marks and colleagues (1988) and Emmelkamp and
van Kraanen (1977), therapist presence yielded superior
outcome of a single, 3-hour exposure session compared
to self-exposure for persons with specific phobia
(Öst, 1989). Because specific phobias are, on the
whole, less disabling and easier to treat than OCD, one
may surmise that therapist presence should also influence
treatment outcome with OCD. Moreover, using
meta-analytic procedures, Abramowitz (1996) found
that therapist-controlled exposure was associated with
greater improvement in OCD and GAD symptoms
compared to self-controlled procedures. A recent study
found comparable outcome for patients receiving EX/
RP with therapist assistance and those who received
teletherapy (Lovell et al., 2006), which further raises
the question of whether therapist assistance is required
for good outcome. In light of these inconsistent findings,
no clear answer is available on the role of thera


pist assistance with exposure tasks in OCD treatment.
However, we have found clinically that the presence of
a therapist can be useful in helping patients to remain
engaged in exposures while anxiety is high, to avoid
subtle rituals or avoidance behaviors during exposure
(e.g., distraction, mental rituals), and to remain sufficiently
motivated despite distress. Researchers have
begun to examine the question of whether telephone
therapy or Skype would also be effective, including
adapted CBT protocols for Tourette syndrome (Himle,
Olufs, Himle, Tucker, & Woods, 2010 ) and OCD specifically
(e.g., Bachofen et al., 1999); such research may
provide greater confidence that these methods can be
used efficaciously, which will help to address the ongoing
problem of the paucity of OCD treatment expertise
that plagues most communities.

EX/RP versus Other Treatment Approaches

In this section we review the literature on the efficacy
of standard individual EX/RP treatment versus other
therapeutic approaches, including group treatment,
family-based EX/RP treatment, cognitive therapy, and
pharmacotherapy.

inDiViDUAl VersUs groUP ex/rP

Intensive individual EX/RP, although effective, can
pose practical obstacles such as high cost for treatment,
and scheduling problems for patient and therapist alike.
Additionally, because experts in EX/RP treatment are
few and far between, patients may need to wait for long
periods or travel substantial distances to be treated.
Thus, some researchers have begun to examine the
efficacy of more affordable and efficient treatment
modalities. One such alternative is group treatment.
Fals-Stewart and colleagues (1993) conducted a controlled
study in which patients with OCD were randomly
assigned to individual EX/RP, group EX/RP, or
a psychosocial control condition (relaxation). Each of
the active treatments was 12 weeks long, with sessions
held twice weekly, and included daily exposure homework.
Significant improvement in OCD symptoms was
evident in both active treatments, with no differences
detected between individual and group EX/RP immediately
posttreatment or at 6-month follow-up. Profile
analysis of OCD symptom ratings collected throughout
treatment did indicate a faster reduction in symptoms
for patients receiving individual treatment. These
results offer evidence for the efficacy of group treat



Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder

ment. However, because patients were excluded from
this study if they were diagnosed with any personality
disorder or with comorbid depression, it may be that
the sample was somewhat atypical. In addition, none of
the participants had received previous OCD treatment,
which is also unusual for this population and suggestive
of a less symptomatic sample. Thus, inferences about
the broader OCD population merit caution until these
results are replicated.

More recently, Barrett, Healy-Farrell, and March
(2004) found that individual and group CBT were
highly and similarly efficacious for children and adolescents
with OCD relative to a wait-list control; this
raises the possibility that group interventions might
hold particular promise in the treatment of youth with
OCD. Also in youth, Asbahr and colleagues (2005)
found group CBT and sertraline comparable at posttreatment,
but there was less relapse in the former
condition. More recently, another Australian research
group found comparable outcomes for group treatment
compared to individual treatment, both of which were
superior to a wait-list control (Anderson & Rees, 2007);
not surprisingly, though, individual treatment was associated
with more rapid response.

fAMily inVolVeMenT
VersUs sTAnDArD ex/rP TreATMenT

Emmelkamp and colleagues (1990) examined whether
family involvement in treatment would enhance the
efficacy of EX/RP for OCD. Patients who were married
or living with a romantic partner were randomly
assigned to receive EX/RP either with or without partner
involvement in treatment. Results indicated that
OCD symptoms were significantly lowered following
treatment for both groups. No differences between the
treatments emerged, and initial marital distress did not
predict outcome. However, the reduction in anxiety/
distress reported for the sample as a whole was modest
(33%), which may have resulted from the relatively
short treatment sessions and absence of in vivo exposure
exercises in treatment sessions.

Mehta (1990) also examined the effect of family
involvement on EX/RP treatment outcome. To adapt
the treatment to serve the large numbers of young unmarried
people seeking OCD treatment and the “joint
family system” prevalent in India, Mehta used a familybased
rather than spouse-based treatment approach.
Patients who did not respond to previous pharmacotherapy
were randomly assigned to receive treatment

by systematic desensitization and EX/RP, either with
or without family assistance. Sessions in both conditions
were held twice per week for 12 weeks; response
prevention was described as “gradual.” In the family
condition, a designated family member (parent, spouse,
or adult child) assisted with homework assignments,
supervised relaxation therapy, participated in response
prevention, and was instructed to be supportive. On
self-reported OCD symptoms, a greater improvement
was found for the family-based intervention at posttreatment
and 6-month follow-up. Although this study
had methodological problems that complicate interpretation
of findings (e.g., use of self-report OCD measures
only, unclear description of treatment procedures), it
offers some preliminary evidence that family involvement
may be helpful in OCD treatment. Clinically, we
routinely enlist the support of family members in EX/
RP, providing psychoeducation about the illness and
its consequences during the early stages of treatment
planning, and advice and encouragement in managing
the patient’s request for assurances, his or her avoidant
behaviors, and violation of EX/RP rules between
sessions. We also try to reduce family members’ criticism
of the patient and unconstructive arguing about
OCD and related matters when these issues arise in the
therapy.

Published randomized studies of CBT for OCD with
youth have each included parents at least to some extent
in treatment (Barrett et al., 2004; de Haan, Hoogduin,
Buitelaar, & Keijsers, 1998; Pediatric OCD Treatment
Study Team, 2004), and a direct comparison of CBT,
with and without a family component, using an otherwise
identical protocol has yet to be conducted in pediatric
OCD. Research on whether family involvement
enhances individual CBT outcomes in other anxiety
disorders has generally yielded mixed findings, however,
and a large, recently completed RCT indicated that
both forms of treatment are efficacious and essentially
equivalent to one another (Bogels & Bodden, 2005).
Higher family dysfunction in general was associated
with poorer long-term outcome in a recent study (Barrett,
Farrell, Dadds, & Boulter, 2005), as was family accommodation
of OCD rituals specifically (Peris et al.,
2012), and at this point it might be clinically prudent
to include a more comprehensive family component
when family members are very directly involved in
the patient’s rituals (e.g., reassurance seeking) or when
family psychopathology threatens generalizability of
treatment gains to a chaotic home environment. It also
may be that greater family involvement in treatment is


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

needed when the patient is very young (Freeman et al.,
2003, 2007).

ex/rP VersUs CogniTiVe THerAPies

Increased interest in cognitive therapy (e.g., Beck,
1976; Ellis, 1962), coupled with dissatisfaction with
formulations of treatment mediated by processes such
as extinction (Stampfl & Levis, 1967) or habituation
(Watts, 1973), prompted examination of the efficacy of
cognitive procedures for anxiety disorders in general
and for OCD in particular. A number of early studies
found few differences between standard behavioral
treatments and behavioral treatments enhanced with
various cognitive approaches (e.g., Emmelkamp &
Beens, 1991; Emmelkamp, Visser, & Hoekstra, 1988).
Recent advances in cognitive conceptualizations of
OCD have apparently yielded more efficacious and
durable cognitive treatments. Freeston and colleagues
(1997) found a cognitive-behavioral intervention efficacious
compared to a wait-list control group for patients
with “pure” obsessions. Several other studies (Cottraux
et al., 2001; McLean et al., 2001; Vogel, Stiles,
& Götestam, 2004; Whittal, Thordarson, & McLean,
2005) have suggested equivalent results for CBT and
EX/RP, respectively, although some procedural overlap
between the two conditions in these studies makes their
findings difficult to interpret. In concert with studies attesting
to the utility of cognitively oriented approaches
for conditions that are quite similar to OCD, such as
hypochondriasis (Barsky & Ahern, 2004; Warwick,
Clark, Cobb, & Salkovskis, 1996), it does appear that
cognitive therapies hold promise for the treatment of
OCD and might be an efficacious potential alternative
to EX/RP. More recently, however, Whittal, Woody,
McLean, Rachman, and Robichaud (2010) failed to
find a difference between cognitive therapy and stress
management training (SMT) for a sample with primary
obsessions and mental rituals, although this appeared
to be due to the fact that SMT yielded substantial and
lasting benefit compared to pretreatment rather than
because cognitive therapy did not.

The question of whether cognitive therapy improves
the efficacy of EX/RP is generally difficult to discern
because both exposure therapy and cognitive therapy
are intended to modify mistaken cognitions. An RCT
that compared “pure” forms of CT or EX/RP, with or
without medication, found similar, yet somewhat attentuated,
outcomes relative to what might typically
be expected from either treatment (van Balkom et al.,

1998). Foa and Kozak (1986) argued that the disconfirmation
of erroneous associations and beliefs is a
crucial mechanism underlying the efficacy of exposure
treatments, hence disputing discussions that mistaken
cognitions from EX/RP might be expected to hamper
outcome. For example, a patient and therapist sitting
on the bathroom floor in a public restroom conducting
an exposure to contaminated surfaces routinely
discuss risk assessment, probability overestimation,
and so forth, as the therapist helps the patient achieve
the cognitive modification necessary for improvement.
The practical issue of interest is how to maximize efficacy:
Is informal discussion of cognitive distortions
during the exposure exercises sufficient, or should the
therapist engage in formal Socratic questioning of hypothesized
distortions, such as inflated responsibility?
Notably, in a meta-analytic review, cognitive therapies
for OCD that included some form of exposure to feared
stimuli were superior to those that did not, suggesting
that exposure may be necessary to maximize outcomes
(Abramowitz, Franklin, & Foa, 2002).

To expand upon this point further, Hiss, Foa, and
Kozak (1994) investigated whether formal relapse
prevention techniques following intensive EX/RP enhanced
maintenance of gains. Notably, all discussions
about cognitive factors typically included during the
core treatment (e.g., discussion of lapse vs. relapse,
posttreatment exposure instructions, themes of guilt
and personal responsibility, and feared consequences)
were removed. Patients received this modified EX/RP,
followed by either a relapse prevention treatment or a
psychosocial control treatment (associative therapy).
All patients in both conditions were classified as responders
at posttreatment (defined as 50% or greater
reduction in OCD symptoms), with treatment gains
better maintained in the relapse prevention group than
in the associative therapy condition at 6-month followup.
The percentages of responders at follow-up were
75% in the relapse prevention condition and 33% in
associative therapy. The higher than usual observed
relapse rate in the associative therapy condition may
have resulted from the removal of cognitive techniques
typically utilized during the core treatment, such as
discussion of feared consequences. These findings, and
those discussed earlier, further underscore our belief
that blended treatment designed to provide patients the
opportunity to disconfirm their erroneous cognitions
makes the most sense clinically. Accordingly, our approach
clearly incorporates informal cognitive procedures,
and discussions of the outcome of exposures are


Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder

geared toward challenging mistaken beliefs; this is accomplished
in the context of a treatment approach that
still emphasizes the importance of EX/RP in bringing
about such changes.

Serotonergic Medications

Effectiveness of Medications

The use of serotonergic medications in the treatment
of OCD has received a great deal of attention in the
past 25 years. Of the tricyclic antidepressants, clomipramine
(CMI) has been studied most extensively.
In controlled trials, CMI has consistently been found
to be superior to placebo (e.g., DeVeaugh-Geiss, Landau,
& Katz, 1989). Similar results have been obtained
with the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs)
fluoxetine, fluvoxamine, and sertraline (see Greist, Jefferson,
Kobak, Katzelnick, & Serlin, 1995). Accordingly,
each of these medications has been approved
by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) as
treatments for adult OCD. On the whole, these studies
suggest that up to 60% of patients show some response
to treatment with SSRIs. However, even the average
treatment gain achieved by treatment responders is
moderate at best (Greist, 1990). In addition, amelioration
of obsessive–compulsive symptoms is maintained
only as long as the drug is continued: For example, in
an early controlled, double-blind discontinuation study,
90% of patients relapsed within a few weeks after being
withdrawn from CMI (Pato, Zohar-Kadouch, Zohar, &
Murphy, 1988). More recent discontinuation studies
with slower taper periods have not yielded such dramatic
results, but they nevertheless converge to suggest
that maintenance treatment is necessary to sustain
achievements attained with pharmacotherapy alone for
OCD (Dougherty, Rauch, & Jenike, 2002).

EX/RP versus Pharmacotherapy

Many controlled studies have indicated that serotonergic
antidepressants are superior to placebo in ameliorating
OCD symptoms (for a review, see Greist et al.,
1995). However, only a few controlled studies have
directly compared the relative or combined efficacy
of antidepressant medications and EX/RP, and several
studies that have made such a comparison included
complex designs that make it difficult to draw confident
conclusions about relative and combined efficacy (e.g.,
Marks et al., 1980, 1988). Cottraux and colleagues

(1990) compared fluvoxamine (FLV) with antiexposure
instructions, FLV plus weekly EX/RP, and pill placebo
(PBO) plus EX/RP, and found FLV + EX/RP and FLV

+ antiexposure instructions superior to PBO + EX/RP;
there was a trend toward an advantage for combined
treatment, but it failed to reach significance. Hohagen
and colleagues (1998) compared EX/RP + FLV to EX/
RP + PBO and found that both groups improved significantly
and comparably on compulsions, but the patients
who received EX/RP + FLV were significantly
better at posttreatment on obsessions than those who
received EX/RP + PBO. Subanalyses indicated that
patients with secondary depression also fared better if
they were receiving EX/RP + FLV.
The relative and combined efficacy of CMI and intensive
EX/RP was examined in a multicenter, RCT
conducted at our center (Penn) and at Columbia University.
Findings with both treatment completer and
intention-to-treat (ITT) data indicated at posttreatment
that the active treatments were superior to placebo, EX/
RP was superior to CMI, and the combination of the
two treatments was not superior to EX/RP alone (Foa
et al., 2005); relapse was more evident following treatment
discontinuation in the CMI group than in either
treatment that included intensive EX/RP (EX/RP, EX/
RP + CMI; Simpson et al., 2004). However, the design
used in the Penn–Columbia study may not have optimally
promoted an additive effect for CMI because the
intensive portion of the EX/RP program was largely
completed before patients reached their maximum dose
of CMI. In addition, combined treatment effects may
be more evident when intensive EX/RP is not used
(Foa, Franklin, & Moser, 2002). Notably, an additive
effect for combined treatment was found in a recent
study in pediatric OCD at Penn, Duke, and Brown (Pediatric
OCD Treatment Study Team, 2004), although
examination of effect sizes by site indicated that the
CBT monotherapy effect at Penn was very large, and
no additive effect for combined treatment was found at
this site.

In summary, although there is clear evidence that
both pharmaceutical treatment with serotonergic medications
and EX/RP treatments are effective for OCD,
information about their relative and combined efficacy
remains scarce because most of the studies that examined
these issues have been methodologically limited.
Nevertheless, no study has found clear, long-term superiority
for combined pharmacotherapy plus EX/RP over
EX/RP alone. The absence of conclusive findings notwithstanding,
many experts continue to advocate com



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

bined procedures as the treatment of choice for OCD
(e.g., Greist, 1992). In clinical practice, it is common to
see patients in EX/RP treatment who are taking SSRIs
concurrently. In uncontrolled examinations of EX/RP
treatment outcome for adults (Franklin, Abramowitz,
Bux, Zoellner, & Feeny, 2002) and youth (Franklin et
al., 1998; Piacentini, Bergman, Jacobs, McCracken, &
Kretchman, 2002) treated in OCD outpatient clinics,
no posttreatment differences in OCD symptom severity
were detected between patients who received EX/RP
alone and those who received SSRI medication when
receiving EX/RP. From these data we can surmise that
concomitant pharmacotherapy is not required for every
patient to benefit substantially from EX/RP, and that
concomitant pharmacotherapy does not appear to inhibit
EX/RP treatment response. With respect to EX/
RP augmentation in SSRI partial responders, there is
now evidence from randomized trials that EX/RP augmented
treatment outcome compared to medication
alone in youth (Franklin et al., 2011) and compared to
stress management training in adults (Simpson et al.,
2010). More definitive conclusions about the effects
of augmenting pharmacotherapy with EX/RP await a
more carefully controlled examination, however.

assessMeNt

Following a diagnostic interview to ascertain the presence
of OCD, it is advisable to quantify the severity
of the OCD symptoms with one or more of the instruments
described below. Quantification of symptom severity
assists the therapist in evaluating how successful
treatment was for a given patient. In our clinic, we use
several assessment instruments. As in most OCD clinical
research studies, however, the primary measure of
OCD symptom severity used in our center is the Yale–
Brown Obsessive–Compulsive Scale (Goodman et al.,
1989a, 1989b).

Yale–Brown Obsessive–Compulsive Scale

The Yale–Brown Obsessive–Compulsive Scale (Y-
BOCS; Goodman et al., 1989a, 1989b), a standardized,
semistructured interview, takes approximately 30 minutes
to complete. The Y-BOCS severity scale includes
10 items (five assess obsessions and five, compulsions),
each of which is rated on a 5-point scale ranging from 0
(No symptoms) to 4 (Severe symptoms). Assessors rate
the time occupied by the obsessions and compulsions,

the degree of interference with functioning, the level
of distress, attempts to resist the symptoms, and level
of control over the symptoms. The Y-BOCS has shown
adequate interrater agreement, internal consistency,
and validity (Goodman et al., 1989a, 1989b). The Y-
BOCS served as the primary measure of outcome in
most of the published OCD pharmacotherapy and CBT
treatment studies conducted during the 1990s.


%%%CUT%%%
Self‑Report Measures

Obsessive–Compulsive Inventory—Revised

The Obsessive–Compulsive Inventory—Revised (OCI-
R; Foa, Huppert, et al., 2002) is an 18-item, self-report
measure that assesses the distress associated with obsessions
and compulsions. In addition to the total score,
six separate subscale scores are calculated by adding
the three items that comprise each subscale: Washing,
Checking, Ordering, Obsessing, Hoarding, and Neutralizing.
Foa, Huppert, and colleagues (2002) reported
good internal consistency, test–retest reliability, and
discriminant validity in clinical patients with OCD,
PTSD, generalized social phobia, and nonanxious controls.
The total score ranges from 0 to 72, and each subscale
ranges from 0 to 12.

Other Self-Report Measures

A few self-report instruments for assessing OCD symptoms,
such as the Leyton Obsessional Inventory (Kazarian,
Evans, & Lefave, 1977) and the Lynfield Obsessional/
Compulsive Questionnaire (Allen & Tune,
1975), are also available. These instruments are limited
in that they assess only certain forms of obsessive–
compulsive behavior and/or they include items that are
unrelated to OCD symptoms. More recently, Storch
and colleagues (2009) have developed the Children’s
Florida Obsessive–Compulsive Inventory, which is intended
primarily for screening purposes.

iNitial iNterview

After a diagnosis of OCD has been established, and before
actually beginning treatment, the therapist should
schedule 4–6 hours of appointments with the patient. In
these sessions, the therapist needs to accomplish three
important tasks. First, the sessions are used to collect
the information necessary to develop a treatment plan.


Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder

Specifically, the therapist must first identify specific
cues that cause the patient distress (threat cues), avoidance,
rituals, and feared consequences. Second, the
therapist should develop a good rapport with the patient,
who will engage in exposure exercises designed
to elicit anxiety and distress during intensive EX/RP,
and the lack of a good relationship between therapist
and the patient may compromise outcome. Third, the
therapist needs to explore the patient’s beliefs about
OCD and the perceived consequences of refraining
from rituals and avoidance because this information
guides the informal discussions of cognitive processes
that take place throughout EX/RP.

Threat cues may be either (1) tangible objects in the
environment or (2) thoughts, images, or impulses that
the person experiences (for lack of better terms, we
have labeled them “external cues” and “internal cues,”
respectively). Passive avoidance and ritualistic behavior
(sometimes called “active avoidance”) both serve
to reduce the distress associated with the threat cues.
Rituals may be further divided into overt or covert
(mental) forms. It is essential that patients understand
the difference between obsessions and mental compulsions
because obsessions are treated with systematic
exposure and mental compulsions, with ritual preventions.
During treatment, patients should be instructed
to report any mental compulsions to the therapist because
performing such compulsions during exposure
exercises attenuates the effects of these exercises in the
same way that behavioral compulsions do.

External Fear Cues

Most individuals with OCD experience fear in reaction
to specific environmental cues (objects, persons, or situations),
but each patient has his/her own idiosyncratic
threat cues. For example, individuals who fear contamination
from toilets may differ as to whether they
fear all toilets or only those open to the public. One
patient may fear only the toilet itself, whereas another
may also fear bathroom floors, doorknobs, and faucets.
Similarly, two individuals may experience distress at
the prospect of a fire burning down their home, but
whereas one experiences the distress only when she is
the last person to leave the house, the other experiences
distress before going to bed at night when his children
are present.

The therapist needs to gather specific information
about cues that elicit the patient’s distress to identify
the basic sources of the fear. Identification of the basic

source is important for planning the treatment program.
Confronting the source of the fear is essential for successful
behavioral treatment of OCD. Often, when such
exposure does not take place during treatment, relapse
occurs. For example, a patient who feared contamination
by her hometown was treated with EX/RP 3,000
miles away from the town. Because of the distances
involved, direct exposure to the town was impossible,
so treatment comprised exposure to objects contaminated
directly or indirectly by contact with the town.
Although the patient habituated to the objects used in
the exposure sessions, she continued to fear her hometown.
Within 1 year after treatment, she had developed
fears to new objects related to her hometown. Not until
she engaged in repeated exposures to the town itself did
she experience lasting improvement.

It is important that the therapist conduct a thorough
investigation of objects, situations, and places that
evoke obsessional distress for the patient at the time
of presentation and at onset. Such information helps to
identify the source of the distress. To facilitate communication
with the patient about situations that evoke distress,
a Subjective Units of Discomfort Scale (SUDS)
ranging from 0 to 100 points is introduced. Patients are
asked to rate each situation with respect to the level of
distress they expect to experience upon exposure. The
source of the distress is expected to be 100. The following
dialogue between therapist and patient illustrates
the process of gathering information about distressing
situations.

tHeraPist: When do you get the urge to wash your

hands?
Patient: In a lot of places. There are so many places.

tHeraPist: Are there any places where the urges are
particularly strong?

Patient: Well when I am sitting in my living room,
particularly near the fireplace. Also in the laundry
room, which I never go to. Also, when I walk in the
park.

tHeraPist: Let’s talk about your living room. How

upset are you when you are sitting next to your fire


place?

Patient: That’s bad. I guess about a 90.

tHeraPist: Can you tell me what makes you so upset

in your living room?
Patient: Well that is a long story . . . and I know it

doesn’t make sense.


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

tHeraPist: Go on. It’s important that we understand
what makes you uncomfortable and fearful in your
living room.

Patient: About 2 years ago, I got up in the morning
and went into the living room, and I saw a dead
squirrel in the fireplace. I guess he got in through the
chimney. So, I figured that if the squirrel was dead,
he must have been sick. I know that a lot of squirrels
have rabies, so I thought that if the squirrel died of
rabies, then there are germs all over the chimney.

tHeraPist: Have you tried to have the chimney and
the fireplace cleaned?

Patient: Yes, we did have a company come in and
clean the whole area, but I’m not sure that they can
clean away the germs.

tHeraPist: I understand. How about the laundry room,
how upsetting is it to be in the laundry room?
Patient: That would be a 100; that’s why I don’t go
in there.

tHeraPist: How did the laundry room become dangerous?


Patient: Oh, that’s another story. Until a year ago, my
children used to keep their guinea pigs in the laundry
room. One day we found the female guinea pig
dead. So I thought that it probably died of rabies, too.

tHeraPist: Oh, I understand. So you are generally
afraid you will contract rabies if you come in contact
with things that you think are contaminated with rabies
germs. Is this true?

Patient: Exactly. That’s why I don’t like to walk in the
woods or the park. You know, those places have all
kind of animals, and you can never tell where the
germs might be.

It is clear from this conversation that it was not living
rooms, laundry rooms, or parks per se that the patient
feared. Rather, any situation or object that, in her
mind, had some probability of being infested with rabies
germs became a source of contamination. Some
contamination-fearful patients, however, cannot specify
feared consequences of coming into contact with
stimuli they perceive to be contaminated. For these
patients, the primary fear is that they will not be able
to tolerate the extreme emotional distress generated by
being contaminated. With such patients, it is also important
to probe further to discern whether they have

fears about the long-term health consequences of experiencing
high and unremitting anxiety in response to
stimuli that prompt obsessions.

Internal Fear Cues

Anxiety and distress may also be generated by images,
impulses, or abstract thoughts that the individual finds
disturbing, shameful, or disgusting. Examples of such
cues include impulses to stab one’s child, thoughts of
one’s spouse injured in an accident, or images of religious
figures engaged in sexual activity. Clearly, internal
threat cues may be produced by external situations,
such as the sight of a knife triggering the impulse to
stab one’s child. Some patients may become distressed
when they experience certain bodily sensations, such as
minor pains triggering the fear of having cancer.

In many cases, patients may be reluctant to express
their obsessive thoughts because they are either
ashamed of them or fear that expressing them will
make the consequence more likely to occur. In these
cases, the therapist needs to encourage the expression
of these thoughts through direct questioning and
a matter-of-fact attitude. Sometimes it helps to tell the
patient that many people with and without OCD have
unwanted thoughts (as many as 85% of normal individuals;
Rachman & DeSilva, 1978). It may also be
helpful to remind the patient that talking about the obsessions
will be a part of therapy; the evaluation session
provides an opportunity to begin this process.

tHeraPist: So tell me, when is it that you feel the urge

to count?
Patient: It seems like I’m always counting something,

but it’s mostly when I think about certain things.

tHeraPist: What kind of things?

Patient: I don’t know. Bad things.

tHeraPist: Can you give me some examples of bad

thoughts that will make you want to count?
Patient: (brief silence) I really prefer not to talk about

them. It makes things worse.

tHeraPist: You mean it makes the counting worse?

Patient: Yes.

tHeraPist: All right, I know now that when you think

or talk about certain bad things, you have an urge to

count, but I still don’t know what those bad things


Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder

are. How about you tell me so that I can help you
with them?
Patient: I’d really rather not. Can’t we talk about
something else?

tHeraPist: It is important that I know what the
thoughts are to plan your treatment. I’ll try to help
you. Do the thoughts involve someone being hurt?

Patient: Yes.
tHeraPist: Do the thoughts involve only certain peo


ple getting hurt or could it be anyone?
Patient: Mostly my family.
tHeraPist: OK, what else can you tell me about the

thoughts?
Patient: I really don’t want to say any more.
tHeraPist: I know this is scary, but remember that fac


ing your fears is what this treatment is all about.
Patient: OK. It’s not always thoughts. Sometimes I see
pictures in my mind, where my brother or my mom
and dad are killed. I’m afraid when I talk about these
thoughts and pictures that they really will die.
tHeraPist: A lot of people have thoughts that they
don’t like to have. Even people without OCD. Just
because you have these thoughts, or talk about them,
doesn’t mean that bad things will actually happen or
that you want them to come true.

It is important to reassure the patient that unpleasant
thoughts occur often and to emphasize the distinction
between thoughts and reality. Many patients with
OCD have magical ideas in which the distinction between
“thinking about” and “making things happen”
is blurred, a process labeled by Salkovskis (1985)
as “thought–action fusion” (TAF). It is important
to point out to the patient that thoughts are different
from actions. Also, many patients think that if negative
thoughts enter their mind, then it means they wish the
bad thing will happen. The therapist should assure the
patient that thinking about bad things does not mean
that one wants them to happen. These sorts of informal
discussions of mistaken beliefs are an integral part
of correct implementation of EX/RP. Such discussions
should accompany the treatment planning process, and
be reiterated as needed during exposure exercises. It is,
however, important that such discussions accompany
EX/RP exercises rather than replace them.

Feared Consequences

Many individuals with OCD are afraid that something
terrible will happen if they fail to perform their rituals.
Such patients with washing rituals, for example, typically
fear that they and/or someone else will become
ill or disabled, or die, as a result of being contaminated.
Many patients with checking rituals fear that because
of their negligence, certain catastrophes will occur,
such as their homes burning down, or that they might
kill someone while driving. Some patients have only a
vague notion of what these negative consequence might
be (e.g., “I don’t know exactly what will happen, but I
feel that if I don’t count to seven, something bad will
happen to my family”). Others do not fear catastrophes
at all, but they cannot tolerate the emotional distress
they experience if they do not perform rituals. Some
fear that unless they ritualize, anxiety will increase
continually, until they have a nervous breakdown. Data
from the DSM-IV field trial indicated that approximately
two-thirds of patients with OCD could clearly
identify consequences other than emotional distress
that would result when they refrained from performing
rituals, whereas the remainder could report no such
consequences (Foa et al., 1995).

It is important to identify the specific details of the
patient’s feared consequences to plan an effective exposure
program. For example, the content of the imaginal
exposure of a patient who checks while driving for fear
of having hit a pedestrian and being sent to jail differs
from that of a patient who fears that hitting a pedestrian
will result in punishment by God. Similarly, patients
who ritualistically place objects in a specific order may
differ with respect to their feared catastrophes. Some
perform the ritual to prevent catastrophic consequences
(e.g., death of parents), whereas others do so only to reduce
distress elicited by disordered objects. The former
would benefit from treatment that includes both imaginal
and in vivo exposure, whereas the latter is likely to
profit from in vivo exposure alone.

Strength of Belief

Clinical observations have led to suggestions that individuals
with OCD who have poor insight do not respond
well to exposure and response prevention, although two
later studies failed to find a linear relationship between
strength of belief in feared catastrophes and improvement
following exposure and response prevention (Foa


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

et al., 1999; Lelliott, Noshirvani, Basoglu, Marks, &
Monteiro, 1988). Two issues need to be considered in
evaluating these collective findings. First, the reliability
and validity of the strength of belief measures used
in previous studies are unknown. Second, the relationship
between overvalued ideation and treatment outcome
may not be linear. Clinical observation suggests
that only patients who express extreme belief in their
obsessional ideation show poor outcome. Indeed, Foa
and colleagues (1999) found that only extremely strong
belief (fixed belief) was associated with attenuated outcome.
Such patients may appear delusional when discussing
their feared catastrophes. We hypothesize that
the effect of fixed belief on outcome may be mediated
by treatment compliance: Patients who are convinced
that feared disasters will ensue if they engaged in prescribed
exercises probably will not complete the tasks
as assigned.

When assessing the strength of belief, it is important
to remember that a patient’s insight into the senselessness
of his/her belief often fluctuates. Some patients
readily acknowledge that their obsessional beliefs are
irrational, but the beliefs still cause marked distress. A
few individuals firmly believe that their obsessions and
compulsions are rational. In most patients, though, the
strength of belief fluctuates across situations, making it
difficult to ascertain the degree to which they believe
the obsessions are irrational. The following example is
an inquiry into the strength of a patient’s belief in her
obsessional fear of contracting acquired immune deficiency
syndrome (AIDS).

tHeraPist: How likely is it that you will contract

AIDS from using a public restroom?
Patient: I’m really terrified that I will get AIDS if I

use a bathroom in a restaurant.

tHeraPist: I know that you are afraid of getting AIDS,

but if you think logically, how likely do you think

you are to get AIDS by sitting on a public toilet?

Patient: I think I will get AIDS if I use a public toilet.

tHeraPist: So do you mean to say that there is a 100%

chance of you getting AIDS if you sit on a public

toilet once?

Patient: Well, I don’t know about once, but if I did it
again and again I would.

tHeraPist: What about other people? Will they get
AIDS if they use a public toilet?

Patient: I guess so. I’m not sure.

tHeraPist: Since most people use public bathrooms,
almost everyone should have AIDS by now. How do
you explain the fact that a relatively small number of
people have AIDS?

Patient: Maybe not everybody is as susceptible to
AIDS as I am.

tHeraPist: Do you think that you are more susceptible

than other people?
Patient: I don’t know for sure. Maybe the likelihood of

my getting AIDS is only 50%.

Based on the interaction just described, the therapist
concluded that the patient was not an “overvalued ideator”;
thus, the prognosis for this patient is brighter than
it would be if she continued strongly to hold her original
belief. Accordingly, the implementation of EX/RP
for this patient would follow the standard guidelines.

Avoidance and Rituals

To maximize treatment efficacy, all avoidance and ritualistic
behaviors, even seemingly minor ones, should
be prevented. Therefore, the therapist should gather
complete information about all passive avoidance and
rituals. When the therapist is in doubt as to whether
a particular avoidance behavior is related to OCD, he/
she might suggest an “experiment” in which the patient
is exposed to the avoided situation. If the patient experiences
anxiety or distress, the avoidance behavior
should be prevented as part of treatment. Similarly, if it
is unclear whether a given action constitutes a ritual, a
response prevention “experiment” may be implemented.
If refraining from performing the action evokes distress,
the action is identified as a ritual and should be
addressed in therapy.

Individuals with OCD, like those with specific
phobias, often attempt to avoid anxiety-evoking situations.
Most passive avoidance strategies are fairly obvious
(e.g., not entering public restrooms, not preparing
meals, and not taking out the trash). However, the
therapist also needs to be attentive to subtle forms of
avoidance, such as carrying money in one’s pockets to
avoid opening a wallet, wearing slip-on shoes to avoid
touching laces, and using drinking straws to avoid
contact with a glass or a can. Patients with obsessive–
compulsive checking rituals also engage in subtle
avoidance behaviors that are important to explore, such
as arranging their work schedules to ensure that they
are rarely, if ever, the last person to leave the business,


Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder

thus ensuring that the responsibility for checking the
safe falls on a coworker.

Active rituals, such as passive avoidance, may be explicit
(e.g., prolonged washing, repeated checks of the
door, and ordering of objects) and/or subtle (e.g., wiping
hands on pant legs, blinking, and thinking “good”
thoughts). It is important that the therapist identify
both explicit and subtle rituals, so that both may be addressed
during treatment.

Although compulsive rituals are intended to reduce
the distress associated with obsessions, patients
sometimes report that the performance of these rituals
is aversive in itself. For example, Ms. S, who was
obsessed with the orderliness of objects on her shelves,
found reordering the shelves aversive because she was
unable to find the “perfect” place for everything. Similarly,
Mr. J, who felt contaminated by chemicals, found
the act of decontaminating himself by repeated handwashing
aversive because he was unable to decide when
his hands were sufficiently clean; therefore, he washed
until his hands became raw. Rituals may also become
aversive because of their intrusion into other aspects of
the person’s life. For example, Mr. J, who would take
2-hour-long showers to feel adequately clean, was reprimanded
repeatedly by his supervisor for arriving late
to work.

When certain compulsions become aversive, some
patients decrease the time they spend performing the
ritual by increasing avoidance behaviors, or by substituting
other, less time-consuming rituals. For example,
Ms. E, who was obsessed with fears of contamination
by funeral-related objects (e.g., cemeteries and people
returning from a funeral), responded with hours of
showering and handwashing. She eventually retreated
into her bedroom and avoided all contact with the
outside world. Mr. J, described earlier, avoided taking
a shower for days at a time, but between showers he
wiped his hands compulsively and avoided touching his
wife. In some cases, seemingly “new” rituals may develop
during the course of treatment to function in the
place of those previously identified and eliminated. For
example, Mr. F, who was concerned about his hands
becoming contaminated, successfully resisted the urge
to wash his hands, but soon after response prevention
was implemented, he started to rub his hands together
vigorously to “decontaminate” them. When such a substitute
ritual is identified, it also needs to be addressed
in treatment with ritual prevention. Therapists must not
only remain alert to such shifts in ritualistic behaviors
but also alert patients to the possibility of such shifts.

History of Main Complaint
and Treatment History

Many individuals with OCD are unable to give a detailed
account of the onset of their symptoms because
the symptoms began subtly, many years ago. Nevertheless,
therapists should attempt to collect as much information
as possible about the onset and course of the
disorder. Such information may provide clues about aspects
of the fear network and variables associated with
the maintenance of symptoms, and may help to anticipate
difficulties that may arise during treatment (e.g.,
old obsessions or rituals that may resurface as more
prominent ones diminish).

Many such individuals also have an extensive history
of psychological and pharmacological treatments,
and it is important to make a detailed inquiry about
the outcome of previous treatments. If the patient has
been treated with EX/RP, the therapist should assess
whether the treatment was implemented appropriately
and the patient was compliant with treatment demands.
Knowledge that a patient experienced difficulty complying
with response prevention instructions, or that
previous therapy failed to provide adequate exposure
experiences or response prevention instructions, is important
for designing the behavioral program. Other
factors that may have prevented successful outcome or
caused relapse, such as job stress, death in the family,
or pregnancy, should be discussed. At the same time, a
prior failed course of EX/RP should not necessarily be
viewed as prognostic, especially if the patient recognizes
why the therapy was less successful in the past. One
of our patients, who had failed multiple trials of less
intensive EX/RP, came to our center with the knowledge
that his noncompliance with exposure exercises
between weekly sessions greatly reduced the effects
of treatment. He also noted that the slow progress he
observed in these previous therapies demoralized him
and caused further disengagement from the treatment.
When offered a choice of daily versus twice-weekly
sessions, he opted for the daily treatment, noting that
the more intensive approach might decrease the chance
of similar lapses. He has now successfully completed
the intensive regimen.

In our clinic we have observed that a substantial
majority of our outpatients have been treated, or are
currently being treated, with serotonergic medications.
Some seek EX/RP to augment the partial gains they
have achieved with the medication. Others wish to discontinue
the medication because it was ineffective, it


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

had side effects, or they do not want to continue taking
medicine indefinitely. Assessment of the patient’s treatment
goals is necessary for planning his/her treatment
program.

Social Functioning

Obsessive–compulsive symptoms may severely disrupt
the daily functioning of patients. Therapists should assess
the impact of OCD symptoms on the various areas
of functioning. Where appropriate, this information
should be used to design suitable exposure exercises.
For example, Ms. D experienced difficulties completing
assignments at work because she repeatedly checked
each task. Treatment included exposures to performing
tasks at work without checking. Even if the client is not
currently working, exposures simulating work situations
may be necessary if symptoms created difficulties
in previous jobs.

OCD clearly has a deleterious effect on the intimate
relationships of many patients. About half of married
individuals seeking treatment for OCD experience
marital distress (Emmelkamp et al., 1990; Riggs et al.,
1992). Other family and social relationships may also
suffer as a result of OCD symptoms. The impairment
in social functioning may arise because social contact
is either perceived as threatening (e.g., “I may spread
germs to other people”) or so much of the patient’s
time and energy is invested in performing rituals and
planning ways to avoid distressing situations. Again,
information about the relation of social dysfunction
to OCD symptoms may lead the therapist to include
specific exposures aimed at ameliorating these social
difficulties.

The assessment of social functioning should also include
an evaluation of what role, if any, other people
play in the patient’s compulsive rituals. If the patient relies
on others for reassurance or compliance with rituals
(e.g., family members must remove their shoes before
entering the house), the therapist should instruct family
members how to respond appropriately when asked
to participate in the patient’s rituals. A careful analysis
of the relationship is called for before specific instructions
are given to significant others. Moreover, if family
members tend to criticize the patient when obsessional
distress arises, it is important to address these negative
exchanges in treatment. We have often addressed this
issue with a combination of empathic discussion of the
frustration experienced by the family member and role
playing of more effective responses.

Mood State

Although some patients with serious depression and
OCD may benefit from behavioral therapy for OCD
(Foa et al., 1992), research suggests that severe depression
may limit the extent of reduction of OCD
symptoms and the maintenance of those gains (e.g.,
Abramowitz et al., 2000). Therefore, it is important
to assess the mood state of the patient prior to beginning
behavioral therapy. Patients with severe depression
should be treated with antidepressant medication
or cognitive therapy to reduce the depressive symptoms
prior to implementing behavioral therapy for the OCD.
Treatment with serotonergic antidepressants may reduce
OCD symptoms, as well as depression. Because
the effects of such medication on OCD symptoms may
not be evident until 3 months after treatment begins,
the therapist needs to use his/her clinical judgment to
decide whether to begin EX/RP when the depression
decreases or wait until the effects of the medication on
OCD symptoms can be assessed.

Choice of Treatment

How should a therapist determine the most suitable
treatment for a given patient? As discussed earlier, exposure
and response prevention, as well as serotonergic
medications, have demonstrated efficacy for OCD.
Therapist and patient are faced with the choice of EX/
RP, pharmacotherapy, or a combination of the two. Neither
treatment is effective with all patients, and no consistent
predictors of who will benefit most from which
treatment modality have been identified. Therefore,
unless the patient has been particularly successful or
unsuccessful with some previous course of treatment,
the decision should be based on factors such as availability
of treatment, amount of time the patient is able
or willing to invest in treatment, and his/her motivation
and willingness to tolerate side effects.

The intensive treatment requires a considerable investment
of time over a period of several weeks. Many
patients are unable, or unwilling, to devote 4–5 hours a
day to treatment. These patients should be advised to
try pharmacological treatment, which does not require
the same extensive time commitment. Recent investigations
of the effects of a twice-weekly EX/RP regimen
compared to intensive treatment suggested comparable
outcomes at follow-up (Abramowitz et al., 2003; Storch
et al., 2007); thus, in our center, we routinely offer either
program to patients considering EX/RP. Some


Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder

patients may be unwilling (sometimes expressed as “I
can’t do that”) to experience the temporary discomfort
caused by EX/RP. These patients, too, may be advised
to try medications. The need to develop “readiness
programs” designed to prepare such patients to accept
EX/RP treatment is often cited in light of the relatively
high refusal rate among patients offered EX/RP. Such
programs may include testimonials from previously
treated patients, cognitive strategies designed to help
the patient calculate objective risks more accurately,
psychoeducation about OCD and EX/RP, and a review
of the outcome literature for various treatments (Tolin,
Maltby, Diefenbach, Hannan, & Worhunsky, 2004).
An initial RCT of EX/RP plus motivational interviewing
(MI) did not yield outcomes that were superior to
EX/RP alone (Simpson et al., 2010), but the study did
not specifically recruit patients who were experiencing
low motivation. Manualizing programs specifically for
those patients and examining the acceptance rate and
efficacy of EX/RP infused with MI constitutes the next
step in this line of research.

Patients who are concerned about the potential (or
have already experienced) side effects of medications
or their unknown long-term effects often prefer EX/
RP. Other patients are concerned with the prospect of
entering an “endless” treatment because, according to
present knowledge, relapse occurs when medication is
withdrawn (Pato et al., 1988; Thoren, Asberg, Chronholm,
Journestedt, & Traskman, 1980). This concern is
particularly relevant for women who plan to bear children
and need to withdraw from the medication during
pregnancy. EX/RP should be recommended to these
patients because its effects are more enduring.

As discussed earlier, the long-term effects of combining
EX/RP and medication are unclear; therefore,
it is premature to recommend treatment programs that
combine the two therapies. However, some patients
who present for treatment are already on antidepressant
medication. Because these medications were found not
to interfere with the effectiveness of EX/RP (Franklin
et al., 2000), it is recommended that patients continue
to take the medication if they have experienced some
improvement in either obsessive–compulsive symptoms
or depression. However, if the patient has not experienced
improvement with medication, withdrawal
of the medication before or during EX/RP should be
considered. Special consideration should be given to
patients with severe depression concurrent with their
OCD. It is recommended that these patients be treated
with antidepressants or cognitive therapy for the

depression prior to entering intensive EX/RP for the
OCD, given recent findings of somewhat attenuated
outcome for severely depressed patients (Abramowitz
et al., 2000).

iNteNsive ex/rP

The intensive treatment program comprises four phases:
(1) information gathering, (2) intensive EX/RP, (3)
a home visit, and (4) maintenance and relapse prevention.


Information Gathering
and Treatment Planning

The first stage of information gathering consists of a
thorough diagnostic evaluation to determine that the
patient’s main psychopathology is OCD. The second
step is to assess whether the patient is appropriate for
EX/RP. We recommend that individuals who are abusing
drugs or alcohol should be treated for the substance
abuse prior to intensive treatment for OCD. Patients who
have clear delusions and hallucinations are also poor
candidates for intensive treatment. Individuals with severe
MDD should be treated for depression before beginning
treatment for OCD. The patient’s motivation to
comply with the demands of intensive treatment should
be carefully evaluated. It is important to describe the
treatment program in enough detail that the patient
is not surprised when treatment begins. If the patient
does not express strong motivation and commitment to
treatment, it might be preferable to delay implementation
of intensive treatment or to offer alternative treatments,
such as medication. As noted earlier, a study of
less intensive EX/RP for patients who appear otherwise
motivated, yet cannot accommodate the daily regimen
into their schedules, suggested an outcome comparable
to intensive treatment; future research with much larger
samples is needed to determine whether patient factors
predict differential outcome to either treatment schedule.


Once a patient is judged to be appropriate for intensive
treatment, information gathering for treatment
planning begins. This phase typically comprises 4–6
hours of contact with the patient over a period of 2–3
days. During this phase, the therapist collects information
about the patient’s obsessive–compulsive symptoms,
general history, and the history of treatment
for OCD, as described earlier. During these sessions,


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

the therapist discusses the rationale for treatment, describes
the program in detail, teaches patients to monitor
their rituals, and develops a treatment plan.

First Information‑Gathering Session

It is very important to discuss the rationale for treatment
and to describe the treatment program in detail.
The program requires that the patient abandon his/her
obsessive–compulsive habits, therefore temporarily
experiencing substantial discomfort. If patients do not
understand why they are asked to suffer this short-term
distress or are not convinced that treatment will work,
they are unlikely to comply with treatment instructions.
The treatment rationale is explained as follows:

“You have a set of habits that, as you know, are called
obsessive–compulsive symptoms. These are habits
of thinking, feeling, and acting that are extremely
unpleasant, wasteful, and difficult to get rid of on
your own. Usually, these habits involve thoughts, images,
or impulses that habitually come to your mind,
even though you don’t want them. Along with these
thoughts you have unwanted feelings of extreme distress
or anxiety and strong urges to do something to
reduce the distress. To try to get rid of the anxiety,
people get into the habit of engaging in various special
thoughts or actions, which we call ‘rituals.’

“Unfortunately, as you know, the rituals do not
work all that well, and the distress decreases for a
short time only, then comes back again. Eventually,
you may find yourself doing more and more ritualizing
to try to reduce anxiety, but even then the relief
is temporary and you have to do the ritual all
over again. Gradually, you find yourself spending so
much time and energy ritualizing—which does not
work that well anyway—that other areas of your life
are seriously disrupted.

“The treatment we are about to begin is called
exposure and response prevention. It is designed to
break two types of associations. The first association
is between sensations of anxiety and the objects,
situations, or thoughts that produce this distress.
[The therapist uses information collected as examples;
e.g., ‘Every time you touch anything associated
with urine you feel anxious, distressed, or contaminated.’]
The second association we want to break is
that between carrying out ritualistic behavior and
the feeling of less anxiety or less distress. In other
words, after you carry out [specifies the identified

rituals], you temporarily feel less distress. Therefore,
you continue to engage in this behavior frequently.
The treatment we offer breaks the automatic bond
between the feelings of discomfort/anxiety/contamination
of [specifies the obsession] and your rituals.
It will also train you not to ritualize when you are
anxious.”

After presenting the treatment rationale, the therapist
should begin to collect information about the patient’s
OCD symptoms. The rationale for information gathering
and a description of the treatment is presented as
follows:

“In the next two sessions, I will ask you specific
questions about the various situations and thoughts
that generate discomfort or anxiety in you. We will
order them according to the degree of distress they
generate in you on a scale from 0 to 100, where 0
means No anxiety and 100 means Maximum anxiety
or panic. The exposure treatment program involves
confronting you with situations and thoughts that
you avoid because they generate anxiety and urges
to carry out ritualistic behavior. Why do we want to
expose you to places and objects that will make you
uncomfortable, situations that you have attempted to
avoid even at much cost? We know that when people
are exposed to situations that they fear, anxiety gradually
declines. Through exposure, then, the association
between anxiety and [specifies the obsession]
weaken because you are repeatedly exposed to these
situations, so that the previously evoked anxiety decreases
with time.

“For many people with OCD the obsessions occur
within their imagination and rarely take place in
reality. This makes it impossible to practice exposure
by actually confronting those situations for prolonged
periods. For example, if a person fears that
her home will burn down, we certainly do not wish
to have her house catch on fire in order to practice
exposure. Similarly, someone who fears that he has
run over a person who is now lying in the road cannot
in reality be exposed to such a situation.

“If confrontation with the feared situation is necessary
to reduce obsessions, how can you improve
without directly confronting the situation? You can
confront these fears through imagery, in which you
visualize the circumstances that you fear will happen.
In imagery practice, you create in your mind
detailed pictures of the terrible consequences that


Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder

you are afraid will occur if you do not engage in the
ritualistic behavior. During prolonged exposure to
these images, the distress level associated with them
gradually decreases.

“When people with OCD encounter their feared
situations or their obsessional thoughts, they become
anxious or distressed and feel compelled to perform
the ritualistic behavior as a way to reduce their
distress. Exposure practices can cause this same
distress and urge to ritualize. Usually, performing
rituals strengthens the pattern of distress and rituals.
Therefore in treatment, ritual prevention is practiced
to break the habit of ritualizing. This requires that
you stop ritualizing, even though you are still having
urges to do so. By facing your fears without resorting
to compulsions, you gradually become less anxious.
Behavior therapists call this process ‘habituation.’
Therefore, during the 3 weeks of intensive exposure,
the association between relief from anxiety and carrying
out [specifies the patient’s rituals] will become
weaker because you will not be allowed to engage in
such behaviors; therefore, you will find out that your
anxiety decreases even if you do not resort to these
activities.”

The initial information-gathering session is also used
to begin training the patient to monitor his/her rituals
accurately. Accurate reports of the frequency and duration
of ritualistic behavior are important to evaluate the
progress of treatment and to demonstrate the reality of
changes to the patient. In some cases, the monitoring
also serves an active role in treatment. Patients begin to
recognize that rituals do not truly occur “all day long”
and the act of monitoring the rituals may decrease their
frequency and duration.

“It is very important for the treatment program that we
have an accurate picture of the extent to which you
engage in obsessive thinking and compulsive behavior.
Having a clear picture of how much of your time
is taken up by your problem will help us to monitor
your progress and adjust the treatment program
accordingly. Therefore, during this week, while I
am still collecting information to form a treatment
program, I would like you to record your symptoms
every day. It is not easy to report accurately on how
much you engage in your obsessive–compulsive behavior;
therefore, we will spend some time now and
in the next session going over some rules for how
to record your symptoms. Here are some monitoring

forms on which you will record your thoughts and
rituals.”

The therapist should specify which ritual(s) the patient
is to record, go over the instructions carefully with
the patient, and practice filling out the form with the
patient using an “imaginary day” of his/her life. The
following rules are helpful in monitoring rituals:

1. Use your watch to monitor the time you spend on
your rituals.
2. Do not guess the time of ritualizing; be exact.
3. Write the time immediately on your monitoring
form.
4. Do not save the recording to the end of the day or
the beginning of the next day.
5. Write a short sentence to describe the trigger for
ritualizing.
Prior to beginning treatment, the patient identifies
an individual (e.g., parent, spouse, or close friend)
who can serve as a support person during the intensive
treatment program. The patient is instructed to rely on
this person for support during exposures, and the support
person is asked to help monitor compliance with
response prevention instructions. If the patient experiences
difficulty resisting the urge to ritualize, then the
support person is contacted for support. Because the
support person is involved in the therapy, the therapist
allocates time during the information-gathering phase
to describe the treatment and discuss its rationale with
him or her.

The therapist makes an effort to ensure that the support
person and the patient mutually agree that the
support person will offer constructive criticism and
observations. In making these suggestions, the support
person should be sensitive to any difficulties that have
arisen in the past. For example, Mr. B, who served as
his wife’s primary source of reassurance, also criticized
her severely when he “caught” her performing
her handwashing ritual. To prevent these responses
from hampering treatment, to help the husband supervise
his wife’s response prevention, the therapist spent
time with the couple negotiating appropriate, uncritical
responses to the wife’s requests for reassurance.

The support person is in regular (at least twice weekly)
contact with the therapist and is not only informed
about the specific homework exposures that the patient
has to accomplish but also relays his/her observations
about the patient’s behavior outside the therapy session.


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

In addition, with the consent of the patient, the support
person should contact the therapist if major treatment
violations occur (e.g., refusing to do homework or engaging
in ritualistic behavior).

Second Information‑Gathering Session

At the beginning of the second information-gathering
session, the therapist devotes time to the patient’s selfmonitoring
form, which includes examining the descriptions
of situations that trigger ritualistic behavior
and offering constructive comments when necessary.
The therapist reminds the patient to use short phrases
or sentences to describe the trigger situations, assesses
the accuracy of the patient’s time estimates, and emphasizes
the need for accurate measurements.

Generating a Treatment Plan

The bulk of the second information-gathering session
is allotted to gathering detailed information about the
patient’s symptoms and, based on what is learned about
the symptoms, developing a treatment with the patient.
It is important to explain to the patient how the exposure
exercises that comprise his/her treatment will reduce the
OCD symptoms. For, example, the patient with religious
obsessions is told that the imaginal exposure to burning
in hell in excruciating detail is designed to reduce
his obsessional distress when a less elaborate image of
burning in hell comes into his mind. It is important that
patients understand the rationale underlying the central
concept in EX/RP, that confronting obsession-evoking
stimuli during treatment increases their suffering in the
short run but will reduce it in the long run. We often tell
patients that the difficulties they experience during the
first week of exposure sessions are likely to diminish
with proper implementation of EX/RP.

Describing Homework

At the end of the second information-gathering session,
the therapist describes the homework assignments
included in the treatment program. The homework,
which usually requires 2–3 hours, in addition to the
2-hour treatment session, comprises additional exposure
exercises to be done between treatment sessions
at the patient’s home or elsewhere (e.g., a shopping
mall or a relative’s home). We suggest that the patient
monitor his/her SUDS level every 10 minutes during

the homework exposures. In some cases, when it is
impossible for the patient to maintain an exposure for
45–60 minutes, the therapist works with the patient to
develop a plan that allows the exposure to be prolonged.
For example, instead of asking the patient to spend 45
minutes sitting in the restroom of a local restaurant, the
therapist might suggest that he/she contaminate a handkerchief
on the toilet seat and carry this “contamination
rag” in a pocket.

Treatment Period

The treatment program at our center typically comprises
fifteen 2-hour treatment sessions conducted daily
for 3 weeks. Clinical observation suggests that massed
sessions produce better results than do sessions spread
out over time; therefore, we recommend a minimum
of three sessions per week. Each session begins with a
10- to 15-minute discussion of homework assignments
and the previous day’s ritual monitoring. The next 90
minutes are divided into 45 minutes each of imaginal
and in vivo exposure. The final 15 minutes are spent
discussing the homework assignment for the following
day. This format may be adjusted when necessary. For
example, if an in vivo exposure requires that therapist
and patient travel to a local shopping mall to contaminate
children’s clothing, the entire session is devoted
to this activity. Some patients have difficulty engaging
emotionally in imaginal exposures (i.e., the images fail
to elicit distress). In these cases, treatment should focus
exclusively on in vivo exercises.

We recommend that the therapist discuss the plan for
that session with the patient in the beginning of the session.
Barring any unusual circumstances (e.g., patient’s
stated objection to proceeding with the planned exposure),
it is important to limit these discussions to no
more than 15 minutes. Patients with OCD are usually
very fearful of engaging in exposure tasks, and elaborate
discussion of the task at hand may serve as a form
of avoidance of going ahead with the exposure. These
preexposure discussions are also fertile ground for assurance
seeking (i.e., the patient asking the therapist if
he/she is certain that the proposed exercise is safe). The
therapist should answer such questions carefully, avoiding
either extreme (i.e., neither providing compulsive
reassurance nor conveying to the patient that the proposed
exposure is objectively dangerous).

Imaginal exposure exercises are typically conducted
prior to in vivo exercises in each session, often as a pre



Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder

lude to the scheduled in vivo exercise. During imaginal
exposure the patient is seated in a comfortable chair
and is given the following instructions:

“Today you will be imagining [describes scene].
I’ll ask you to close your eyes so that you won’t be
distracted. Please try to picture this scene as fully
and vividly as possible, not like you are being told
a story, but as if you were experiencing it now, right
here. Every few minutes I will ask you to rate your
anxiety level on a scale from 0 to 100. Please answer
quickly and try not to leave the image.”

The imaginal exposure sessions are audiotaped, and
the patient is asked to repeat the exposure by listening
to the tape as part of that day’s homework. The situations
included in in vivo exposure vary greatly from
patient to patient (particularly with patients with prominent
checking rituals). Below are some examples of
instructions that might be offered to patients during in
vivo exposure exercises.

For patients with prominent washing rituals:

“Today, you will be touching [specifies item(s)]. This
means that I will ask you to touch it with your whole
hand, not just the fingers, and then to touch it to your
face, hair, and clothing, all over yourself, so you feel
that no part of you has avoided contamination. Then
I’ll ask you to sit and hold it and repeatedly touch it
to your face, hair, and clothes during the rest of the
session. I know that this is likely to make you upset,
but remember the anxiety will eventually decrease.
I also want you to go ahead and let yourself worry
about the harm you are afraid will occur—for example,
disease—since you won’t he washing or cleaning
after this exposure. I am sorry that this treatment
has to be difficult and cause so much discomfort, but
I’m sure you can do it. You’ll find it gets easier as
time goes on. OK, here it is, go ahead and touch it.”

The therapist should give the patient the object to
hold, ask him/her to touch it, and then ask the patient to
touch the object or the “contaminated” hands directly
to his/her face, hair, and clothing. Every 10 minutes the
patient should be asked, “What is your level of anxiety
or discomfort from 0 to 100 right now as you focus on
what you’re touching?” This can be shortened to “What
is your SUDS?” once the patient understands the question.


For patients with prominent checking rituals:

“Now, I’d like you to [e.g., write out your checks to
pay your monthly bills without looking at them after
you’ve finished; just put them in the envelope and
then we will mail them right away, without checking
even once after you’ve done it]. Then we will go on
and do [e.g., drive on a bumpy road without looking
in the rearview mirror] in the same way. While
doing this, I would like you to worry about what
harm might occur because you aren’t checking your
actions, but don’t let the thoughts interfere with actually
doing those activities.”

Patients should be reminded of the specific instructions
for response prevention on the first day of treatment
and periodically during treatment. We have found
that giving patients a printed copy of the rules for response
prevention can help them to understand and remember
the rules. If the rules as outlined for the patient
do not adequately cover the type of ritual(s) the patient
exhibits, the therapist should provide a written set of
instructions modeled after these forms.

During the last few sessions of treatment, the patient
should be introduced to rules of “normal” washing,
cleaning, or checking. Response prevention requirements
should be relaxed to enable the patient to return
to what is considered a normal routine.

Home Visit

It is important to ensure that the patient’s gains from
the treatment program generalize to the home environment.
Usually homework assignments function to produce
this generalization, but we have found that visits
by the therapist to the patient’s home can be quite helpful,
especially in cases where the patient is not able to
return home daily during the intensive treatment phase
(e.g., patients who are from out of town or are hospitalized).
The home visit also offers therapist and patient
an opportunity to discuss guidelines for “normal” behavior.
The therapist should discuss the plans for these
visits with the patient and his/her family before the
treatment ends. It is also important to note that, in some
cases, the majority of the treatment sessions need to be
conducted at the patient’s home, such as when treating a
hoarder. Determining the frequency of home visits during
the core treatment should be based on whether the
patient’s OCD symptoms are readily “transportable” to


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

situations outside the home, or whether they are specific
to the home. For patients with prominent washing
rituals, with “safe” rooms and areas in their houses,
contamination of these areas is imperative and also
quite difficult; it is often advisable that the therapist
assist directly with these home-based exposures when
it is questionable whether the patient can contaminate
these “sanctuaries” successfully on his/her own.

Typically, the home visit comprises 4-hour sessions
held on each of 2 days at the end of the treatment program.
The bulk of the time in these sessions is used
to conduct additional exposures to obsessive stimuli in
and around the patient’s home or workplace. For example,
the therapist might accompany the patient as
he/she contaminates objects around the house or at
the local grocery store. Similarly, the patient might be
asked to turn the stove on and off without checking
and leave the house with the therapist. Most patients,
particularly those who were able to return home during
treatment, will report little or no discomfort when
doing these exposures because they represent repetition
of homework assignments. In some cases, though, the
therapist will discover areas that the patient has not
contaminated, or some areas at home that continue to
generate distress despite previous exposures. The home
visit should focus on exposure to situations or objects
that remain problematic.

Maintenance Period

In addition to prescribing continued self-exposure tasks
to help the patient maintain therapy gains, the therapist
may wish to schedule regular maintenance sessions.
These sessions may be used to plan additional exposures,
to refine guidelines for normal behavior, and to
address issues that arise as the patient adjusts to life
without OCD.

There is some evidence that patients benefit from
continued contact with the therapist following the
intensive therapy sessions. In one study, 12 weekly
supportive therapy sessions (no exposure exercises)
appeared to reduce the number of relapses in a sample
of individuals with OCD treated with 3 weeks of
intensive EX/RP (Foa et al., 1992). In another study,
following the intensive treatment with 1 week of daily
cognitive-behavioral sessions followed by eight brief
(10-minute) weekly telephone contacts resulted in better
long-term outcome than following intensive treatment
with 1 week of treatment with free association
(Hiss et al., 1994).

Therapeutic Setting

It is advisable for patients to remain in their normal environments
during intensive treatment. This is particularly
important for patients whose fears are cued mainly
by stimuli in their home environment. The hospital
may be an artificially protected setting, particularly for
patients with prominent checking rituals, who may not
feel responsible for their surroundings and as a result
do not experience their usual urges to check. If patients
live too far away to commute for daily sessions, we recommend
that they rent an apartment or hotel room near
the clinic. When this is not possible, hospitalization
should be considered. Hospitalization is recommended
for patients deemed to be at risk for suicide or psychotic
breakdown, and for those who need close supervision
but lack a support system sufficient to aid them during
treatment.

If a patient is employed and his/her OCD symptoms
are work related, he/she should be encouraged to continue
working, so that relevant exposures can he included
in treatment. However, since treatment requires 5 to
6 hours per day, the patient may opt to work half-days
during the intensive treatment.

When the patient’s symptoms are unrelated to work,
he/she may decide not to continue working during intensive
treatment. Because of the time-consuming nature
of the treatment, we often suggest that patients take
some time off from work. If it is not possible for the
patient to take 3 full weeks off from work, the therapist
might suggest that the patient work half-days or take
time off from work during the first and second weeks
of the treatment program.

Therapist Variables

Intensive treatment with exposure to feared situations
and response prevention of ritualistic behavior provoke
considerable stress for patients. Their willingness to
undergo such “torture” attests to their strong motivation
to rid themselves of the OCD symptoms. The intensive
treatment regimen requires that the therapist maintain
a delicate balance between pressuring the patient
to engage in the treatment and empathizing with his/
her distress. Clinical observations and findings from a
study by Rabavilas and colleagues (1979) suggest that
a respectful, understanding, encouraging, explicit, and
challenging therapist is more likely to achieve a successful
outcome than a permissive, tolerant therapist.
Notably, patients of well-supervised, nonexpert EX/RP


Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder

therapists appear to fare well with EX/RP (Franklin,
Abramowitz, Furr, Kalsy, & Riggs, 2003; Valderhaug
et al., 2007).

During treatment, patients’ behavior may range from
extreme cooperation and willingness to participate in
exposures to blatant manipulation and refusal to follow
the therapist’s instructions. An individual patient may
fluctuate depending on what exposure is conducted
during a particular session. To a great extent, the “art”
of conducting behavioral therapy for OCD involves
knowing when to push, when to confront, and when to
be more flexible. Such decisions require that the therapist
carefully observe the patient’s reactions and make
a judgment based on his/her experience. As much as
possible, the therapist should display an attitude that
counteracts the harshness of the treatment program,
while maintaining the rules for therapy established at
the beginning of the program. The therapist should assure
the patient that he/she will not use force to implement
exposure and that no exposure will be planned
without the patient’s consent. If the patient cannot trust
that the therapist will adhere to these essential guidelines,
the treatment is likely to be compromised. We
also assure the patients that family members will be
asked not to present unplanned exposures to the patient
(e.g., taking out the garbage) without discussing it.

Patient Variables

A primary factor that influences a patient’s potential
for benefiting from intensive behavioral treatment is
the level of his/her motivation. Because EX/RP causes
high distress, patients need to be highly motivated to
undertake the treatment. Often the level of motivation
is related to the severity of the patient’s symptoms.
When symptoms are sufficiently intolerable, patients
are more likely to tolerate considerable discomfort for
a short period to gain relief from their symptoms in the
long run. Tolin and colleagues (2004) have also discussed
the importance of motivational readiness in EX/
RP and have suggested specifically how best to prepare
patients for the often grueling treatment regimen.

Sometimes individuals are pressured into entering
therapy by their families, and they agree to participate
in treatment only to appease a spouse or a parent. These
patients are unlikely to follow the therapist’s instructions
strictly; therefore, they are less likely to make
lasting gains in therapy. In light of these observations,
we do not recommend that patients enter into EX/RP
if they are not committed to follow such instructions;

alternative treatment strategies are typically recommended
in such circumstances.

It is important that the therapist clearly explain to
the patient that 1 month of therapy, albeit intensive, is
unlikely to eliminate all OCD symptoms. Rather, patients
should expect that their anxiety and the urges to
ritualize will diminish and become more manageable.
An expectation of becoming symptom free at the end
of treatment may lead to disappointment and can potentiate
relapse because maintenance of treatment gains
usually requires continued effort over time following
the intensive treatment. Thus, in the initial interview,
we tell patients that we do not have a “cure” for OCD;
rather, we have a treatment that is likely to help them
substantially reduce their symptoms in both the short
and the long run.

It is also important to explain to patients that EX/
RP treatment is not a panacea for all of their psychological
and interpersonal problems. This treatment is
aimed specifically at reducing patients’ obsessions and
urges to ritualize. Problems that existed prior to treatment
(e.g., marital discord or depression) are likely
to remain, although they may be somewhat alleviated
after treatment.

As mentioned earlier, patients with severe depression
and/or an extremely strong belief in the reality
of the obsessive fear may not benefit from EX/RP. An
additional factor that has been identified as a potential
hindrance to the cognitive-behavioral and pharmacological
treatment of OCD is concurrent schizotypal
personality disorder (Jenike, Baer, Minichiello,
Schwartz, & Carey, 1986). Although some questions
have been raised about the method used to diagnose
schizotypy (see Stanley, Turner, & Borden, 1990), therapists
should be alerted to the probability that patients
with schizotypal disorder may respond poorly to treatment
for OCD.

case stuDy

In this section we demonstrate through verbatim material
the process of gathering information relevant to
treatment, planning the treatment program, and conducting
exposure sessions.

Case Description

“June,” a 26-year-old married woman who had just
completed her bachelor’s degree in nursing, sought


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

treatment for a severe washing and cleaning problem.
She was extremely agitated in the first interview and
described herself as “crying a whole lot” during the
previous 6 weeks. She arrived in the company of her
husband of 6 months and her sister-in-law, whom she
considered a good friend. Previous treatment by systematic
desensitization, antidepressants, tranquilizers,
and cognitive restructuring had proven ineffective.
June had been unable to seek employment as a nurse
due to her symptoms.

This information was collected at June’s initial
evaluation for participation in EX/RP treatment. After
ascertaining the absence of psychosis, drug and alcohol
abuse, and organic disorders, June was assigned a
therapist.

Information Gathering

Current Symptoms

First, the therapist sought information from June about
the obsessional content, including external and internal
fear cues; beliefs about consequences; and information
about passive avoidance patterns and types of rituals.
Because rituals are the most concrete symptom, it is
often convenient to begin the inquiry by asking for a
description of this behavior.

tHeraPist: I understand from Dr. F that you are having
a lot of difficulty with washing and cleaning. Can
you tell me more about the problem?

June: I can’t seem to control it at all recently. I wash too
much. My showers are taking a long time, and my
husband is very upset with me. He and my sister-inlaw
are trying to help, but I can’t stop it. I’m upset all
the time and I’ve been crying a whole lot lately (on
the verge of tears). Nothing seems to help.

tHeraPist: I see. You look upset right now. Please try
to explain what your washing has been like in the
past few days, so I can understand. How much washing
have you been doing?

June: Much too much. My showers use up all the hot
water. And I have to wash my hands, it seems like,
all the time. I never feel clean enough.

tHeraPist: About how long does a shower take? How
many minutes or hours would you say?
June: About 45 minutes, I guess. I try to get out sooner.
Sometimes I ask Kenny to make me stop.

tHeraPist: And how often do you take one?

June: Usually only twice, once in the morning and
once at night before bed, but sometimes, if I’m really
upset about something, I could take an extra one.

tHeraPist: And what about washing your hands? How
much time does that take?
June: You mean how many times do I wash?

tHeraPist: How long does it take each time you wash
your hands, and how often do you wash your hands
in a day?

June: Umm, maybe 20 times a day. It probably takes
me 5 minutes each time, maybe more sometimes. I
always have the feeling they’re not really clean, like
maybe I touched them to the side of the sink after I
rinsed and then I think they’re dirty again.

The therapist now had some basic information about
the most prominent rituals. Some further questioning
clarified whether other compulsions were also in evidence.


tHeraPist: Do you do anything else to make yourself
feel clean?
June: Yes, I alcohol things. I wipe with alcohol, like
the car seat before I sit down.

tHeraPist: Do you wipe yourself with alcohol?

June: No, only things that I think are dirty.

tHeraPist: Can you tell me how much you do that?

June: I use about a bottle of alcohol a week.

Here the therapist had to choose whether to inquire
about what objects June cleans or to ask about possible
additional rituals. The therapist chose to continue
the inquiry about ritualistic actions, and to turn to the
subject of “contaminants” as soon as the inquiry was
completed.

tHeraPist: OK, can you think of any other things that
you do to clean yourself, or other things around you
that you feel are dirty?

June: That’s all I can think of right now.

tHeraPist: What about other kinds of what we call
“compulsive” type of activities? Do you have to
check or repeat things over and over?

June: No, except when I wash, if I don’t feel it’s enough.
Then I wash again.


Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder

tHeraPist: No other repetitive actions besides washing?


Since this patient did not appear to have multiple
types of ritualistic behaviors, the therapist turned to the
obsessional content. External cues are usually solicited
first.

tHeraPist: What are the things that make you feel you
want to wash? For instance, why do you wipe the car
seat with alcohol?

June: I think that maybe I got dog dirt on it when I got
in from before, or Kenny might have.
tHeraPist: From your shoes?

June: Yes, I also worry about the hem of my dress
touching the seat. I’ve been worrying that my
shoe could kick my skirt hem or when I step up a
step, like to go in a building, the dress could touch
the step.

tHeraPist: A dress like this? June was wearing a dress
that came to just below her knee. [The likelihood
that it could have touched a curb or sole of her shoe
was very slim.]

June: Yes.
tHeraPist: Has your skirt ever had dog dirt on it?
June: I don’t think so, but in my mind I think that

maybe it could have gotten some on it. I suppose it
would be hard for that to happen, wouldn’t it?

Thoughts that highly improbable events might have
occurred are common in OCD. Such distortions may
be the result of intense anxiety. Doubts about “safety”
often lead to requests for reassurance or to rituals. Reassuring
June that her dress is unlikely to be soiled
would have been countertherapeutic because it perpetuates
the neurotic fears. Rather, the therapist inquired
further about the obsessional content.

tHeraPist: Is dog “dirt” the most upsetting thing that
you worry about?
June: Probably. Yes, I think so, but bathroom germs
are pretty bad, too.
tHeraPist: What sort of germs?
June: From toilets. You know, when you go to the bathroom.
tHeraPist: Urine and feces?

June: Yes, urine doesn’t bother me as much as the
other.

tHeraPist: Why?

June: Because I learned in nursing school that it’s almost
sterile. I had a hard time in the course about microbiology
because it upset me to try to learn about
bacteria and microorganisms. They make it sound
like there are all kinds of germs everywhere that are
real dangerous. I didn’t learn it very well; I tried to
avoid thinking about it.

June’s concerns with both dog dirt and bathroom
germs suggested that her fear structure includes apprehension
about potential illness. The therapist questioned
her to better understand the nature of the feared
consequences of contamination.

tHeraPist: Are you afraid of diseases that could come
from feces?

June: Yes, I guess so. The thing of it is, though, I know
other people don’t worry about it like I do. To them,
you know, they just go to the bathroom and wash
their hands and don’t even think about it. But I can’t
get it out of my head that maybe I didn’t get clean
enough.

tHeraPist: If you didn’t wash enough, would you get
sick or would you cause someone else to get sick?
June: Mostly I worry that I’ll get sick, but sometimes I
worry about Kenny, too.

tHeraPist: Do you worry about a particular kind of
disease?
June: I’m not sure. Some kind of illness.

It is not uncommon for patients who fear harm that
may ensue from not ritualizing to be unable to identify
a specific feared consequence. Patients with prominent
checking rituals often fear they will forget or throw out
something important, but they do not always know exactly
what this will be. Repeaters may fear that something
bad will happen to loved ones but often cannot
specify what particular disaster will befall them. However,
many individuals with OCD do fear specific consequences
(e.g., blindness or leukemia). At this point,
the therapist may choose either to complete the inquiry
about external threat cues or pursue the investigation
about the feared consequences and the belief that such
harm is indeed likely to occur. The latter course was
selected here.


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

tHeraPist: Let’s say that you did actually touch dog
feces or human feces, and you weren’t aware of it, so
you didn’t wash to remove it. What is the likelihood
that you or Kenny would really get seriously ill?

June: Well, I feel like it really could happen.

tHeraPist: I understand that when it happens and you
become very distressed, it feels like you will actually
become sick, but if I ask you to judge objectively,
right now, how likely is it that you will get sick from
touching feces and not washing? For example, if you
were to touch feces 10 times, how many times would
you get sick?

June: Oh, I know it’s pretty unlikely, but sometimes it
seems so real.

tHeraPist: Can you put a number on it? What’s the
percent chance that if you touched a small amount of
feces and didn’t wash that you’d get sick?

June: I’d say low, less than 25%.

tHeraPist: That means that one time in every four
you’d get sick.
June: No, that’s not right. I guess it’s really less than
1%.

From this dialogue it is clear that June did not
strongly believe that her feared disasters would actually
occur, although her initial estimate of the likelihood
was high. A person with poor insight regarding
the senselessness of his/her OCD symptoms would
have assigned higher probabilities (usually over 80%)
and would insist on the accuracy of his/her estimate
even in the face of persistent questioning. Note also that
this exchange is an example of the informal cognitive
restructuring accompanying EX/RP that we discussed
earlier. The therapist may need to repeat this discussion
during subsequent exposure sessions when June, highly
anxious about confronting contaminants, readjusts her
likelihood estimates when anxious. Strength of belief
can change in a given patient but is stronger when the
patient perceives threat.

tHeraPist: OK. Now, besides disease, what else could
happen if you got feces on you?

June: I suppose I’m also afraid of what other people
might think if I got dog feces on my shoe or on my
dress. Somebody would see it or smell it and think
it was really disgusting, and I was a dirty person.
I think I’m afraid they would think I’m not a good
person.

The therapist then questioned June further about this
feared consequence, inquiring about the possibility of
others evaluating her character negatively because she
had feces on her dress. The material regarding feared
consequences was collected for later inclusion in the
imaginal exposure scenes. To conclude the inquiry
about the nature of the obsessions, the therapist further
elucidated the external feared stimuli.

tHeraPist: Besides dog and human feces and toilets,
what else can “contaminate” you? Is it OK if I use
the word “contaminated” to describe how you feel if
you handle these things?

June: Yes, it’s like I can feel it on my skin, even if I
can’t see it. Umm, I also get upset if I see “bird doo”
on my car.

tHeraPist: Bird droppings? The whitish spots?

June: Yeah, I have to hold my skirt close to me so that I
don’t touch any of these spots with my clothes.

tHeraPist: OK, bird doo, what else?

June: Dead animals, like on the roadside. I feel like
the germs, or whatever it is, get on the tires from the
pavement and get on the car. Even if I don’t run over
it. Like it’s spread around the street near it.

tHeraPist: What do you do if you see a dead animal?

June: I swerve wide around it. Once I parked the car
and as I got out, I saw this dead cat right behind the
car. I had to wash all my clothes and take a shower
right away. It was really a mess that day.

tHeraPist: It sounds like that was very difficult for
you. Is there anything else besides dead animals that
contaminates you?

June: I can’t think of any. There are lots of places I
avoid now, but that’s because of what we just talked
about.

The therapist questions June further about other
items that are likely to be contaminated because of
their potential relationship to the ones she has already
noted.

tHeraPist: What about trash or garbage?

June: Yeah, that bothers me. And I also avoid gutters
on the street.

tHeraPist: What’s in the gutter that upsets you?
June: Dead animals, I guess. And then the rain spreads
the germs down the street. Also rotten garbage. It’s


Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder

really dirty. Sometimes the gutters are really disgusting.
tHeraPist: Um hmm. Are you afraid you could get
sick from dead animals and garbage?
June: Yes, it’s like the toilets or dog dirt.

To prepare for an exposure program in which objects
are presented hierarchically with respect to their
ability to provoke discomfort, June was asked to rank
her major contaminants. Here she also provided information
about avoidance behaviors associated with her
contaminants.

tHeraPist: Now, let’s make a list of the main things
that upset you. I’m going to ask you how distressed
you would be on a 0- to 100-point scale if you
touched the thing I’ll name. Zero indicates no distress
at all and 100 means you’d be extremely upset,
the most you’ve ever felt.

June: OK.
tHeraPist: What if you touched dog dirt?
June: And I could wash as much as I wanted?
tHeraPist: No, let’s say you couldn’t wash for a while.
June: 100.
tHeraPist: A dead animal.
June: Also 100.
tHeraPist: Bird doo on your car.
June: That depends on whether it is wet or dry.
tHeraPist: Tell me for both.
June: 100 wet and 95 dry.
tHeraPist: Street gutter.
June: 95.
tHeraPist: Garbage in your sink at home.
June: Not too bad. Only 50. But, the trash can outdoors

would be 90.
tHeraPist: Why the difference?
June: Because the inside of the trash can is dirty from

lots of old garbage.
tHeraPist: I see. What about a public toilet seat?
June: That’s bad. 95.
tHeraPist: Car tires?
June: Usually 90. But if I just passed a dead animal,

they’d be 99.

tHeraPist: What about a doorknob to a public bathroom?


June: The outside knob is low, like 40. But the inside
knob is 80 because people touch it right after they’ve
used the bathroom, and I’ve seen that some don’t
wash their hands.

tHeraPist: I understand. How about grass in a park
where dogs are around?

June: If I did walk in the grass, it would be about 80
or 85, but I don’t usually do it. I also have a lot of
trouble on sidewalks. You know, the brown spots on
the concrete. I guess most of it is just rust or other
dirt, but I think maybe it could be dog dirt.

tHeraPist: How much does that bother you?
June: To step on a brown spot? About 90. I always walk

around them.

The therapist should continue in this manner until a
list of 10–20 items is formed. More items may be necessary
for patients with multiple obsessional fears or
rituals. The items are ordered from low- to high-level
fear in preparation for treatment by exposure. Items
equivalent with regard to their level of disturbance are
grouped together. Moreover, it is important to probe the
rationale for one stimulus differing from another because
it provides further information about the patient’s
particular “OCD logic.” This information is highly relevant
for the construction of the exposure hierarchy and
for the informal cognitive discussions about risk assessment,
responsibility, and so forth.

Considerable information about avoidance patterns
and rituals emerged from the previous interview about
external threat cues. More details may be obtained by
asking the patient to provide a step-by-step description
of a typical day’s activities from the time he/she
awakens until he/she goes to sleep. Usually, patients are
not entirely accurate when describing their compulsive
behaviors during the interview because, as one patient
told us, they have not “thought of their OCD in that way
before.” Thus, the self-monitoring tasks assist patients
in raising their awareness about the OCD patterns and
provide the therapist with more accurate data about
rituals and avoidant behaviors.

We were particularly concerned by June’s bathroom
routines, her shower, use of the toilet, handling of towels
and dirty clothes, and dressing and putting on shoes.
Additional information about avoidance patterns may
be ascertained by inquiring about other routine activi



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

ties, such as shopping, eating out, housecleaning, preparing
meals, working, and so on. The following dialogue
exemplifies the degree of detail desired.

tHeraPist: June, for us to plan your treatment carefully,
I need to know what you avoid in your daily
routine. Why don’t you start by describing what you
do first when you wake up.

June: I go to use the bathroom first.

tHeraPist: Nightgown on or off?

June: I take off my nightgown because I don’t want it
to touch the toilet. That way it’s clean at night after
I shower.

tHeraPist: Go on.

June: I go to the toilet. I suppose I use a lot of toilet
paper because I don’t want to get anything on my
hand. Then I have to shower after a bowel movement.

tHeraPist: How do you get ready to shower?

June: I have to put a new towel on the rod near the
shower. I don’t like it to touch anything before I use
it. Oh, and I put my slippers facing the door, near the
shower, so I can put them on without stepping on the
bathroom floor when I get out of the shower. Then I
get into the shower.

tHeraPist: You said you shower for 45 minutes. Why
does it take so long?

June: I have to wash myself in a special order and I
count how many times I wash each part. Like I wash
my arm four times. That’s why it takes so long.

tHeraPist: What is the order you use?

June: First I wash my hands, then my face and hair, and
then I go from the top down.

tHeraPist: What about the genital and anal area?
[This area should disturb this patient most because
she fears contamination from fecal “germs.”]

June: Oh yes, those are last, after my feet.

Such a detailed description helps the therapist to
anticipate possible avoidance by the patient during
treatment and to plan specific exposure instructions.
Supervision of normal washing behavior at the end of
treatment will address June’s tendency to count and to
order her washing. During the initial session of information
gathering, June was instructed to self-monitor
the frequency and duration of her compulsions.

tHeraPist: Between now and our next session, I’d like
you to record all the washing and cleaning that you
do, including wiping things with alcohol. You can
use this form (Hands her a self-monitoring of rituals
form.) Please write down every time you wash,
how long you washed, what made you wash, and how
anxious you were before you washed. This kind of
record will help us identify any sources of contamination
you’ve forgotten to mention, and we can also
use it to measure your progress during treatment.

June: Do you want me to write in each space for each
half-hour?

tHeraPist: No, only when you wash or use alcohol.

June: OK.

History of Symptoms and Treatment History

After assessing the patient’s current symptoms, the
therapist sought information about the onset of the
problem, with particular reference to the presence of
specific stressors at the time and whether these stressors
are still present.

tHeraPist: How long have you been washing like this?

June: It started about 2 years ago in my first year of
nursing school. It wasn’t real bad right away. It started
with the city. I had to go into the city to classes,
and the city seemed real dirty.

tHeraPist: Did nursing have something to do with it?

June: Maybe. I was under a lot of tension. I had to quit
working as a secretary, and it was pretty hard without
an income and a lot of school bills. My mother
and dad weren’t much help. And then we started to
learn all the sterilizing techniques, and I already told
you about the course in microbiology.

tHeraPist: Did it gradually get worse?

June: Mostly, but I did notice that it was a lot worse
after a rotation on surgery, where I was really worried
about germs contaminating the instruments.
That’s when I started to wash more than usual.

tHeraPist: Did you seek help at that time?

June: I was already seeing Dr. W at the university, and
he tried to help.

tHeraPist: You were already in treatment with him?
For what reason?


Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder

June: He was helping me with an eating problem. I had
anorexia. I’d been seeing him for about a year when
the washing started.

tHeraPist: Anorexia? Did treatment help?

June: Yes. I was down to 85 pounds and I’m up around
105 now. He mostly asked me to increase my weight
every week and he did “cognitive therapy,” I think
it’s called.

tHeraPist: I see. What about the washing problem?

June: He tried the same type of therapy, but it didn’t
work for that. That’s why I’m here. My sister-in-law
heard about it, and Dr. W said I should come.

tHeraPist: What about drugs? Were you ever given
medication for this problem?

June: Yes, I tried Anafranil [clomipramine] for a while
and it helped a little, but it made me dizzy and sleepy,
so I decided to stop taking it. Also, I heard that you
can’t take the medication when you are pregnant,
and Kenny and I want to have a baby soon. Before
that, I took Xanax [alprazolam]; it calmed me down
but didn’t stop the washing.

tHeraPist: Have you tried any other treatments?

June: Only for the anorexia. I went to another counseling
center at the university for about a year, but that
didn’t really help at all.

June’s history was unusual only in the relatively recent
onset of her symptoms. Typically, patients in our
clinic present a much longer duration of symptoms,
with the mean around 8 years. Other centers in England
and Holland report similar figures. June’s treatment
history of trying various psychotherapeutic and pharmacological
treatments prior to seeking EX/RP was
quite typical. Since previous failure with nonbehavioral
treatments has not been found to influence outcome
with EX/RP, the clinician should not be discouraged by
such a history. However, because of a possible skeptical
attitude about the value of treatment, the therapist
should provide the patient with a clear rationale for EX/
RP treatment along the lines discussed earlier and demonstrated
below.

tHeraPist: Before I continue to collect more information
about your problem, let me tell you about our
treatment.

June: Well, Dr. F told me something about it, but

I’m still not sure what this treatment is going to be
like.

tHeraPist: The treatment is called exposure and ritual
prevention. I’ll be asking you to confront situations
and things that frighten you or make you feel contaminated.
We will do this gradually, working up to
the hardest things. For example, we may begin with
the outside door handles of bathrooms and work our
way up to toilet seats and bird doo. We’ll do this together,
and I’ll be there to help you. The sessions will
last 1½ or 2 hours, and we’ll meet every weekday.
In addition, I’ll assign you homework to do similar
things between the therapy sessions.

June: You mean I have to touch them, even dog dirt?

tHeraPist: Yes, to get over these kinds of fears, people
must learn to confront what they’re afraid of and stay
with it until the discomfort decreases.

June: Even if I did, it would probably take me a year to
get used to it.

tHeraPist: Remember, you didn’t always feel like this
about dog dirt. When you were younger, did you ever
step in dog dirt and just wipe it off on the grass and
go on playing?

June: Yeah, I forget that. It seems such a long time ago.
I used to not think twice about this stuff.

tHeraPist: To get you back to how you used to feel,
we need to expose you directly to what you’re afraid
of. Now, there’s a second part to treatment. I’m also
going to ask you not to wash for 3 days at a stretch.
No handwashing or showering for 3 days. Then you
can take a shower, but you will have to limit it to 10
minutes. After the shower, you will have to contaminate
yourself again, then wait another 3 days for your
next shower.

June: I can’t believe it! I’ll never be able to do that. If I
could, I wouldn’t be here. How can I not wash? Every
day I resolve to stop, but I always give in. You mean
I wouldn’t be able to wash after I use the bathroom
or before I eat? Other people wash after they use the
toilet. Why can’t I just wash less, like normal people
do?

tHeraPist: Other people don’t have OCD. Remember,
for you, washing makes you feel less “contaminated”
and less anxious. Right?

June: Yes.


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

tHeraPist: If you wash, even briefly, whenever you
feel “contaminated,” you never get a chance to learn
that the feeling of contamination would go away by
itself without washing. If you are really very anxious,
it might take a while, even several hours, before
you feel better, but it will eventually happen.
On the other hand, if you wash, even briefly, every
few hours, it will reinforce your idea that you have to
wash to feel better.

June: But why 3 days? Couldn’t I shower once a day
like other people?

tHeraPist: For the same reason. You’d still feel relief,
even if you waited 24 hours between washings. And
that would strengthen your belief that you need to
“decontaminate” by washing yourself. You must
learn to use soap and water to feel clean and fresh
but not to “decontaminate” yourself.

June: I think I understand. I know I shower now to get
the things I’m afraid of off my body. I used to shower
just to get sweat and dirt off, and feel nice. I’m still
not sure I could stand it though, not washing for that
long.

tHeraPist: The treatment is very demanding. Before
we start the treatment program you will need to
make a commitment to yourself that even though you
will feel very uncomfortable and even quite upset at
times, you won’t wash. I’ll try to help you as much
as I can by planning the treatment so you know what
to expect each day and by supporting you whenever
you need it. Someone will have to be available to
help supervise and support you any time you need
it. Between sessions you can always call me here or
at home if a problem comes up. I know the treatment
won’t be easy for you, but I’m sure you can do it if
you make up your mind.

At this point, a firm commitment should not be requested.
Rather, the patient should be made aware of
what will be required so that he/she can adjust to these
expectations and plan activities during the treatment
period accordingly. The patient should make the arrangements
necessary to attend daily treatment sessions
for 3 to 4 weeks. As we discussed earlier, two to three
sessions per week may be sufficient for patients with
less severe symptoms. It is important that the therapist
not minimize the difficulty of the treatment regimen, so
that the patient is prepared to struggle and enters treatment
with a readiness to mobilize inner resources and
emotional support from family and friends.

The history of the patient is usually taken in the first
session. Because collecting histories of individuals
with OCD does not differ from collecting histories of
other psychiatric patients, details are not provided here.

Treatment Planning

The therapist began the second session by briefly reviewing
the patient’s self-monitoring of rituals form.
The remainder of the session was devoted to developing
a treatment plan.

tHeraPist: OK, now I want to discuss our plan for
each day during the first week of therapy. We need
to expose you both in imagination and in reality to
the things that bother you, which we talked about in
our first sessions. As I said already, we’ll also limit
your washing. The scenes you imagine will focus
on the harm that you fear will occur if you do not
wash. The actual exposures will focus on confronting
the things that contaminate you. Restricting your
washing will teach you how to live without rituals. In
imaginal exposure, you will picture yourself touching
something you’re afraid of, like toilet seats, and
not washing and then becoming ill. We can have
you imagine going to a doctor who can’t figure out
what’s wrong and can’t fix it. That’s the sort of fear
you have, right?

June: Yes, that and Kenny getting sick, and it being
my fault.

tHeraPist: OK, so in some scenes you’ll be sick, and
in others Kenny will get sick. Should I add that other
people blame you for not being careful? Is this what
you’re afraid of?

June: Yes, especially my mother.

tHeraPist: OK. We’ll have her criticize you for not
being careful enough. Can you think of anything
else we should add to the image?

June: No, that’s about it.

tHeraPist: We can compose the scenes in detail after
we plan the actual exposures. Let’s review the list
of things you avoid or are afraid to touch and make
sure that we have listed them in the right order. Then
we’ll decide what to work on each day. OK?

June: OK.

June reviewed the list, which included items such as
trash cans, kitchen floor, bathroom floor, public hall



Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder

way carpet, plant dirt, puddles, car tires, dried dog
“dirt,” and bird “doo.” Changes were made as needed.

tHeraPist: Good. Now let’s plan the treatment. On the
first day we should start with things that you rated
below a 60. That would include touching this carpet,
doorknobs that are not inside bathrooms, books on
my shelves, light switches, and stair railings. On the
second day, we’ll do the 60- to 70-level items, like
faucets, bare floors, dirty laundry, and the things on
Kenny’s desk. [The therapist continued to detail Sessions
3 to 5, increasing the level of difficulty each
day.] In the second week, we will repeat the worse
situations like gutters, tires, public toilets, bird doo,
and dog dirt, and we’ll also find a dead animal to
walk near and touch the street next to it.

On rare occasions, direct confrontation with a
feared object (e.g., pesticides or other chemicals) may
have some likelihood of producing actual harm. In
such cases, the therapist’s judgment should be exercised
to find a middle ground between total avoidance
and endangerment. With chemicals, for example, patients
are exposed to small quantities that are objectively
nonharmful. In June’s case the therapist decided
that direct contact with a dead animal was not called
for, and that stepping on the animal’s fur with her shoe
and then touching the shoe sole constituted sufficient
exposure. In general, the therapist must weigh the level
of obsessional distress that will be evoked by a given
exposure with the objective risks entailed in completing
that exposure. Patients with OCD have difficulty
assessing such risks realistically; thus, it is the responsibility
of the therapist to evaluate whether exposure
is warranted. For example, patients with fears of contracting
HIV would certainly be highly distressed if
asked to handle a dirty hypodermic needle found in
a city gutter, but because exposure to such stimuli is
objectively risky, they should not be included on the
treatment hierarchy.

tHeraPist: How does this plan sound?

June: The first week is OK, but I’m really scared about
the second week. I’m not sure I’ll be ready to do the
bathrooms and dog dirt by then.

tHeraPist: Many people feel this way at the beginning,
but by the end of the first week, you won’t be
as frightened as you are now about touching tires or
public toilets. Remember, I will be here to help you

because it will probably be difficult in the beginning.


June: Yes, I know it. I feel like I don’t really have a
choice anyhow. This washing is crazy and I’m disgusted
with myself. I suppose I’m as ready as I’ll
ever be.

tHeraPist: Good. Now remember, I’ll ask you to keep
working on these things for 2 to 3 hours at home
after each session, but you will already have done
them with me, so I don’t think it will be too hard. I
take it that you talked to Kenny about assisting us
with supervising, since I saw him out in the waiting
room.

June: Yes, he said that’s fine. He wanted to know what
he should do.

tHeraPist: Let’s call him in. Did you talk to your
sister-in-law about being available when Kenny is at
work during the day?

June: Yes, she was really good about it, but she couldn’t
come today because of the kids.

tHeraPist: If it’s difficult for her to come, I could talk
to her on the phone. Why don’t you go get Kenny
now?

Treatment

June was seen for 15 treatment sessions, held every
weekday for 3 weeks. During the fourth week the therapist
visited her twice at her home for 4 hours each time.
During these visits, under the therapist’s supervision,
June contaminated her entire house and exposed herself
to objects at home and in her neighborhood that
provoked distress. Thereafter, once-weekly follow-up
sessions were instituted to ensure maintenance of gains
and to address any other issues of concern to her.

As discussed earlier, treatment begins with exposure
to moderately difficult items on the hierarchy and progresses
to the most disturbing ones by the beginning
of the second week. The most distressing items are repeated
during the remainder of the second and third
weeks. The following sequence, which occurred on the
sixth day of treatment, exemplifies this process.

tHeraPist: How was your weekend?

June: Not that great. I suppose it was as good as I could
expect. I took my shower Sunday night and I was so
nervous about finishing in time I don’t even know if
I washed right.


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

tHeraPist: Most people feel the same way. Remember
though, you aren’t supposed to wash “right,” just to
wash. Did Kenny time it?

June: Yes, he called out the minutes like you said, “5,
7, 9,” and then “stop.”

tHeraPist: You stopped when he said to?

June: Yes, but it still wasn’t easy.

tHeraPist: I know. I’m really pleased that you were
careful to follow the rules.

June: I have pretty much decided that this is my chance
to get better, so I’m trying my best.

tHeraPist: Good. I am glad you feel so positive. How
was the homework?

June: I touched the floor and the soles of my shoes and
the cement. It is all written on the daily sheet there.
On Saturday, I went to my sister’s, so I could play
with the kids like we said. They stepped on me when
I lay on the floor and I tried to touch their bottoms
when I held them. On Sunday, Kenny and I went
to the park. I didn’t sit in the grass but I did walk
around and touched my shoes afterward.

tHeraPist: The soles?

June: Yeah. We also went downtown and I threw some
things in the trash cans and pushed them down, and
tried to touch the sides. It’s sort of hard because I felt
conspicuous, but I did it anyway.

tHeraPist: That sounds really good. I’m glad to hear
it. How about your doormat and going into the garden?


June: I did the doormat and I stood in the garden, but
I couldn’t touch the dirt. The neighbor’s dog always
runs all over. I know I should have touched it, but I
just couldn’t get up the courage.

tHeraPist: Well, you did do many other things. Let’s
plan to go outside today and do it together, so it will
be easier for you to walk in the garden when you go
home.

June: OK.

June was very compliant with the treatment regimen.
Some patients occasionally lapse on response prevention,
particularly during the first week of the treatment
program. The therapist should reinforce the patient for
partial compliance but emphasize the need to comply
fully with treatment instructions. With regard to expo


sure homework, it is not uncommon for patients to neglect
completing some assignments. Again, they should
be reinforced for what they have achieved and encouraged
to complete all of the assignments.

tHeraPist: How are you and Kenny doing?

June: He got mad on Sunday night after the shower
because I started to ask him how he showered and if
I was clean enough. I think I nagged him too much,
so he lost his temper. We just watched TV, and after
a while we talked a bit and he sort of apologized for
getting mad. But I understand; I ask too many questions.
Otherwise, the rest of the weekend was OK.

tHeraPist: Well, it’s unfortunate that Kenny got mad,
but it’s good that he didn’t answer your questions.
He’s not supposed to reassure you about cleanliness.

June: I think he has a hard time knowing when to answer
me and when not to. I am not real sure either.
Could you talk to him before Wednesday when I
shower again?

tHeraPist: That’s a good idea. I’ll call him after we’re
done with today’s session. Now, today we’ll start
with the scene about you driving your car to an appointment
with me, and you get a flat tire and have
to change it. The cars splash water in the puddle near
you, and it lands on the car and on you. Then you
notice a dead animal when you walk behind the car,
and it’s right behind you. You really feel contaminated.
You walk to the gas station nearby to see if
they can fix the tire and you have to urinate so badly
that you have to use their restroom. They agree to fix
the tire if you remove it and bring it to them because
otherwise they are too busy. Of course, that means
you will have to handle the tire that is contaminated
by the dead animal. We’ll add some bird doo on the
street and on the sidewalk, too. Then, later you start
to feel sick, and you feel like it’s from the dead animal.
Sound awful enough?

June: Yeah. Ugh. That one is really bad. Do I have to?
Never mind, I know the answer.

tHeraPist: OK. I want you to close your eyes now and
imagine that you are driving your car on West Avenue.


Note that the therapist checked the patient’s assign


ment from the previous day to verify that she complet


ed it and did not engage in avoidance and rituals. This


Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder

provided an opportunity to reinforce efforts at selfexposure.
It is important to keep track of completion of
homework because patients do not always volunteer information
about omissions. They will, however, admit
failure to comply if directly asked and are likely to
carry out the next assignment if reinforced adequately.

With regard to the conflict between June and Kenny,
it is our experience that, like Kenny, most family members
are quite willing to help. Difficulty may, however,
arise when they are unable to help without becoming
upset, thereby increasing the patient’s tension. Providing
them with an opportunity to ventilate their frustration
by contacting the therapist, who also may coach
them in alternative reactions, may reduce familial tension.


That same session also included imaginal exposure
to do a scenario planned in advance. Since that scenario
had already been discussed in detail with the patient,
it posed no surprises for her. It is presented for up to 1
hour, or until a substantial decrease in anxiety is evident.
Next, the patient is confronted in vivo with situations
like those included in the fantasized scene.

tHeraPist: It’s time to do the real thing now. I looked
for a dead animal by the side of the road yesterday
and I found one about a mile away. I think we should
go there.

June: Yuck, that’s terrific. Just for me you had to find it.

tHeraPist: Today’s our lucky day. You knew we were

going to have to find one today anyhow. At least it’s

close.

June: Great.

Humor is encouraged and can be quite helpful if the
patient is capable of responding to it. At the same time,
it is important that the therapist laugh with rather than
at the patient. Patients and therapists often develop a
shorthand lexicon for discussing OCD and its treatment
that is specific to them and aimed at promoting compliance
with treatment. For example, one patient–therapist
pair began to discuss exposure homework as “swallowing
the frog,” based on a proverb that the patient introduced.
When the therapist asked the patient if she had
“swallowed the frog” that morning, it conveyed the difficulty
of the exposure tasks she needed to do between
sessions. It is important for the therapist to observe the
patient’s interpersonal style to determine whether such
banter is likely to promote the therapeutic goals.

tHeraPist: (outside the office) There it is, behind the
car. Let’s go and touch the curb and street next to it. I
don’t think that you need to touch it directly because
it’s a bit smelly, but I want you to step next to it, then
touch the sole of your shoe.

June: Yuck! It’s really dead. It’s gross!

tHeraPist: Yeah, it is a bit gross, but it’s also just a
dead cat if you think about it plainly. What harm can
it cause?

June: I don’t know. Suppose I get germs on my hand?

tHeraPist: What sort of germs?

June: Dead cat germs.

tHeraPist: What kind are they?

June: I don’t know. Just germs.

tHeraPist: Like the bathroom germs that we’ve already
handled?

June: Sort of. People don’t go around touching dead cats.

tHeraPist: They also don’t go running home to shower
or alcohol the inside of their car. It’s time to get
over this. Now, come on over and I’ll do it first. (June
follows.) OK. Touch the curb and the street. Here’s
a stone you can carry with you and a piece of paper
from under its tail. Go ahead, take it.

June: (looking quite uncomfortable) Ugh!

tHeraPist: We’ll both hold them. Now, touch it to your
front and your skirt, and your face and hair. Like
this. That’s good. What’s your anxiety level?

June: Ugh! 99. I’d say 100, but it’s just short of panic. If
you weren’t here, it’d be 100.

tHeraPist: You know from past experience that this
will be much easier in a while. Just stay with it and
we’ll wait here. You’re doing fine.

June: (A few minutes pass in which she looks very
upset.) Would you do this if it weren’t for me?

tHeraPist: Yes, if this were my car and I dropped my
keys here, I’d just pick them up and go on.

June: You wouldn’t have to wash them?

tHeraPist: No. Dead animals aren’t delightful, but
they’re part of the world we live in. What are the
odds that we’ll get ill from this?

June: Very small, I guess. I feel a little bit better than at
first. It’s about 90 now.

tHeraPist: Good! Just stay with it now.


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

The session continued for another 45 minutes, or
until anxiety decreased substantially. During this period
conversation focused generally on the feared situations
and the patient’s reaction to them. The therapist
inquired about June’s anxiety level approximately
every 10 minutes. It is important to note that June and
the therapist have engaged in conversation throughout
the exposure task, discussing issues such as habituation,
risk, responsibility, and long-term outcomes. At
the same time it is imperative to refocus the patient on
the exposure task at hand to ensure that he/she remains
engaged with it. Thus, asking for SUDS ratings serves
two purposes: It provides data about fear reduction,
and it refocuses the patient on the exposure. However,
if the informal discussion serves as a distractor, helping
the patient “not think about” what he/she is doing, the
therapist should limit such conversations.

tHeraPist: How do you feel now?

June: Well, it is easier, but I sure don’t feel great.

tHeraPist: Can you put a number on it?

June: About 55 or 60, I’d say.

tHeraPist: You worked hard today. You must be
tired. Let’s stop now. I want you to take this stick
and pebble with you so that you continue to be contaminated.
You can keep them in your pocket and
touch them frequently during the day. I want you to
contaminate your office at work and your apartment
with them. Touch them to everything around, including
everything in the kitchen, chairs, your bed, and
the clothes in your dresser. Oh, also, I’d like you to
drive your car past this spot on your way to and from
work. Can you do that?

June: I suppose so. The trouble is going home with all
of this dirt.

tHeraPist: Why don’t you call Kenny and plan to
get home after he does, so he can be around to help
you. Remember, you can always call me if you have
trouble.

June: Yeah. That’s a good idea. I’ll just leave work
after he does. See you tomorrow.

This scenario illustrates the process of in vivo exposure.
The therapist answered clearly the questions
raised without detouring from the essential purpose of
the session, exposure to the feared contaminant. After
the initial increase, the anxiety may begin to drop rela


tively quickly for some patients and may require longer
for others. As noted previously, it is advisable to
continue the exposure until the patient appears visibly
more at ease and reports a substantial decrease in anxiety
(40 or 50%).

After 10–15 sessions, the patient’s reported anxiety
level is expected to decrease considerably. At the
15th session, June reported a maximum discomfort of
70 SUDs(still somewhat high, although reduced from
99 SUDs), that lasted for a few minutes. Her minimal
anxiety was 35 SUDs. Her average anxiety level during
this session was 45 SUDs. Ideally, by the end of treatment
the highest level should not exceed 50 SUDs and
should drop below 20 SUDs at the end of the session.
In June’s case, more follow-up sessions were required
because her anxiety was still quite high.

To facilitate a transition to normal washing and
cleaning behavior, the therapist instituted a normal
washing regimen during the third week of treatment.
The patient was allowed one 10-minute shower daily
and no more than five 30-second handwashes when
there was visible dirt on her hands or when they were
sticky.

When the therapist arrived for a home treatment session
the next week, the following conversation ensued:

tHeraPist: How did it go over the weekend?

June: Not too bad. But I got sort of upset Saturday.
We went to a picnic and there were several piles of
dog dirt around. I had on my flip-flops and I wanted
to play volleyball. You can’t in flip-flops, so I went
barefoot.

tHeraPist: That’s great! I’m glad to hear it.

June: Yeah, but then I got really upset about going
home and carrying it into the apartment. I did it. I
walked all over barefoot and with the flip-flops, but
I worried about it for another whole day, until I talked
to Kenny about my thoughts on Sunday around
noon. I felt better when he said he wouldn’t worry
about it. It seems like I feel guilty or something, like
the house isn’t clean enough. But lately if he says it is
clean, I’ve been able to take his word for it.

tHeraPist: Well, in time you’ll be able to make this
kind of judgment yourself. How about your washing
and cleaning?

June: It was all right. I washed for half a minute before
I ate because I was dusty from playing volleyball. I


Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder

deliberately didn’t wash when I got home because I
felt bad and I knew that if I did, it would be to “decontaminate”
myself. I showered Saturday night and
I did feel relieved, but I knew I should go and walk
around barefoot and touch the floors I’d walked on.
So I did that.

tHeraPist: That’s great! It sounds like you handled it
fine. I’m really pleased. You avoided washing when
it would mean reducing feelings of contamination,
and you exposed yourself when you felt concerned
about germs. That’s excellent. Now, let’s go over the
problem situations that still need work here at home.
What things still disturb you?

June: The basement. I haven’t done much with the kitty
litter box and old shoes that I threw down there a
year ago because they got contaminated. The closet
still has some contaminated clothes. And I still
worry about the backyard some. Also the porch. Pigeons
have been perching on the roof and there are
droppings on the railing now, so I thought I’d wait
until you came to do that.

tHeraPist: OK. Let’s start low and work up. Which
is easiest?
June: The basement and closets.
tHeraPist: Fine, down we go.

Exposure to contaminants during the home visit is
conducted in the same manner as that during treatment
sessions. Typically, home sessions last longer, from 2 to
4 hours, until all “dirty” items are touched and “clean”
places are contaminated. These visits should be repeated
if the patient expresses considerable concern about
his/her ability to adopt a permanent regimen of nonavoidance.


Follow‑Up Sessions

June was seen weekly for 3 months, until she experienced
a setback following the development of a new obsession.
She became concerned about hitting a pedestrian
while driving. Thoughts that she “might have hit
someone” intruded, particularly after turning a corner
or glancing in the mirror to change lanes. Once evoked,
they persisted for several hours. To overcome this new
problem, the therapist directed her to increase her driving
and refrain from retracing her path or looking in the
mirror to check for casualties. June was told that she

could stop her car only if she knew for certain that she
hit someone. Thoughts that it “might” have occurred
were to be ignored. To reduce June’s anxiety about having
obsessions (e.g., “Oh, my God, here it is again. This
is terrible”), she was advised to expect occasional recurrences
of obsessive thoughts. The frequency of obsessions
about hitting someone decreased from several
each day to once weekly after 3 weeks of self-exposure;
the associated anxiety diminished from 95 to 50 SUDs
or less.

Of June’s germ-related obsessions, only that of dog
feces partially recurred. Fears of public bathrooms
and dead animals remained low. The therapist felt that
June’s fear of dog feces had received insufficient attention
during treatment. To address this return of fear,
June was seen three times a week for 1-hour exposure
sessions, in which she touched brown spots on the sidewalk
and walked near, and eventually stepped on, dog
feces. Homework included going to parks, walking on
sidewalks without looking, stepping on dog feces, and
stepping on the grass where she thought dogs had been.
This treatment continued for 4 weeks and was reduced
to twice a week for an additional 3 weeks. Thereafter,
June came once weekly for another 6 weeks, during
which the therapist assigned self-exposure and dealt
with June’s everyday concerns. News media coverage
of herpes led to a brief concern about public toilets, but
this dissipated within a few days.

In the dialogue below, the therapist reviewed with
June her progress at a 9-month follow-up.

tHeraPist: I’d like to know how you feel compared to
when you first came here 9 months ago.

June: I’m definitely a lot better. But, I still have some
bad days when I worry a lot about something, and I
get down on myself. But when I remember how upset
I was last summer and all that washing I did, it’s really
a whole lot better. Maybe about 80% better. I’m
not ready to be a floor nurse yet, but the job I got
after treatment is pretty good for now. Kenny and I
are doing fine, except he’s real sensitive if I bring up
one of my fears. I wish he’d just listen and say “OK”
or something instead of looking worried about me.
It’s like he’s afraid I’m going to get upset again. It
makes it hard for me to talk freely, but sometimes he
does handle it fine. I really can’t complain. He’s been
through a lot, too, when I was really a mess last year
and before that.


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

tHeraPist: I’m glad to hear you feel so much better.
You look a lot more at ease. You laugh more now.
I don’t know if you recall, but you never did in the
beginning.

June: I remember.

tHeraPist: What’s left now, the other 20%?

June: Obsessions, I guess. I can still work on my fear
of driving over someone. Mostly it lasts less than 15
minutes, but now and then it hangs on through an
evening.

tHeraPist: How often?

June: Once every week or two, I think. And I still
have an urge to avoid walking on the grass in parks.
Like I’m hyperalert. I do it pretty often, but I’m selfconscious.


tHeraPist: You mean you have to remind yourself not
to avoid dog feces?

June: Yeah. And I tend to see things in black and white,
all good or all bad. I catch myself feeling guilty for
dumb things like eating dessert after a full meal.
I can stop, but it’s like I’m out to punish myself or
think badly about what I did. I have to watch out for
it. Still, the thoughts are nothing like they used to be.
I can have fun now. And work is pretty absorbing, so
I can go whole days without getting down on myself
for something. Will I always do that?

tHeraPist: Maybe to some extent. We know that you
have a tendency to obsess. Most people who have
had an obsessive–compulsive problem say that the
rituals and urges to do them decrease more quickly
than the obsessive ideas. You might have disturbing
thoughts for a while, but you can expect them to become
less frequent if you’re careful not to attempt to
control them through rituals or by avoiding things.
Can you handle that?

June: I suppose so. They’re not a lot of fun, but I feel
like I’m living a normal life again. I suppose everyone
has some problems to deal with.

Rarely do patients report complete remission of all
obsessions. It is unrealistic to lead a patient to expect
that 4 weeks of treatment will result in a total absence
of obsessions and rituals. Patients should expect some
continued struggle with obsessions and urges to ritualize.
Strategies for coping with such occasional difficulties
should be rehearsed.

coMPlicatioNs DuriNG
Behavioral treatMeNt

Obviously, difficulties may arise during implementation
of EX/RP treatment for OCD. Several of these are
described below and possible solutions are discussed.

Noncompliance with Response Prevention

Individuals with OCD often report engaging in rituals
despite the response prevention instructions. In most
cases these represent brief “slips” that the therapist addresses
by reiterating the rationale for the treatment
regimen and the need to follow the response prevention
instructions strictly. The therapist also may offer ways
the ritual might be “undone” (e.g., recontaminating or
turning the stove on and off again).

Sometimes the patient’s support person reports violations
of response prevention to the therapist. The
therapist should discuss the violations with the patient,
emphasizing the fact that continued failure to comply
with the response prevention instructions may result in
treatment failure. The following is an example of how
violations of response prevention may be presented to
the patient.

“I understand from your father that on three occasions
this weekend he saw you checking the front
door lock five or six times before you left the house.
As we agreed in the first session, he called to inform
me about your checking. I am sure you remember
that we agreed that you would check the doors only
once, and that if you had a problem, you would discuss
it with your father or me right away, so we could
help you overcome your urge to ritualize. Will you
explain to me what happened?”

If the patient acknowledges the slip and responds
with a renewed agreement to follow instructions, the
therapist need not pursue the issue further. However,
if a second significant infraction of the response prevention
instructions occurs, the therapist should again
remind the patient of the therapy rules and the rationale
for these rules, and “troubleshoot” with the patient how
successfully to implement ritual prevention. During the
course of this discussion, if it becomes evident that the
patient is unwilling to consider these recommendations
and remains committed to rituals and avoidance as a
means to reduce obsessional distress, then the therapist


Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder

may broach the subject of discontinuing treatment unless
the patient is ready to comply.

“It seems that right now you aren’t able to stop ritualizing.
For treatment to be successful, it is essential
that you completely stop your rituals. Every time that
you relieve your discomfort by ritualizing, you prevent
yourself from learning that anxiety would have
declined eventually without rituals, and you don’t
permit your obsessional fears to be disconnected
from distress and anxiety. Exposing you to feared
situations without stopping your rituals won’t be
helpful. If you cannot follow the no-rituals rule quite
strictly, then we ought to stop treatment now and
wait until you are really prepared to follow through
with all the requirements. It is very hard for people
to resist the urge to ritualize, and it may be that you
are just not ready yet and will feel more able to do so
in the future. It is much better for us to stop treatment
now than to continue under conditions where you are
unlikely to benefit from treatment. That would only
leave you feeling more hopeless about future prospects
for improvement.”

As discussed earlier, patients sometimes replace
identified rituals with less obvious avoidance patterns.
For example, a patient may use hand lotion to
“decontaminate” the hands instead of the excessive
washing that was done originally. If this occurs, the
therapist should immediately instruct the patient to
stop the new ritual. Other examples of replacement
washing rituals include brushing off one’s hands or
blowing off “germs”; extensive checks are often replaced
with quick glances. Direct questioning of the
patient to solicit such information should proceed
as follows:

“Now that you’ve stopped your washing rituals, do
you find yourself doing other things to relieve your
anxiety? For example, some people start to wipe
their hands with paper towels or tissues as a substitute
for washing with soap and water. Are you doing
anything like this?”

If the answer is “yes,” the therapist should identify
these new behaviors as rituals and instruct the patient
to resist engaging in them in the same manner as he/she
resists other compulsions.

Continued Passive Avoidance

Patients who continue to avoid situations likely to
evoke obsessional distress are also likely to experience
attentuated outcome in EX/RP. For example, a
patient may put “contaminated” clothing back in the
closet as instructed, but in doing so he/she may ensure
that the contaminated clothes do not touch clean garments.
Such avoidance reflects an ambivalent attitude
toward treatment and hinders habituation of anxiety to
feared situations. Because such processes may hinder
outcome, the presence of continued and frequent avoidance
behavior calls for the therapist and patient to reevaluate
whether the patient should continue treatment.

tHeraPist: Jim, let’s make sure that you are doing
your homework the right way. I know that you had
a problem putting your dirty underwear in with your
other dirty clothes. How are you doing with it now?

Patient: Well, I was afraid you might ask that. I still
haven’t mixed them up. I was too scared to do it.

tHeraPist: We discussed this several days ago and you
were instructed to do it that night. It would have been
better had you told me the next day that you weren’t
able to. What I’d like you to do for tomorrow is to bring
in some dirty clothes. Bring in the underwear and the
other clothes in separate bags, and we will mix them
here in the office. Are there any other things you have
been avoiding that you haven’t told me about?

Patient: I don’t think so.

tHeraPist: I want you to pay careful attention to
things you are doing, or not doing, and make a list
of anything you are avoiding, particularly things that
you are supposed to do for therapy. It is very important
that you don’t protect yourself by avoiding distressing
situations, since if you don’t face these situations,
your obsessive–compulsive symptoms won’t
get better. Let’s give it another try, but if you can’t
bring yourself to confront these problematic situations
without these little avoidances, perhaps you
would be better off delaying your treatment to a later
time when you will be more ready to comply with
the treatment program.

Arguments

Some individuals who carry out the required exposure
without ritualizing may attempt to engage the therapist


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

in arguments about the assignments. It is quite tempting
to get involved in arguments with patients over
what they will or will not do during treatment. To avoid
this, it is important for the therapist and the patient to
agree on some ground rules before the intensive program
begins. Patients must agree to follow the treatment
plan that they developed in conjunction with the
therapist, and to expose themselves to the distressing
situations without argument. New, feared situations
that are discovered should be discussed, and a new exposure
program should be developed and agreed to, before
exposures to the new situations are carried out. If a
patient balks at or attempts to alter a planned exposure,
the therapist should acknowledge and empathize with
the patient’s the discomfort, inquire about the reasons
for the hesitation, and encourage the patient to proceed
in the following manner:

“I’m sorry to see that you are having so much trouble
sitting on the floor. I know it’s difficult and that
you’re frightened, but it won’t do you any good if we
delay the exposure for another day or let you skip it
all together. You really need to touch the floor, so
let’s go ahead and do it now. We have agreed that
today is the ‘floor’ day, and I wouldn’t be doing you a
favor if I allowed you to avoid it. Remember, though,
I am here to support you as much as I can when you
become upset.”

In some instances, difficulties may be overcome by
first exposing the patient to similar items that generate
a lower level of distress. For example, if a patient
refuses to touch a toilet seat, then the therapist may ask
him/her first to touch the bathroom floor or the door to
the bathroom stall. Thereafter, the patient might touch
the walls of the stall and the toilet handle before proceeding
to the toilet seat itself.

Emotional Overload

Occasionally during treatment a patient will become
overwhelmed by fear or another emotion that is not directly
related to his/her OCD symptoms. For example,
a patient may be upset by a recent event (e.g., the death
of a relative) or by fears of facing future plans (e.g.,
living on one’s own or getting a job). Implementing exposure
exercises is inadvisable when the patient is extremely
upset because it is unlikely that the patient will
adequately attend to the exposure stimulus; therefore,
anxiety is unlikely to habituate. Instead, the therapist

should discuss the distressing situation with the patient
and proceed with exposure only when the patient is
calmer. On rare occasions, exposure may be postponed
altogether until the next day’s session. If this becomes a
repetitive pattern, it may be advisable to interrupt treatment
until the crisis is over.

Nonanxious Reactions to Exposures

Occasionally patients respond to exposures with emotions
other than anxiety or distress, such as anger or depression.
Clinical observations suggest that anger often
serves as a means for the patient to avoid the distress or
anxiety that is the target of exposure. If this happens,
the anger should be viewed as an avoidance. The therapist
should refocus the patient on the anxiety-evoking
aspects of the situation and point out to the patient that
the anger only stands in the way of progress.

Sometimes during imaginal exposure, when a patient
is exposed to the feared consequences of his/her
behaviors, the patient becomes depressed. Such depression
and other emotional reactions may reduce the efficacy
of treatment, and the therapist needs to help the
patient to focus on the anxiety-evoking cues. This may
be done by directing the content of the imaginal exposure
away from the feared consequences and toward
the external threat cues. In some cases, such redirection
does not resolve the problem, and the patient continues
to display a depressive reaction to the exposure. When
this happens, alternative scenarios that do not elicit depression
should be developed.

Emergent Fears and Rituals

As mentioned earlier, sometimes patients develop
“new” fears or rituals during treatment. Often, the
content of these new symptoms is closely related to the
original fears and may be treated by extending to these
fears the EX/RP instructions given earlier in treatment.
For example, following the successful implementation
of response prevention for his compulsive handwashing,
Mr. F began to rub his hands together to decontaminate
them. The therapist identified this as another
ritual and instructed Mr. F to resist the urge to rub his
hands together. Next, Mr. F began subtly to rub his fingers
against the palms of his hands to cleanse his hands
and to reduce anxiety. The therapist asked Mr. F to stop
this ritual as he had the others and was again successful.

Some emergent fears may not be as clearly connected
to the patient’s original fears. For example, the fear


Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder

that June developed of hitting someone while driving
was not obviously related to her fears of contamination.
Further assessment often results in the discovery
of a conceptual link between the two reported fears. In
June’s case, her fear of being blamed for causing someone
to become ill or die, and her concern about being
thought of as a “bad person” because she killed someone,
or because she smelled of dog feces, may have
been the connection between her two identified fears.
In such cases, it is important for the therapist to develop
exposures that include cues for this more general fear.
June’s therapist might conduct imaginal exposures that
include images of people criticizing June or blaming
her for causing someone to die.

Negative Family Reactions

Because family members have typically experienced
years of frustration with the patient’s symptoms, it is
not surprising that some are impatient, expecting treatment
to progress smoothly and to result in total symptom
remission. It is not uncommon for family members
to become disappointed or angry when they perceive
that the symptoms are not subsiding quickly enough. In
such cases, the therapist should assure family members
that occasional strong anxiety reactions are to be expected
and do not reflect failure. The family should be
encouraged to respond calmly and be supportive should
the patient experience a burst of anxiety.

Often, families have developed patterns of behavior
designed to reduce the patient’s distress. Some family
members may continue these patterns either in an attempt
to protect the patient from upsetting situations
or because it is difficult to break habits established
over years of accommodating the patient’s requests.
For example, Mr. P, who was accustomed to entering
his home through the basement, immediately removing
his clothes, and showering for his wife’s sake, was
instructed to enter through the front door and toss his
overcoat on the couch. Similarly, family members may
find themselves continuing to perform a variety of
household activities that they have come to regard as
their responsibility because of the patient’s wishes to
avoid the distress that the activity caused. For instance,
Mr. P was responsible for preparing all the family
meals because his wife was distressed by the possibility
that she might inadvertently contaminate the food.
Because such familiar patterns may hinder progress in
treatment, the therapist should ask both the patient and
family members about such habits and prescribe appro


priate alternative behaviors that maximize the patient’s
exposure and minimize avoidance.

Functioning without Symptoms

At the end of treatment, many individuals with OCD
find themselves left with a considerable void in their
daily routines. The fact that they no longer need to allocate
a large portion of their day to performing rituals
leaves them wondering what to do. The therapist
should be sensitive to these issues and aid in planning
new social or occupational goals to be achieved following
therapy. If needed, the therapist should conduct
additional sessions or refer the patient to another therapist
who will focus on adjustment-related issues. It may
also be the case that behavioral treatments such as acceptance
and commitment therapy (ACT) are directly
applicable to this problem given the explicit focus on
functioning; patients with OCD might be especially
vulnerable to the belief that they cannot move forward
successfully in their lives unless their obsessions are
gone, and ACT is particularly well suited to address
these kinds of problems. Preliminary evidence from a
case series suggested the applicability of ACT to OCD
(Twohig, Hayes, & Masuda, 2006), and a randomized
controlled trial now provides stronger evidence for the
efficacy of ACT (Twhohig et al., 2010).

Because they have spent years performing their rituals,
patients may be unsure about what constitutes normal
behavior. The therapist should offer guidelines for
appropriate washing, checking, repeating, or ordering.
If rituals are still present, the therapist needs to instruct
patients to continue the response prevention of some
behaviors to ensure maintenance of treatment gains. A
patient may also develop a fear that the OCD symptoms
will return. The therapist should reassure the patient
that a single washing of his/her hands does not signal
the beginning of a relapse.

coNclusioN

In this chapter we have reviewed the literature on OCD
and its treatment, and provided verbatim dialogue from
patient–therapist interactions to demonstrate how EX/
RP is implemented. Our review illustrates clearly that
much is already known about CBT and pharmacotherapy
for OCD. In our clinical practice with adults, we are
guided by the empirical research summarized in this
chapter, although not all of our clinical decisions are


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

unequivocally supported by empirical studies. For example,
no controlled, direct comparison study has indicated
that intensive EX/RP yields superior outcome to
less intensive treatment, yet we typically provide intensive
treatment to our adult patients with at least moderately
severe OCD. Although our clinical experience
suggests that weekly sessions are probably insufficient
to produce meaningful gains in most adult patients with
OCD, it has yet to be established whether two or three
weekly sessions would yield results comparable to
daily sessions both immediately after treatment and at
follow-up. Future research should examine this important
issue to establish a “dose–response” curve for EX/
RP; in our view clinically the patient’s initial severity,
comorbidity, and motivational readiness to engage in
the treatment influence our recommendations regarding
the EX/RP visit schedule . Another important issue
is how to best combine EX/RP with medication. Future
research will allow us to identify the optimal treatment
course for a particular patient.

Empirical results and clinical observations converge
to indicate that psychosocial treatment for OCD must
involve both exposure and ritual prevention instructions,
and that failure to conduct exposures to the most
anxiety-evoking situations is likely to compromise outcome.
With respect to the therapist-assisted versus selfexposure
issue, we routinely choose therapist-assisted
exposure in our clinical practice. At present, eliminating
therapist assistance with exposure exercises seems
premature because existing studies have methodological
problems such as insufficient sample sizes, and a
recently completed RCT in pediatric OCD indicated
that EX/RP with in-session exposure was superior to
a brief form of EX/RP that did not include this procedural
element (Franklin et al., 2011). With respect to
the role of cognitive interventions in the treatment of
OCD, the EX/RP program described in this chapter is a
“cognitive-behavioral” treatment in that it targets both
cognitions and behaviors; however, we do not typically
include formal cognitive restructuring. Future research
needs to delineate which cognitive and behavioral procedures
are most effective for correcting particular
pathological emotions. Cognitive procedures may also
be utilized in “readiness programs” designed to help
patients who are highly ambivalent about EX/RP realize
that the treatment is both tolerable and effective.
Empirical research to date suggest that although antidepressant
medications for OCD do not interfere with the
efficacy of CBT, combination treatment is not necessarily
more effective than EX/RP alone. However, the

partial symptom reduction typically found in pharmacotherapy
studies for OCD may render some patients
more willing to tolerate the distress associated with
EX/RP; thus, premedication may be helpful in promoting
readiness in such cases.

What factors seem to enhance long-term efficacy of
EX/RP for OCD? Studies suggest that patients with
OCD who show great improvement immediately after
CBT are more likely to retain their gains at follow-up
than those who make only moderate posttreatment
gains (e.g., Simpson et al., 2004). Thus, emphasis on
procedures that are likely to lead to maximal shortterm
efficacy also serves to yield superior maintenance
of gains. In our clinical experience, understanding of
the treatment rationale, active engagement in exposure
exercises, strict adherence to ritual prevention instructions,
willingness to design and implement exposure
exercises between sessions, and willingness to confront
even the most difficult tasks on the fear hierarchy are
all factors associated with positive treatment outcome.
Thus, verbal reinforcement of patients when they accomplish
these goals, and reinstruction when they do
not, are important in promoting lasting improvement.
In addition, relapse prevention techniques designed
specifically for OCD have been found effective in promoting
maintenance of gains at follow-up (Hiss et al.,
1994). In clinical practice we begin discussing relapse
prevention procedures long before treatment is completed,
and we focus on maintaining gains in the last
few active treatment sessions. Some continuing contact
with the treating clinician is also thought to be of benefit;
thus, brief follow-up sessions are held in the first
few months after the active treatment is completed,
with contact as needed following the formal followup
phase. As part of relapse prevention, we often ask
our patients to plan EX/RP exercises for hypothetical
obsessions they might encounter in the future (e.g., “If
you became obsessed in 6 months that touching tree
bark would result in your contracting a terrible illness,
what exercises should you do?”) to encourage them to
problem-solve around OCD issues for themselves rather
than relying on the therapist’s instruction. We also
emphasize that the occasional occurrence of obsessions
should not be a cause of great alarm, provided that
patients implement EX/RP to combat these recurring
obsessions and urges to ritualize. The patients who are
accepting of this reality are often the ones most able to
apply what they have learned in treatment, and this process
enables them to keep their OCD symptoms under
control long after treatment has terminated.


Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder

referenCes

Abramowitz, J. S. (1996). Variants of exposure and response
prevention in the treatment of obsessive compulsive
disorder: A meta-analysis. Behavior Therapy, 27, 583–
600.

Abramowitz, J. S., & Foa, E. B. (2000). Does major depressive
disorder influence outcome of exposure and response
prevention for OCD? Behavior Therapy, 31, 795–800.

Abramowitz, J. S., Foa, E. B., & Franklin, M. E. (2003). Exposure
and ritual prevention for obsessive–compulsive
disorder: Effects of intensive versus twice-weekly sessions.
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 71,
394–398.

Abramowitz, J. S., Franklin, M. E., & Foa, E. B. (2002). Empirical
status of cognitive-behavioral therapy for obsessive
compulsive disorder: A meta-analytic review. Romanian
Journal of Cognitive and Behavior Psychotherapies, 2,
89–104.

Abramowitz, J. S., Franklin, M. E., Street, G. P., Kozak, M.
J., & Foa, E. B. (2000). Effects of comorbid depression on
response to treatment for obsessive–compulsive disorder.
Behavior Therapy, 31, 517–528.

Allen, J. J., & Tune, G. S. (1975). The Lynfield Obsessional/
Compulsive Questionnaire. Scottish Medical Journal, 20,
21–24.

American Psychiatric Association. (1994). Diagnostic and
statistical manual of mental disorders (4th ed.). Washington,
DC: Author.

American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and
statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.). Arlington,
VA: Author.

Angst, J. (1993). Comorbidity of anxiety, phobia, compulsion
and depression. International Clinical Psychopharmacology,
8(Suppl. 1), 21–25.

Anderson, R. A., & Rees, C. S. (2007). Group versus individual
cognitive-behavioural treatment for obsessive–
compulsive disorder: A controlled trial. Behaviour Research
and Therapy, 45(1), 123–137.

Antony, M. M., Downie, F., & Swinson, R. P. (1998). Diagnostic
issues and epidemiology in obsessive–compulsive
disorders. In R. P. Swinson, M. M. Antony, S. Rachman,
& M. A. Richter (Eds.), Obsessive–compulsive disorder:
Theory, research and treatment (pp. 3–32). New York:
Guilford Press.

Asbahr, F. R., Castillo, A. R., Ito, L. M., Latorre, R. D.,
Moreira, M. N., & Lotufo-Neto, F. (2005). Group
cognitive-behavioral therapy versus sertraline for the
treatment of children and adolescents with obsessive–
compulsive disorder. Journal of the American Academy
of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 44(11), 1128–1136.

Bachofen, M., Nakagawa, A., Marks, I. M., Park, J., Greist, J.
H., Baer, L., et al. (1999). Home self-assessment and selftreatment
of obsessive compulsive disorder using a manual
and a computer-conducted telephone interview: Replica


tion of a UK–US study. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry,
60, 545–549.

Barrett, P., Farrell, L., Dadds, M., & Boulter, N. (20050.
Cognitive-behavioral family treatment of childhood
obsessive–compulsive disorder: Long-term follow-up and
predictors of outcome. Journal of the American Academy
of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 44, 1005–1014.

Barrett, P., Healy-Farrell, L., & March, J. S. (2004).
Cognitive-behavioral family treatment of childhood
obsessive–compulsive disorder: A controlled trial. Journal
of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent
Psychiatry, 43, 46–62.

Barsky, A. J., & Ahern, D. (2004). Interventions for hypochondriasis
in primary care: In reply. Journal of the American
Medical Association, 292(1), 42–43.

Basoglu, M., Lax, T., Kasvikis, Y., & Marks, I. M. (1988).
Predictors of improvement in obsessive–compulsive disorder.
Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 2, 299–317.

Beck, A. T. (1976). Cognitive therapy and the emotional disorders.
New York: International Universities Press.

Bellodi, L., Scuito, G., Diaferia, G., Ronchi, P., & Smeraldi,

E. (1992). Psychiatric disorders in the families of patients
with obsessive–compulsive disorder. Psychiatry Research,
42(2), 111–120.
Bogels, S. M., & Bodden, D. (2005, November). Family versus
child CBT for childhood anxiety disorders: Short and
long-term results of a multicenter study. In S. M. Bogels
(Chair), Family-Based Prevention and Treatment of Childhood
Anxiety Disorders Symposium presented at the annual
meeting of the Association for Behavioral and Cognitive
Therapies, Washington, DC.

Brown, T., Campbell, L., Lehman, C., Grisham, J., & Mancill,

R. (2001). Current and lifetime comorbidity of the DSM-
IV anxiety and mood disorders in a large clinical sample.
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 110(4), 585–599.
Carr, A. T. (1974). Compulsive neurosis: A review of the literature.
Psychological Bulletin, 81, 311–318.
Comings, D. E. (1990). Tourette syndrome and human behavior.
Duarte, CA: Hope Press.

Constans, J. I., Foa, E. B., Franklin, M. E., & Mathews, A.
(1995). Memory for actions in obsessive compulsives with
checking rituals. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 33,
665–671.

Cottraux, J., Mollard, L., Bouvard, M., Marks, L., Sluys, M.,
Nury, A. M., et al. (1990). A controlled study of fluvoxamine
and exposure in obsessive–compulsive disorder. International
Clinical Psychopharmacology, 5, 17–30.

Cottraux, J., Note, I., Yao, S. N., Lafont, S., Note, B., Mollard,
E., et al. (2001). A randomized controlled trial of cognitive
therapy versus intensive behavior therapy in obsessive
compulsive disorder. Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics,
70(6), 288–297.

De Araujo, L. A., Ito, L. M., Marks, I. M., & Deale, A. (1995).
Does imaginal exposure to the consequences of not ritualising
enhance live exposure for OCD?: A controlled


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

study: I. Main outcome. British Journal of Psychiatry,
167, 65–70.

de Haan, E., Hoogduin, K. A., Buitelaar, J. K., & Keijsers, G.

P. (1998). Behavior thearpy versus clomipramine for the
treatment of obsessive–compulsive disorder. Journal of
the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry,
37, 1022–1029.
Denys, D., Tenney, N., van Megen, J. G., de Geus, F., & Westenberg,
H. G. (2004). Axis I and II comorbidity in a large
sample of patients with obsessive–compulsive disorder.
Journal of Affective Disorders, 80, 155–162.

DeVeaugh-Geiss, J., Landau, P., & Katz, R. (1989). Treatment
of OCD with clomipramine. Psychiatric Annals, 19,
97–101.

Diniz, J. B., Rosario-Campos, M. C., Shavitt, R. G., Curi, M.,
Hounie, A. G., Brotto, S. A., et al. (2004). Impact of age
at onset and duration of illness on the expression of comorbidities
in obsessive–compulsive disorder. Journal of
Clinical Psychiatry, 65, 22–27.

Dollard, J., & Miller, N. L. (1950). Personality and psychotherapy:
An analysis in terms of learning, thinking and
culture. New York: McGraw-Hill.

Dougherty, D. D., Rauch, S. L., & Jenike, M. A. (2002). Pharmacological
treatments for obsessive compulsive disorder.
In P. E. Nathan & J. M. Gordon (Eds.), A guide to treatments
that work (2nd ed., pp. 387–410). New York: Oxford
University Press.

Eisen, J. L., Phillips, K. A., Baer, L., Beer, D. A., Atala, K.
D., & Rasmussen, S. A. (1998). The Brown Assessment of
Beliefs Scale: Reliability and validity. American Journal
of Psychiatry, 155, 102–108.

Ellis, A. (1962). Reason and emotion in psychotherapy. New
York: Lyle Stuart.

Emmelkamp, P. M. G., & Beens, H. (1991). Cognitive therapy
with obsessive–compulsive disorder: A comparative evaluation.
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 29, 293–300.

Emmelkamp, P. M. G., de Haan, E., & Hoogduin, C. A. L.
(1990). Marital adjustment and obsessive–compulsive disorder.
British Journal of Psychiatry, 156, 55–60.

Emmelkamp, P. M. G., & van Kraanen, J. (1977). Therapistcontrolled
exposure in vivo: A comparison with obsessive–
compulsive patients. Behaviour Research and Therapy,
15, 491–495.

Emmelkamp, P. M. G., Visser, S., & Hoekstra, R. J. (1988).
Cognitive therapy vs. exposure in vivo in the treatment of
obsessive–compulsives. Cognitive Therapy and Research,
12, 103–114.

Fals-Stewart, W., Marks, A. P., & Schafer, J. (1993). A comparison
of behavioral group therapy and individual behavior
therapy in treating obsessive compulsive disorder.
Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 181, 189–193.

Farrell, L. J., Waters, A., Milliner, E., & Ollendick, T. (2012).
Comorbidity and treatment response in pediatric OCD: A
pilot study of group cognitive-behavioral treatment. Psychiatry
Research, 199, 115–123.

Flament, M., Koby, E., Rapoport, J. L., Berg, C., Zahn, T.,
Cox, C., et al. (1990). Childhood obsessive compulsive
disorder: A prospective follow-up study. Journal of Child
Psychology and Psychiatry, and Allied Disciplines, 31,
363–380.

Flament, M., Whitaker, A., Rapoport, J. L., Davies, M., Berg,
C., Kalikow, K., et al. (1988). Obsessive compulsive disorder
in adolescence: An epidemiological study. Journal of
the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry,
27, 764–771.

Foa, E. B., Abramowitz, J. S., Franklin, M. E., & Kozak, M.

J. (1999). Feared consequences, fixity of belief, and treatment
outcome in patients with obsessive compulsive disorder.
Behavior Therapy, 30, 717–724.
Foa, E. B., Franklin, M. E., & Moser, J. (2002). Context in the
clinic: How well do CBT and medications work in combination?
Biological Psychiatry, 51, 989–997.

Foa, E. B., Huppert, J. D., & Cahill, S. P. (2006). Emotional
processing theory: An update. In B. O. Rothbaum (Ed.),
Pathological anxiety: Emotional processing in etiology
and treatment (pp. 3–24). New York: Guilford Press.

Foa, E. B., Huppert, J. D., Leiberg, S., Langner, R., Kichic, R.,
& Hajcak, G., et al. (2002). The Obsessive–Compulsive
Inventory: Development and validation of a short version.
Psychological Assessment, 14(4), 485–495.

Foa, E. B., & Kozak, M. J. (1985). Treatment of anxiety disorders:
Implications for psychopathology. In A. H. Tuma
& J. D. Maser (Eds.), Anxiety and the anxiety disorders
(pp. 421–452). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

Foa, E. B., & Kozak, M. J. (1986). Emotional processing of
fear: Exposure to corrective information. Psychological
Bulletin, 99, 20–35.

Foa, E. B., & Kozak, M. J. (1996). Psychological treatments
for obsessive compulsive disorder. In M. R. Mavissakalian
& R. P. Prien (Eds.), Long-term treatments of anxiety
disorders (pp. 285–309). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric
Press.

Foa, E. B., Kozak, M. J., Goodman, W. K., Hollander, E., Jenike,
M. A., & Rasmussen, S. (1995). DSM-IV filed trial:
Obsessive compulsive disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry,
152, 90–96.

Foa, E. B., Kozak, M. J., Steketee, G., & McCarthy, P. R.
(1992). Treatment of depressive and obsessive–compulsive
symptoms in OCD by imipramine and behavior therapy.
British Journal of Clinical Psychology, 31, 279–292.

Foa, E. B., Liebowitz, M. R., Kozak, M. J., Davies, S. O.,
Campeas, R., Franklin, M. E., et al. (2005). Treatment
of obsessive compulsive disorder by exposure and ritual
prevention, clomipramine, and their combination: A randomized,
placebo-controlled trial. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 162, 151–161.

Foa, E. B., Steketee, G., Grayson, J. B., Turner, R. M., &
Latimer, P. (1984). Deliberate exposure and blocking of
obsessive–compulsive rituals: Immediate and long-term
effects. Behavior Therapy, 15, 450–472.


Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder

Foa, E. B., Steketee, G., Turner, R. M., & Fischer, S. C.
(1980). Effects of imaginal exposure to feared disasters in
obsessive–compulsive checkers. Behaviour Research and
Therapy, 18, 449–455.

Franklin, M. E., Abramowitz, J. S., Bux, D. A., Zoellner, L.
A., & Feeny, N. C. (2002). Cognitive-behavioral therapy
with and without medication in the treatment of obsessive
compulsive disorder. Professional Psychology: Research
and Practice, 33, 162–168.

Franklin, M. E., Abramowitz, J. S., Furr, J., Kalsy, S., &
Riggs, D. S. (2003). A naturalistic examination of therapist
experience and outcome of exposure and ritual prevention
for OCD. Psychotherapy Research, 13, 153–167.

Franklin, M. E., Abramowitz, J. S., Kozak, M. J., Levitt, J.,
& Foa, E. B. (2000). Effectiveness of exposure and ritual
prevention for obsessive compulsive disorder: Randomized
compared with non-randomized samples. Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 68, 594–602.

Franklin, M. E., Kozak, M. J., Cashman, L., Coles, M., Rheingold,
A., & Foa, E. B. (1998). Cognitive behavioral treatment
of pediatric obsessive compulsive disorder: An open
clinical trial. Journal of the American Academy of Child
and Adolescent Psychiatry, 37, 412–419.

Franklin, M., Sapyta, J., Freeman, J., Khanna, M., Compton,
S., Almirall, D., et al. (2011). Cognitive behavior therapy
augmentation of pharmacotherapy in pediatric obsessive–
compulsive disorder: The Pediatric OCD Treatment Study
II (POTS II). Journal of the American Medical Association,
306, 1224–1232.

Freeman, J. B., Choate-Summers, M. L., Moore, P. S., Garcia,
A. M., Sapyta, J. J., Leonard, H. L., et al. (2007).
Cognitive behavioral treatment of young children with
obsessive compulsive disorder. Biological Psychiatry, 61,
337–343.

Freeman, J. B., Garcia, A. M., Fucci, C., Karitani, M., Miller,
L., & Leonard, H. L. (2003). Family-based treatment
of early-onset obsessive–compulsive disorder [Special
issue]. Journal of Child and Adolescent Psychopharmacology,
13(2), 71–80.

Freeston, M. H., Ladouceur, R., Gagnon, F., Thibodeau,
N., Rhéaume, J., Letarte, H., et al. (1997). Cognitivebehavioral
treatment of obsessive thoughts: A controlled
study. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 65,
405–413.

Gershuny, B. S., Baer, L., Jenike, M. A., Minichiello, W. E.,
& Wilhelm, S. (2002). Comorbid posttraumatic stress
disorder: Impact on treatment outcome for obsessive–
compulsive disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry,
159, 852–854.

Goodman, W. K., Price, L. H., Rasmussen, S. A., Mazure,
C., Delgado, P., Heninger, G. R., et al. (1989a). The Yale–
Brown Obsessive–Compulsive Scale: II. Validity. Archives
of General Psychiatry, 46, 1012–1016.

Goodman, W. K., Price, L. H., Rasmussen, S. A., Mazure, C.,
Fleischmann, R. L., Hill, C. L., et al. (1989b). The Yale–

Brown Obsessive–Compulsive Scale: I. Development,
use, and reliability. Archives of General Psychiatry, 46,
1006–1011.

Greist, J. H. (1990). Treatment of obsessive–compulsive disorder:
Psychotherapies, drugs, and other somatic treatments.
Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 51, 44–50.

Greist, J. H. (1992). An integrated approach to treatment of
obsessive compulsive disorder. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry,
53(Suppl.), 38–41.

Greist, J. H., Jefferson, J. W., Kobak, K. A., Katzelnick, D.
J., & Serlin, R. C. (1995). Efficacy and tolerability of serotonin
reuptake inhibitors in obsessive compulsive disorder:
A meta-analysis. Archives of General Psychiatry, 46,
53–60.

Hanna, G. L. (1995). Demographic and clinical features of
obsessive compulsive disorder in children and adolescents.
Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent
Psychiatry, 34, 19–27.

Himle, M. B., Olufs, E., Himle, J., Tucker, B., & Woods, D.

W. (2010). Behavior therapy for tics via Videoconference
Delivery: An initial pilot test in children. Cognitive & Behavioral
Practice, 17, 329–337.
Hiss, H., Foa, E. B., & Kozak, M. J. (1994). A relapse prevention
program for treatment of obsessive compulsive disorder.
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 62,
801–808.

Hodgson, R. J., Rachman, S., & Marks, L. M. (1972). The
treatment of chronic obsessive–compulsive neurosis:
Follow-up and further findings. Behaviour Research and
Therapy, 10, 181–189.

Hohagen, F., Winkelmann, G., Rasche-Raeuchle, H., Hand,
I., Konig, A., Munchau, N., et al. (1998). Combination of
behaviour therapy with fluvoxamine in comparison with
behaviour therapy and placebo: Results of a multicentre
study. British Journal of Psychiatry, 173, 71–78.

Insel, T. R., & Akiskal, H. (1986). Obsessive–compulsive disorder
with psychotic features: A phenomenologic analysis.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 12, 1527–1533.

Jaycox, L. H., Foa, E. B., & Morral, A. R. (1998). Influence of
emotional engagement and habituation on exposure therapy
for PTSD. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,
66, 185–192.

Jenike, M., Baer, L., Minichiello, W., Schwartz, C., & Carey,

R. (1986). Concomitant obsessive–compulsive disorder
and schizotypal personality disorder. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 143, 530–532.
Kazarian, S. S., Evans, D. L., & Lefave, K. (1977). Modification
and factorial analysis of the Leyton Obsessional
Inventory. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 33, 422–425.

Keijsers, G. P., Hoogduin, C. A., & Schaap, C. P. (1994). Predictors
of treatment outcome in the behavioural treatment
of obsessive–compulsive disorder. British Journal of Psychiatry,
165, 781–786.

Kessler, R. C., Demier, O., Frank, R. G., Olfson, M., Pincus,

H. A., Walters, E. E., et al. (2005). Prevalence and treat

CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

ment of mental disorders, 1990 to 2003. New England
Journal of Medicine, 352(24), 2515–2523.

Koran, L. M. (2000). Quality of life in obsessive–compulsive
disorder. Psychiatric Clinics of North America, 23, 509–
517.

Kozak, M. J., & Foa, E. B. (1994). Obsessions, overvalued
ideas, and delusions in obsessive compulsive disorder. Behaviour
Research and Therapy, 32, 343–353.

Kozak, M. J., Foa, E. B., & Steketee, G. (1988). Process
and outcome of exposure treatment with obsessive–
compulsives: Psychophysiological indicators of emotional
processing. Behavior Therapy, 19, 157–169.

Kurlan, R., Como, P. G., Miller, B., Palumbo, D., Deeley, C.,
Andersen, E. M., et al. (2002). The behavioral spectrum
of tic disorders: A community-based study. Neurology, 59,
414–420.

Ladoucer, R., Rhéame, J., Freeston, M. H., Aublet, F., Jean,
K., Lachance, S., et al. (1995). Experimental manipulations
of responsibility: An analogue test for models of
obsessive–compulsive disorder. Behaviour Research and
Therapy, 33, 937–946.

Lang, P. J. (1979). A bio-informational theory of emotional
imagery. Psychophysiology, 6, 495–511.

Leckman, J. F., & Chittenden, E. H. (1990). Gilles de la Tourette
syndrome and some forms of obsessive–compulsive
disorder may share a common genetic diathesis.
L’Encephale, 16, 321–323.

Leckman, J. F., Denys, D., Simpson, H. B., Mataix-Cols, D.,
Hollander, E., Saxena, S., et al. (2010). Obsessive compulsive
disorder: A review of the diagnostic criteria and
possible subtypes and dimensional specifiers for DSM V.
Depression and Anxiety, 27, 507–527.

Ledley, D. R., Pai, A., & Franklin, M. E. (2007). Treating
comorbid presentations: Obsessive compulsive disorder,
anxiety, and depression. In M. M. Antony, C. Purdon, &

L. Summerfeldt (Eds.), Psychological treatment of OCD:
Fundamentals and beyond (pp. 281–293). Washington,
DC: American Psychological Association Press.
Lelliott, P. T., Noshirvani, H. F., Basoglu, M., Marks, I. M., &
Monteiro, W. O. (1988). Obsessive–compulsive beliefs and
treatment outcome. Psychological Bulletin, 18, 697–702.

Leon, A. C., Portera, L., & Weissman, M. M. (1995). The
social costs of anxiety disorders. British Journal of Psychiatry,
166(Suppl.), 19–22.

Lindsay, M., Crino, R., & Andrews, G. (1997). Controlled
trial of exposure and response prevention in obsessive
compulsive disorder. British Journal of Psychiatry, 171,
135–139.

Lochner, C., & Stein, D. J. (2003). Heterogeneity of
obsessive–compulsive disorder: A literature review. Harvard
Review of Psychiatry, 11(3), 113–132.

Lovell, K., Cox, D., Haddock, G., Jones, C., Raines, D., Garvey,
R., et al. (2006). Telephone administered cognitive
behaviour therapy for treatment of obsessive compulsive

disorder: Randomised controlled non-inferiority trial.
British Medical Journal, 333, 883.

March, J. S., Franklin, M. E., Leonard, H., Garcia, A., Moore,
P., Freeman, J., et al. (2007). Tics moderate the outcome of
treatment with medication but not CBT in pediatric OCD.
Biological Psychiatry, 61, 344–347.

Marks, I. M., Lelliott, P., Basoglu, M., Noshirvani, H., Monteiro,
W., Cohen, D., et al. (1988). Clomipramine selfexposure,
and therapist-aided exposure for obsessive–
compulsive rituals. British Journal of Psychiatry, 152,
522–534.

Marks, I. M., Stern, R. S., Mawson, D., Cobb, J., & McDonald,
R. (1980). Clomipramine and exposure for obsessive–
compulsive rituals: I. British Journal of Psychiatry, 136,
1–25.

Masellis, M., Rector, N. A., & Richter, M. A. (2003). Quality
of life in OCD: Differential impact of obsessions, compulsions,
and depression comorbidity. Canadian Journal of
Psychiatry, 48(2), 72–77.

Mataix-Cols, D., Marks, I. M., Greist, J. H., Kobak, K. A.,
& Baer, L. (2002). Obsessive–compulsive symptoms dimensions
as predictors of compliance with and response to
behaviour therapy: Results from a controlled trial. Psychotherapy
and Psychosomatics, 71, 255–262.

Mathews, A. M., Johnston, D. W., Shaw, P. M., & Gelder, M.

G. (1974). Process variables and the prediction of outcome
in behavior therapy. British Journal of Psychiatry, 125,
256–264.
Matsunaga, H., Kiriike, N., Matsui, T., Oya, K., Okino, K.,
& Stein, D. (2005). Impulsive disorders in Japanese adult
patients with obsessive–compulsive disorder. Comprehensive
Psychiatry, 46, 43–49.

McLean, P. L., Whittal, M. L., Thordarson, D. S., Taylor, S.,
Sochting, I., Koch, W. J., et al. (2001). Cognitive versus
behavior therapy in the group treatment of obsessive–
compulsive disorder. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 69, 205–214.

Mehta, M. (1990). A comparative study of family-based and
patients-based behavioural management in obsessive–
compulsive disorder. British Journal of Psychiatry, 157,
133–135.

Meyer, V. (1966). Modification of expectations in cases with
obsessional rituals. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 4,
273–280.

Meyer, V., & Levy, R. (1973). Modification of behavior in
obsessive–compulsive disorders. In H. E. Adams & P.
Unikel (Eds.), Issues and trends in behavior therapy
(pp. 77–136). Springfield, IL: Thomas.

Meyer, V., Levy, R., & Schnurer, A. (1974). A behavioral
treatment of obsessive–compulsive disorders. In H. R.
Beech (Ed.), Obsessional states. London: Methuen.

Mowrer, O. H. (1939). A stimulus–response analysis of anxiety
and its role as a reinforcing agent. Psychological Review,
46, 553–565.


Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder

Mowrer, O. H. (1960). Learning theory and behavior. New
York: Wiley.

Neziroglu, F., Stevens, K. P., Yaryura-Tobias, J. A., & McKay,

D. (2000). Predictive validity of the Overvalued Ideas
Scale: Outcome in obsessive–compulsive and body dysmorphic
disorder. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 39,
745–756.
Öst, L. G. (1989). One-session treatment for specific phobias.
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 27, 1–7.

O’Sullivan, G., Noshirvani, H., Marks, I., Monteiro, W., &
Lelliott, P. (1991). Six-year follow-up after exposure and
clomipramine therapy for obsessive–compulsive disorder.
Journal of Clinical Archives, 52, 150–155.

Pato, M. T., Zohar-Kadouch, R., Zohar, J., & Murphy, D. L.
(1988). Return of symptoms after discontinuation of clomipramine
in patients with obsessive–compulsive disorder.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 145, 1521–1525.

Pauls, D. L., Towbin, K. E., Leckman, J. F., Zahner, G. E., &
Cohen, D. J. (1986). Gilles de la Tourette syndrome and
obsessive–compulsive disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry,
43, 1180–1182.

Pediatric OCD Treatment Study Team. (2004). Cognitivebehavioral
therapy, sertraline, and their combination for
children and adolescents with obsessive–compulsive disorder:
The Pediatric OCD Treatment Study (POTS) randomized
controlled trial. Journal of the American Medical
Association, 292, 1969–1976.

Peris, T. S., Sugar, C. A., Bergman, L., Chang, S., Langley,
A., & Piacentini, J. (2012). Family factors predict treatment
outcome for pediatric obsessive-compulsive disorder.
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 80,
255–263.

Piacentini, J., Bergman, R. L., Jacobs, C., McCracken, J. T.,
& Kretchman, J. (2002). Open trial of cognitive behavior
therapy for childhood obsessive–compulsive disorder.
Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 16, 207–219.

Purdon, C., & Clark, D. A. (2002). The need to control
thoughts. In R. Frost & G. Steketee (Eds.), Cognitive
approaches to obsessions and compulsions: Theory, research,
and treatment (pp. 29–43). Oakland, CA: New
Harbinger.

Rabavilas, A. D., Boulougouris, J. C., & Perissaki, C. (1979).
Therapist qualities related to outcome with exposure in
vivo in neurotic patients. Journal of Behavior Therapy and
Experimental Psychiatry, 10, 293–299.

Rachman, S. (1998). A cognitive theory of obsessions: Elaborations.
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 36, 385–401.
Rachman, S., & DeSilva, P. (1978). Abnormal and normal ob


sessions. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 16, 233–248.
Rachman, S., Thordarson, D. S., Shafran, R., & Woody, S.

R. (1995). Perceived responsibility: Structure and significance.
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 33(7), 779–784.
Rapoport, J. L., Swedo, S. E., & Leonard, H. L. (1992). Childhood
obsessive compulsive disorder (144th Annual Meet


ing of the American Psychiatric Association: Obsessive
Compulsive Disorder: Integrating Theory and Practice
[1991, New Orleans, LA]). Journal of Clinical Psychiatry,
53(Suppl. 4), 11–16.

Rasmussen, S. A., & Eisen, J. L. (1989). Clinical features and
phenomenology of obsessive–compulsive disorder. Psychiatric
Annals, 19, 67–73.

Rasmussen, S. A., & Eisen, J. L. (1990). Epidemiology of
obsessive–compulsive disorder. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry,
51, 10–14.

Rasmussen, S. A., & Tsuang, M. T. (1986). Clinical characteristics
and family history in DSM III obsessive–
compulsive disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry,
1943, 317–382.

Reed, G. E. (1985). Obsessional experience and compulsive
behavior: A cognitive structural approach. Orlando, FL:
Academic Press.

Rhéaume, J., Freeston, M. H., Dugas, M. J., Letarte, H., &
Ladouceur, R. (1995). Perfectionism, responsibility, and
obsessive compulsive symptoms. Behaviour Research and
Therapy, 36, 385–402.

Riggs, D. S., Hiss, H., & Foa, E. B. (1992). Marital distress
and the treatment of obsessive–compulsive disorder. Behavior
Therapy, 23, 585–597.

Rothbaum, B. O., & Shahar, F. (2000). Behavioral treatment
of obsessive–compulsive disorder in a naturalistic setting.
Cognitive and Behavioral Practice, 7, 262–270.

Rowe, M. K., & Craske, M. G. (1998). Effects of an
expanding-space vs. massed exposure schedule on fear
reduction and return of fear. Beahviour Research and
Therapy, 36, 701–717.

Rubenstein, C. S., Peynircioglu, Z. F., Chambless, D. L., &
Pigott, T. A. (1993). Memory in sub-clinical obsessive–
compulsive checkers. Behaviour Research and Therapy,
31(8), 759–765.

Salkovskis, P. M. (1985). Obsessional compulsive problems:
A cognitive-behavioral analysis. Behaviour Research and
Therapy, 23, 571–583.

Sher, K. J., Frost, R. O., & Otto, R. (1983). Cognitive deficits
in compulsive checkers: An exploratory study. Behaviour
Research and Therapy, 21, 357–364.

Simpson, H. B., Liebowitz, M. R., Foa, E. B., Kozak, M. J.,
Schmidt, A. B., Rowan, V., et al. (2004). Post-treatment effects
of exposure therapy and clomipramine in obsessive–
compulsive disorder. Depression and Anxiety, 19, 225–
233.

Simpson, H. B., Zuckoff, A. M., Maher, M. J., Page, J. R.,
Franklin, M. E., & Foa, E. B. (2010). Challenges using
motivational interviewing as an adjunct to exposure therapy
for obsessive–compulsive disorder. Behaviour Research
and Therapy, 48, 941–948.

Stampfl, T. G., & Levis, D. J. (1967). Essentials of implosive
therapy: A learning-based psychodynamic behavioral
therapy. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 72, 496–503.


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

Stanley, M. A., Turner, S. M., & Borden, J. W. (1990). Schizotypal
features in obsessive–compulsive disorder. Comprehensive
Psychiatry, 31, 511–518.

Steketee, G., Chambless, D. L., & Tran, G. Q. (2001). Effects
of Axis I and II comorbidity on behavior therapy outcome
for obsessive–compulsive disorder and agoraphobia. Comprehensive
Psychiatry, 42, 76–86.

Steketee, G., Eisen, J., Dyck, I., Warshaw, M., & Rasmussen,

S. (1999). Predictors of course in obsessive-compulsive
disorder. Psychiatry Research, 89, 229–238.
Steketee, G. S., Foa, E. B., & Grayson, J. B. (1982). Recent
advances in the treatment of obsessive–compulsives. Archives
of General Psychiatry, 39, 1365–1371.

Stein, D. J., Fineberg, N. A., Bienvenu, O. J., Denys, D., Lochner,
C., Nestadt, G., et al. (2010). Should OCD be classified
as an anxiety disorder in DSM V? Depression and
Anxiety, 27, 495–506.

Storch, E., Geffken, G., Merlo, L., Mann, G., Duke, D., Munson,
M., et al. (2007). Family-based cognitive-behavioral
therapy for pediatric obsessive–compulsive disorder:
Comparison of intensive and weekly approaches. Journal
of American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry,
46, 469–478.

Storch, E. A., Merlo, L. J., Larson, M. J., Geffken, G. R.,
Lehmkuhl, H. D., Jacob, M. L., et al. (2008). Impact of
comorbidity on cognitive-behavioral therapy response in
pediatric obsessive–compulsive disorder. Journal of the
American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry,
47, 83–92.

Storch, E. A., Khanna, M., Merlo, L. J., Loew, B. A., Franklin,
M., et al. (2009). Children’s Florida Obsessive Compulsive
Inventory: Psychometric properties and feasibility
of a self-report measure of obsessive–compulsive symptoms
in youth. Child Psychiatry and Human Development,
40(3), 467–483.

Swedo, S. E., Leckman, J. F., & Rose, N. R. (2012). From
research subgroup to clinical syndrome: Modifying
the PANDAS criteria to describe PANS (pediatric acuteonset
neuropsychiatric syndrome). Pediatric Therapeutics,
2, 2.

Swedo, S. E., Leonard, H. L., Garvey, M., Mittleman, B.,
Allen, A. J., Perlmutter, S., et al. (1998). Pediatric autoimmune
neuropsychiatric disorders associated with streptococcal
infections: Clinical description of the first 50 cases.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 155, 264–271.

Swedo, S. E., Rapoport, J. L., Leonard, H. L., Lenane, M.,
& Cheslow, D. (1989). Obsessive compulsive disorder in
children and adolescents: Clinical phenomenology of 70
consecutive cases. Archives of General Psychiatry, 46,
335–341.

Thoren, P., Asberg, M., Chronholm, B., Jornestedt, L.,
& Traskman, L. (1980). Clomipramine treatment of
obsessive–compulsive disorder: I. A controlled clinical
trial. Archives of General Psychiatry, 37, 1281–1285.

Tolin, D. F., Maltby, N., Diefenbach, G. J., Hannan, S. E., &
Worhunsky, P. (2004). Cognitive-behavioral therapy for
medication nonresponders with obsessive–compulsive
disorder: A wait-list-controlled open trial. Journal of
Clinical Psychiatry, 65, 922–931.

Tukel, R., Polat, A., Ozdemir, O., Aksut, D., & Turksov, N.
(2002). Comorbid conditions in obsessive–compulsive
disorder. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 43, 204–209.

Twohig, M. P., Hayes, S. C., & Masuda, A. (2006). Increasing
willingness to experience obsessions: Acceptance and
commitment therapy as a treatment for obsessive compulsive
disorder. Behavior Therapy, 37, 3–13.

Twohig, M., Hayes, S. C., Plumb, J., Pruitt, L. D., Collins, A.
B., Hazlett-Stevens, H., et al. (2010). A randomized controlled
trial of acceptance and commitment therapy versus
progressive relaxation training for obsessive compulsive
disorder. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,
78, 705–716.

Valderhaug, R., Larsson, B., Gotestam, K. G., & Piacentini,

J. (2007). An open clinical trial of cognitive-behaviour
therapy in children and adolescents with obsessive–
compulsive disorder administered in regular outpatient
clinics. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 45, 577–589.
Valleni-Basille, L. A., Garrison, C. Z., Jackson, K. L., Waller,

J. L., McKeown, R. E., Addy, C. L., et al. (1994). Frequency
of obsessive–compulsive disorder in a community sample
of young adolescents. Journal of the American Academy
of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 33, 782–791.
van Balkom, A. J., de Haan, E., van Oppen, P., Spinhoven,
P., Hoogduin, K. A., Vermeulen, A. W. A., et al. (1998).
Cognitive and behavioral therapies alone and in combination
with fluvoxamine in the treatment of obsessive compulsive
disorder. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease,
186, 492–499.

van Minnen, A., & Hagenaars, M. (2002). Fear activation
and habituation patterns as early process predictors of response
to prolonged exposure treatment in PTSD. Journal
of Traumatic Stress, 15, 359–367.

Verdellen, C. W., Keijsers, G. P., Cath, D. C., & Hoogduin,

C. A. (2004). Exposure with response prevention versus
habit reversal in Tourette syndrome: A controlled study.
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 42, 501–511.
Vogel, P. A., Stiles, T. C., & Götestam, K. G. (20040. Adding
cognitive therapy elements to exposure therapy for
obsessive–compulsive disorder: A controlled study. Behavioural
and Cognitive Psychotherapy, 32, 275–290.

Warren, R., & Thomas, J. C. (2001). Cognitive-behavior therapy
of obsessive–compulsive disorder in private practice:
An effectiveness study. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 15,
277–285.

Warwick, H. M., Clark, D. M., Cobb, A. M., & Salkovskis,

P. M. (1996). A controlled trial of cognitive-behavioural
treatment of hypochondriasis. British Journal of Psychiatry,
169(2), 189–195.

Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder

Watts, F. N. (1973). Desensitization as an habituation phenomenon:
II. Studies of interstimulus interval length. Psychological
Reports, 33, 715–718.

Weissman, M. M., Bland, R. C., Canino, G. J., Greenwald, S.,
Hwu, H. G., Lee, C. K., et al. (1994). The cross national
epidemiology of obsessive compulsive disorder: The Cross
National Collaborative Group. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry,
55(Suppl.), 5–10.

Whittal, M. L., Thordarson, D. S., & McLean, P. D. (2005).
Treatment of obsessive–compulsive disorder: Cognitive
behavior therapy vs. exposure and response prevention.
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 43, 1559–1576.

Whittal, M. L., Woody, S. R., McLean, P. D., Rachman, S.,
& Robichaud, M. (2010). Treatment of obsessions: A randomized
controlled trial. Behaviour Research and Therapy,
48, 295–303.


CHaPter 5

An Acceptance‑Based
Behavioral Therapy
for generalized Anxiety Disorder

lizaBeth roeMer
susaN M. orsillo

generalized anxiety disorder (gAD) has been called the “basic” anxiety disorder, in the
sense that generalized anxiety is, by definition, a component of other anxiety and related
disorders. indeed, gAD, although characterized by marked fluctuations, is chronic.
some have even considered that generalized anxiety might be better conceptualized as a
personality disorder, since many individuals with this problem cannot report a definitive
age of onset; rather, they note that it has been with them all their lives. Psychological and
drug treatments, although often evaluated, have not produced the robust results evident
with some other anxiety disorders. for this reason, further study of new treatment protocols
is all the more pressing. The protocol presented in this chapter, recently developed
by Drs. roemer and orsillo at our Center, illustrates a cutting‑edge, acceptance‑based approach
to gAD that has achieved a high rate of success in initial trials. This protocol also
illustrates, more so than any other chapter in this edition, principles associated with the
so‑called “third‑wave” cognitive‑behavioral approach to psychological disorders. Clinicians
and students interested in how this approach is actually implemented will find the
case study of “Hector” particularly fascinating.—D. H. B.

generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) is a chronic
anxiety disorder, centrally defined in DSM-IV and
DSM-5, where criteria are unchanged, by excessive
anxiety and worry more days than not over a period of
at least 6 months (American Psychiatric Association,
1994, 2013). Clients who meet criteria for GAD also
report difficulty controlling the worry they experience,
as well as three or more associated symptoms (muscle
tension, irritability, restlessness or feeling keyed up,
difficulty concentrating or mind going blank, being
easily tired, and difficulty sleeping). Epidemiological

studies reveal a lifetime prevalence of 5.7% for GAD
using DSM-IV criteria (Kessler et al., 2005).

GAD is associated with high levels of comorbidity
with other psychological disorders. Over 90% of
individuals who meet criteria for GAD during their
lifetimes also meet criteria for at least one additional
disorder (Bruce, Machan, Dyck, & Keller, 2001), and
prospective studies indicate that GAD is a specific risk
factor for the development of other mental health disorders,
particularly major depression (Bruce et al., 2001).
GAD is also associated with significantly reduced

206


Generalized Anxiety Disorder

quality of life (Hoffman, Dukes, & Wittchen, 2008).
Furthermore, individuals with GAD have more annual
medical visits than other patients (Belanger, Ladouceur,
& Morin, 2005) and are more likely to seek medical,
rather than mental health, care for their symptoms
(Wang et al., 2005). In fact, GAD is the most common
anxiety disorder found among primary care patients
(Ballenger et al., 2001), and the mean annual medical
cost of GAD is $2,138 higher than for other anxiety disorders
(mean = $6,475; Revicki et al., 2012). Given that
GAD is associated with a host of physical complaints
and conditions, including painful physical symptoms
(Romera et al., 2010), gastrointestinal symptoms (Mussell
et al., 2008), and cardiological complaints (Logue,
Thomas, Barbee, & Hoehn-Saric, 1993), it is not surprising
that patients with GAD have a tendency to overutilize
medical (Ballenger et al., 2001), and underutilize
psychiatric (Kennedy & Schwab, 1997) services.

Although earlier diagnostic criteria for GAD incorporated
symptoms of autonomic arousal (e.g., accelerated
heart rate), several lines of research converged to
support removal of these criteria for DSM-IV. A largescale
study of reported associated symptoms indicated
that autonomic symptoms were more rarely endorsed
than symptoms of muscle tension, vigilance, and scanning,
such as those described earlier (Marten et al.,
1993). Furthermore, physiological studies revealed that
GAD was more accurately characterized by reduced
heart rate variability than by increased autonomic
arousal (e.g., Thayer, Friedman, & Borkovec, 1996). Finally,
experimental studies of worry revealed that worrying
prior to exposure to a feared stimulus leads to less
autonomic arousal than relaxation prior to exposure to
a feared stimulus (e.g., Borkovec & Hu, 1990). Taken
together, these studies suggest that autonomic arousal
is not a necessary feature of GAD.

Instead, the central defining feature of GAD is excessive
worry, or repeatedly thinking about worst case
scenarios involving potential future events. Studies reveal
that worry content does not differ between individuals
who meet criteria for GAD and those who do
not, except that those with GAD report worrying about
miscellaneous topics, particularly minor matters, more
than those who do not meet criteria (e.g., Roemer, Molina,
& Borkovec, 1997). As noted earlier, individuals
with GAD report difficulty stopping their worry once
it starts, and clients often note that worrying about one
topic can lead to worry about another. These findings
and observations suggest that worry is a cognitive habit,
with clients who meet criteria for GAD getting “stuck”

in cycles of worry about a wide range of topics that are
difficult to stop once started. All cognitive-behavioral
treatments for GAD emphasize interrupting this cycle,
although methods for doing so vary.

Descriptive studies of GAD and worry have revealed
affective, cognitive, and interpersonal correlates that
may have important treatment implications. Borkovec’s
seminal research revealed that worry serves an avoidant
function, by its perceived association with decreasing
the likelihood of already low base rate negative
events, and by the reduction in physiological arousal
noted earlier (Borkovec, Alcaine, & Behar, 2004), as
well as distraction from more emotional topics by selfreport
(Borkovec & Roemer, 1995). Mennin and others
have demonstrated that GAD is associated with both
self-reported deficits in emotion regulation (e.g., Mennin,
Holaway, Fresco, Moore, & Heimberg, 2007) and
limits in implicit regulation of emotional processing
(Etkin & Schatzberg, 2011). Studies in this area have
also revealed that GAD is associated with the fear or
distress of anxiety (and other emotions; Lee, Orsillo,
Roemer, & Allen, 2010; Mennin et al., 2007), worry
about worry (or metaworry; Wells, 2005), and habitual
avoidance of internal experiences (i.e., experiential
avoidance; Lee et al., 2010). Furthermore, in a clinical
sample, both worry and GAD were uniquely associated
with perceived uncontrollability of emotional reactions,
beyond shared variance with other known cognitive
predictors of GAD (Stapinski, Abbott, & Rapee,
2010). Extensive research also documents an association
between GAD and intolerance of uncertainty (the
tendency to respond negatively to uncertain events
and situations; Gentes & Ruscio, 2011), including an
experimental study showing that manipulated uncertainty
leads to increased worry (Ladouceur, Gosselin,
& Dugas, 2000). GAD is also associated with interpersonal
problems (Przeworski et al., 2011), including
increased marital distress (Whisman, 2007).

overview of eviDeNce
for Psychosocial treatMeNts of GaD

Meta-analyses reveal that cognitive-behavioral therapies
(CBTs) are efficacious for GAD, with large effect
sizes that are maintained over follow-up periods (Borkovec
& Ruscio, 2001; Covin, Ouimet, Seeds, & Dozois,
2008), and evidence of comparative efficacy over nondirective
therapy (Borkovec & Costello, 1993). Within
CBTs, a meta-analysis revealed comparable effects


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

of cognitive therapy and relaxation therapy in treating
GAD (Siev & Chambless, 2007). However, GAD
remains one of the least successfully treated of the
anxiety disorders (Waters & Craske, 2005), with most
studies indicating that fewer than 65% of clients meet
criteria for high end-state functioning at posttreatment
(Ladouceur et al., 2000; Newman et al., 2011).

As briefly reviewed earlier, recent research has refined
and expanded our understanding of GAD in an
effort to identify causal and maintaining factors to
target in therapy and improve its efficacy (see Behar,
DiMarco, Hekler, Mohlman, & Staples, 2009, for an
extensive review). Recent randomized controlled trials
(RCTs) informed by these models indicate that targeting
the interpersonal and emotion-focused aspects
of GAD (Newman et al., 2011), and intolerance of
uncertainty (Dugas et al., 2010), yield effects comparable
to existing CBTs for GAD. A small pilot study
found that targeting metacognition (e.g., metaworry)
in GAD (Wells et al., 2010) produced better outcomes
than applied relaxation; however, the very low rates of
response to applied relaxation, coupled with the small
sample size, indicate a need for further research to confirm
this finding. A trial examining the efficacy of emotion
regulation therapy for GAD is currently under way
(Mennin & Fresco, in press).

We developed the acceptance-based behavioral therapy
described in this chapter (which explicitly targets
reactivity to [distress about] internal experiences, and
experiential and behavioral avoidance, as described
below) in an effort to better target GAD and comorbid
disorders. We use the term “acceptance-based behavior
therapy” (ABBT; Roemer & Orsillo, 2009) to
refer to the broad class of therapies based in cognitivebehavioral
theory but that explicitly incorporate methods
to promote acceptance of internal experiences (e.g.,
acceptance and commitment therapy [ACT; Hayes,
Strosahl, & Wilson, 2012]; dialectical behavior therapy
[DBT; Linehan, 1993]; mindfulness-based cognitive
therapy [MBCT; Segal, Williams, & Teasdale, 2002]).
This ABBT for GAD, which draws from these treatments,
as well as Borkovec’s CBT for GAD (Borkovec
& Sharpless, 2004), has been examined through an
open trial and two RCTs. The open trial revealed significant,
large effects on clinician-rated GAD severity,
self-reported worry, anxiety, and depressive symptoms
(Roemer & Orsillo, 2007). A wait-list RCT similarly
revealed significant, large effects on clinician and selfreported
GAD symptoms, as well as depressive symptoms
(Roemer, Orsillo, & Salters-Pedneault, 2008).

Marginally significant, medium effects emerged on
clinician-rated additional diagnoses and self-reported
quality of life. Significant large effects also emerged on
self-reported experiential avoidance and mindfulness,
two proposed mechanisms of change in the treatment.
All effects were maintained at 9-month follow-up. Of
those treated, 77% met criteria for high end-state functioning
(falling within normative range on the majority
of anxiety measures) at posttreatment; this proportion
increased slightly (nonsignificantly) over time. In this
trial, ABBT produced a significant increase in engagement
in valued, or personally meaningful, activities
(Michelson, Lee, Orsillo, & Roemer, 2011). Moreover,
ABBT significantly impacted outcome variables proposed
in other models to be central to GAD (emotion
regulation deficits, intolerance of uncertainty, and perceived
control over anxiety-related events; Treanor,
Erisman, Salters-Pedneault, Roemer, & Orsillo, 2011).
A recently completed RCT comparing ABBT with applied
relaxation, an empirically treatment for GAD,
revealed comparable effects on clinician-rated and
self-reported GAD symptoms, clinician-rated comorbid
diagnoses, and self-reported depressive symptoms
and quality of life (Hayes-Skelton, Roemer, & Orsillo,
2013). A large proportion of clients in both conditions
met criteria for high end-state functioning (some of the
highest rates reported in the literature in each condition)
and gains were maintained at 6-month follow up.
Finally, there is evidence that ABBT works through
its proposed mechanisms. Session-by-session changes
in acceptance of internal experiences and engagement
in meaningful activities predicted outcome above and
beyond change in worry (Hayes, Orsillo, & Roemer,
2010).

A recent study that examined the relative efficacy of
ACT compared to CBT for a mixed-anxiety sample revealed
comparable effects across the full sample (Arch
et al., 2012). Although the small size of the GAD subsample
precluded within-subgroup analyses, examination
of means suggests that ACT was effective in reducing
clinician-rated and self-reported GAD symptoms in
this study.

Taken together, these findings suggest that psychosocial
treatments for GAD are efficacious, and adaptations
of CBT that specifically target empirically determined
features of GAD are promising. As with all
treatments based in behavioral theory, a well-developed
case conceptualization is a necessary starting point to
use evidence-based treatments effectively with a specific
client.


Generalized Anxiety Disorder

aN accePtaNce‑BaseD Behavioral
MoDel of GaD

An acceptance-based behavioral model of GAD is
grounded in behavioral learning theory. Consistent
with other theories, we propose that individuals with
GAD develop the habit of worry, repeatedly anticipating
potential dangers and threats. These habits are
strengthened through repetition and reinforcing consequences.
This worry process is negatively reinforced
by both the nonoccurrence of feared outcomes and the
reduced physiological activation that is a positive consequence
of engaging in worry (Borkovec et al., 2004).

Moreover, individuals with GAD come to associate
universal, functional human states such as fear, anxiety,
other emotional responses, and even worry with
negative personal characteristics. As a result, individuals
with GAD respond to anxiety-related thoughts and
emotional states with self-criticism and judgment. In
an attempt to avoid or escape the uncomfortable, unwanted
experience of worry, and the associated negative
self-evaluation, individuals with GAD engage in a
variety of potentially problematic behaviors. Although
these behaviors interfere with quality of life, they provide
short-term relief from arousal and negative affect.

Drawing from decades of research on GAD, other
anxiety disorders, and broader models of psychopathology
(e.g., Hayes et al., 2012), we hypothesize that the
following three learned behaviors contribute to the development
and maintenance of GAD.

Reacting to Internal Experiences
with Distress, Criticism, and Judgment
(Leading to Entanglement/Fusion)

One of the most formative, consistent findings to
emerge in the field of anxiety disorders has been that
the experience of anxiety or fear in and of itself (e.g.,
sensations of panic, worrisome thoughts, catastrophic
images, recurrent painful memories) is not evidence of
a disorder. Instead, reactions to these symptoms, or “reaction
to our reactions” (Borkovec & Sharpless, 2004)
exacerbate their intensity and duration, cause distress,
and interfere with quality of life, leading to the anxiety
disorder diagnosis. The centrality of “reactions to reactions”
to the concept of psychological disorders was
recently documented in a treatment trial. Changes in
reactivity to emotions predicted unique variance in all
outcome variables over and above changes in frequency
of emotional responses in a study of the unified proto


col for emotional disorders (Sauer-Zavala et al., 2012;
see Payne, Ellard, Farchione, Fairholme, & Barlow,
Chapter 6, this volume).

A growing body of research documents that individuals
with GAD report increased anxiety sensitivity
(i.e., fear of anxiety-related bodily sensations; Olatunji
& Wolitzky-Taylor, 2009), negative reactivity to their
emotional responses (e.g., Lee et al., 2010; Mennin et
al., 2007), and worry about their own worry (Wells,
2005). Furthermore, anxiety leads to a narrowed focus
of attention (both external and internal) toward potential
threat (Cisler & Koster, 2010), which likely both
exacerbates these reactions and is strengthened by reactivity,
further perpetuating cycles of anxious responding.
These reactions can lead individuals to become
entangled with (Germer, 2005) or “hooked” on (Chodron,
2007) their experiences of anxiety and worry, so
that the anxiety comes to seem self-defining and allencompassing.
Instead of viewing anxiety as a response
that is elicited in a particular context, individuals can
come to define themselves as “anxious,” fusing their
identity with these experiences (e.g., Hayes et al., 2012).
Thus, negative reactivity to emotions can evolve into
negative personal judgments (“I’m so weak!”; “Other
people don’t worry the way I do”), which in turn can
increase anxiety and worry.

Becoming entangled or fused with internal experiences
makes it much harder to see the ways that
thoughts, feelings, and sensations naturally rise, fall,
and change over time. It can also interfere with one’s
ability to understand and respond effectively to emotional
states, leading to diffuse experiences of distress
that do not provide clear motivational information.
When fear, anxiety, and worry are perceived as distressing,
defining, and unrelenting, they naturally elicit
attempts to escape and avoid.

Rigid Attempts to Avoid Internal Distress

Trying not to think about or feel or remember something
distressing is a natural response.

All people use strategies to turn their attention away
from internal distress at times, in order to bring attention
to the task at hand. Yet experimental studies show
that rigid, repeated efforts to put thoughts, feelings,
sensations or memories out of our minds (e.g., experiential
avoidance; Hayes, Wilson, Gifford, Follette, &
Strosahl, 1996) are often unsuccessful and can actually
increase distressing thoughts, feelings, or sensations
(e.g., Gross, 2002; Levitt, Brown, Orsillo, & Barlow,


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

2004; Najmi & Wegner, 2008). Furthermore, instructed
effort not to think of situations can increase reported
anxiety associated with the target situation (Roemer &
Borkovec, 1994), suggesting that experiential avoidance
increases distress about thoughts and emotions.
Taken together, these studies suggest that rigid efforts
to avoid distressing thoughts, feelings, sensations, and
memories can increase the frequency of these experiences,
as well as the distress associated with them,
further strengthening the cycle of reactivity and avoidance.
Efforts at experiential avoidance are likely to
reduce distress in the short term at least sometimes,
leading to immediate negative reinforcement, further
strengthening this habitual response.

Reports of experiential avoidance are associated with
GAD diagnoses, even beyond shared variance with depressive
symptoms (Lee et al., 2010). Furthermore, as
described earlier, experimental studies demonstrate
that worry itself serves an experientially avoidant function
by reducing physiological arousal in response to
feared stimuli and distracting individuals from more
distressing topics (Borkovec et al., 2004).

Behavioral Avoidance/Constriction

Reactions to internal experiences and rigid experiential
avoidance not only feed on each other in a continually
escalating cycle, but also naturally lead to avoidance
of contexts that elicit anxiety or other experiences of
distress. Behavioral avoidance is a core feature of other
anxiety disorders, but it has generally been overlooked
in GAD. However, individuals with GAD often avoid
certain situations, spend extensive time preparing for
situations, procrastinate or put off decision making, or
seek reassurance, all in an effort to avoid distress, anxiety,
and/or uncertainty (Andrews et al., 2010). Clients
with GAD report engaging in valued actions (i.e., doing
what they find personally meaningful) less than do control
participants (Michelson et al., 2011).

Clinically, clients with GAD show a range of avoidance
behaviors. Sometimes avoidance is overt, such
as when a client does not pursue dating or a promotion
at work due to anxiety, fears of being rejected, or
worry. Other times, clients who seem to be engaging in
a wide range of behaviors that are important (e.g., taking
on challenges at work, being involved in activities
with their children) may report that they are constantly
worrying about what is ahead rather than attending to
what they are doing in the moment. Borkovec notes this

focus on the future instead of the present as a core characteristic
of GAD (e.g., Borkovec & Sharpless, 2004),
and research indicates that GAD and worry are associated
with reports of reduced mindfulness (awareness
in the present moment; Roemer et al., 2009). This continual
focus on what might go wrong in the future can
lead clients to feel like spectators in their own lives:
behaviorally, but not emotionally, engaged in actions
that matter to them.

This conceptual model highlights three targets for
intervention when treating clients with GAD and other
comorbid disorders: (1) problematic ways of relating to
internal experiences, (2) rigid strategies aimed at experiential
avoidance, and (3) constriction or avoidance of
meaningful actions. Based on this model, the goals of
an ABBT for GAD are (1) to cultivate an expanded (as
opposed to narrowed) awareness and a compassionate
(as opposed to critical and judgmental), decentered (as
opposed to entangled and fused) stance toward internal
experiences; (2) to increase acceptance of/willingness
to have internal experiences; and (3) to engage mindfully
in personally meaningful behaviors.

aPPlyiNG aBBt

Context for Therapy

Our first case study of ABBT took place in group format
(Orsillo, Roemer, & Barlow, 2003). Although clients
benefited from the group context in some ways, they
reported that they wanted more individualized focus
to help them clarify their values (i.e., what matters to
them) and apply the treatment to their specific contexts.
As a result, all of our subsequent trials have used individual
therapy. However, we think that the modality of
treatment can be adjusted to better fit specific settings.
In fact, a recent study found that a group version of our
protocol led to significant reductions in self-reported
anxiety, worry, and GAD symptoms in a community
setting (Heatherington et al., 2013). Furthermore, several
elements of ABBT (e.g., psychoeducation, mindfulness
practice, commitment to valued action) have
been effectively conducted in group settings in other,
related treatment approaches (e.g., Evans et al., 2008;
Kocovski, Fleming, & Rector, 2009).

Given the prevalence of GAD in primary care contexts,
we are interested in adapting treatment so it can
be used as part of integrative primary care. We wrote


Generalized Anxiety Disorder

a self-help book that may be beneficial in this context
(Orsillo & Roemer, 2011), but no studies to date have
examined its effectiveness. Briefer workshops (e.g.,
Blevins, Roca, & Spencer, 2011; Brown et al., 2011) may
also be a useful modality for delivery of the conceptual
model and suggestions for mindfulness and valued action
practices in contexts where individual therapy is
less feasible due to economic or time constraints.

Therapist Characteristics

A central aspect of ABBT involves modeling acceptance
of intense emotional experiences. Therefore,
successful ABBT therapists are able to tolerate intense
emotions and convey acceptance to their clients. Similarly,
ABBT therapists continually validate and express
compassion toward clients in distress, providing for clients
an example of how they might respond differently
to their own experiences and reduce the cycle of reactivity
and avoidance that contributes to maintenance of
their symptoms. These characteristics, combined with
a clear understanding of the model and how to apply
it to specific cases, help therapists to develop a strong,
positive working alliance, which significantly predicted
outcome in our most recent trial (Sorenson, Hayes-
Skelton, Roemer, & Orsillo, 2012).

As we describe more fully below, ABBT is meant
to be applied flexibly, with therapists adapting their
approach, strategies used, and between-session assignments
to meet the presentation and context of clients.
As such, flexibility may be an important therapist characteristic.
In a small qualitative study, as part of our
most recent RCT, we interviewed clients who identified
with marginalized backgrounds in terms of race,
ethnicity, sexual orientation, socioeconomic status, or
religion. Clients identified the flexibility of their therapist
as an important factor in how helpful they found
treatment and how well it fit with their particular context
(Fuchs et al., 2012).

Client Characteristics

In the studies we have conducted on ABBT for GAD,
we have had very few exclusion criteria in order to
maximize the generalizability of our findings. Clients
frequently present with comorbid diagnoses, most
commonly major depressive disorder, social anxiety
disorder, and other anxiety disorders. Because ABBT
targets mechanisms that are likely to underlie these

other disorders as well, treatment may positively impact
these comorbid conditions (e.g., Roemer et al.,
2008). However, outside the constraints of protocol
therapy, we would recommend integrating elements of
evidence-based methods (e.g., behavioral activation,
exposure) when indicated. The disorders we have ruled
out in our RCTs, primarily because they warrant specific
treatments, include substance dependence, bipolar
disorder, schizophrenia, and autism spectrum disorders.
Thus, we cannot determine the impact of ABBT
on these comorbid presentations.

To date, we have only preliminarily explored potential
predictors of response to ABBT. To date, our data
suggest that gender, age, GAD severity, frequency and
intensity of worry, depressive symptoms, and comorbid
diagnoses do not significantly predict outcome (Orsillo,
Roemer, & Salters-Pedneault, 2008).

As with most evidence-based treatments, considerably
more research is needed to determine the ways an
ABBT for GAD might be beneficial for people from
marginalized or nondominant cultural backgrounds. A
meta-analysis indicated promising results for ABBTs
more broadly (Fuchs, Lee, Roemer, & Orsillo, 2013).
Our small qualitative study revealed that clients from
marginalized backgrounds generally found ABBT
helpful (Fuchs et al., 2012). Clients particularly noted
that therapist flexibility and the focus on valued living
helped them engage in treatment and find it relevant.
However, some clients reported that therapist inflexibility
or not connecting to specific mindfulness exercises
was a barrier.

A commonly expressed concern is that mindfulness
may not be accepted by clients who identify strongly
with a non-Buddhist religion. However, mindfulness
exercises can be adapted to match specific religious
practices (Sobczak & West, 2013) because mindfulness
is part of many religious traditions, for instance,
Western Christian contemplative practice (Dimidjian
& Linehan, 2009). More work is needed to explore
how best to adapt ABBT for clients from different
backgrounds, and also how to use ABBT strategies to
address contextual sources of stress such as discrimination
and lack of resources (Lee, Fuchs, Roemer, &
Orsillo, 2009; Sobczak & West, 2013).

Concurrent Pharmacological Treatment

Although medication is the most common mode of
treatment for GAD (Issakidis, Sanderson, Corry, An



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

drews, & Lapsley, 2004) and is often considered a
first-line treatment option (Katzman, 2009), evidence
for the sustained clinical impact of pharmacotherapy
is limited (Davidson, Bose, Korotzer, & Zheng, 2004;
Gelenberg et al., 2000; Rickels et al., 2003). The magnitude
of change in GAD symptoms associated with
pharmacological treatment ranges from moderate to
poor (Hidalgo, Tupler, & Davidson, 2007). Moreover,
pharmacological interventions may produce adverse
side effects (Katzman, 2009) and are less cost-effective
than psychotherapeutic approaches such as CBT (Heuzenroeder
et al., 2004).

Clients who were stable on medications were enrolled
in our clinical trials. Within ABBT, medications are conceptualized
as one of several ways to reduce the intensity
of internal reactions, so that it is easier to accept them,
have compassion for oneself, and engage in meaningful
actions. In this way, a nonexperientially avoidant function
for medication can be highlighted (medication helps
one to engage more fully in life and accept whatever
comes), so that it is consistent with the rest of treatment.

Overview of Treatment Elements

In our clinical trials, we have followed a 16-session,
weekly individual protocol for ABBT, with the last
two sessions tapered (every other week) and focused
on relapse prevention. The first seven sessions focus on
psychoeducation and skills building, while the remaining
sessions focus on application of skills while the client
engages in personally meaningful, valued actions.
Here we provide a brief overview of each element of
treatment, followed by a composite case example to illustrate
the way each element is addressed across the
course of therapy. Those interested in more details on
our approach should consult our book for therapists
(Roemer & Orsillo, 2009) and our self-help book (Orsillo
& Roemer, 2011).

Clinical Assessment to Develop an
Acceptance-Based Behavioral Conceptualization

To develop a case conceptualization that guides flexible
application of treatment elements, we assess symptoms,
context, and the three components of the model.

syMPToMs

Assessing the client’s anxiety and related symptoms
provides useful information about targets for change,

while also supporting the therapeutic goal of changing
a client’s relationship with anxiety. Assessment of
anxiety-related thoughts, feelings, physical sensations,
and behaviors, the contexts in which anxiety typically
occurs, and the frequency and severity of symptoms
helps clients begin to observe more accurately specific
elements of their anxiety responses. Ongoing
self-monitoring of daily anxiety symptoms, as well as
guided imaginal recall, can provide a more accurate
assessment of specific symptoms than general report
given that clients who engage in habitual avoidance or
suppression of their anxiety often do not have an accurate
perception of its frequency, duration, or variability
over time. Brief but specific self-report measures (e.g.,
the Depression Anxiety Stress Scales; Lovibond & Lovibond,
1995, or the trait and weekly Penn State Worry
Questionnaires (Meyer, Miller, Metzger, & Borkovec,
1990; Stöber & Bittencourt, 1998), can also be used,
both to obtain baseline measures of symptoms and to
track weekly fluctuations in symptoms.

Semistructured clinical interviews such as the Anxiety
Disorders Interview Schedule (Di Nardo et al.,
1994) can be used to determine both principal and comorbid
disorders to guide the selection and emphasis of
specific treatment strategies. Depression is an important
target of assessment, as are other clinical presentations,
such as eating disorders and substance-use disorders,
which may indicate specific avoidance strategies
that need to be targeted in treatment.

reACTions To inTernAl exPerienCes

Assessing how clients respond to their anxiety symptoms,
as well as to internal experiences (e.g., thoughts,
emotions, sensations, memories) more generally, contributes
to case conceptualization. Therapists may ask
questions such as “When you notice you are worrying,
what thoughts, feelings and sensations do you experience
next?”; “Do you find yourself having critical
thoughts about your experiences of anxiety?”; and
“What kinds of thoughts do you have?” or use selfreport
measures that capture these constructs. Selfcriticism,
judgment, and reactivity that arise for clients
in response to their own thoughts and feelings
are important targets for intervention. Measures such
as the Affective Control Scale (Williams, Chambless,
& Ahrens, 1997), a measure of distress in response to
anxiety, depression, anger, and positive emotions, and
the Self-Compassion Scale (Neff, 2003) can help to
identify reactivity to emotions and self-criticism.


Generalized Anxiety Disorder

exPerienTiAl AVoiDAnCe

Therapists also assess the strategies that clients use in
an attempt to suppress, avoid, or change internal experiences
(Hayes et al., 1996). Experiential avoidance
strategies may be internal, such as thought or emotion
suppression (Gross & Levenson, 1997; Najmi & Wegner,
2008), or external, such as using substances, engaging
in self-harm, or restricting eating. Therapist can
ask clients what they do to try to manage their distress
or anxiety, then listen for avoidant strategies. Efforts
in which clients engage automatically or rigidly are
most likely to lead to paradoxical increases in distress
and symptoms. Therapists need to distinguish between
efforts to modulate or regulate emotional distress and
rigid efforts to avoid it; often the difference is evident
in what happens after the strategy is engaged. The former
are likely to be beneficial and may be strengths
on which to build in therapy, if used flexibly, whereas
the latter are more likely to lead to increased distress
and interference. For instance, one client with whom
we worked reported going for walks to try to clear her
head of worry. When her therapist asked what she did
when she returned, she reported that she was more able
to focus on being with her children and enjoy their time
together. On the other hand, another client who described
regularly watching TV in order to distract herself
from her worries said that as soon as she turned off
the TV, her worried thoughts flooded back, so that she
found herself watching TV for hours at a time rather
than doing activities she had planned during the day.
Whereas the first client’s walks might be incorporated
into treatment as a way to care for herself and help her
engage more effectively with her children, the second
client’s therapist might help her develop alternative
ways of responding to her anxiety. The Acceptance and
Action Questionnaire (Bond et al., 2011) can help to
identify experientially avoidant strategies; the Difficulties
in Emotion Regulation Scale (Gratz & Roemer,
2004) assesses emotion regulation more broadly.

BeHAViorAl ConsTriCTion

Therapists should also assess how clients are functioning
in their daily lives and the ways that anxiety and
worry are interfering. Drawing from ACT (Wilson &
Murrell, 2004), we focus particularly on the degree to
which clients are doing what is important to them (i.e.,
what they value). We assess this with the Valued Living
Questionnaire (Wilson, Sandoz, Kitchens, & Rob


erts, 2010), while also inviting clients to write about the
ways anxiety interferes with their relationships, work–
school–household management, self-nourishment, and
community involvement. This provides not only important
information about current functioning but also a
target and motivation for treatment to help clients live
fuller, more meaningful lives. This assessment often
provides an important first step toward shifting the goal
of therapy from anxiety reduction to enhancement of
life.

ConTexT AnD HisTory

As with all treatment approaches, assessing the context
surrounding a client is important. Therapists need
to learn how the client (as well as family and friends)
understands his/her anxiety, in addition to the client’s
history of anxiety symptoms and other presenting problems.
Therapists should also explore the client’s cultural
identity, with attention to culturally specific sources
of coping and strength, as well as contextual stressors
that the client may face. This helps to establish rapport
and validate the client’s experience, and to build the
strength of the therapeutic alliance. This information
also helps the therapist to ensure that therapy proceeds
in a culturally sensitive and responsive way (D. W. Sue
& Sue, 2012; S. Sue, 1998).

This comprehensive assessment sets the stage for
treatment elements aimed at (1) cultivating an expanded
(as opposed to narrowed) awareness and a compassionate
(as opposed to critical and judgmental), decentered
(as opposed to entangled and fused) stance toward internal
experiences; (2) increasing acceptance/willingness
to have internal experiences; and (3) mindfully
engaging in personally meaningful behaviors.

Therapeutic Relationship

The therapeutic relationship provides an important
context for therapeutic change. In ABBT, the therapist
provides acceptance and compassion that allows clients
to begin to react differently toward their own internal
experiences. Therapists explicitly validate the humanness
and naturalness of all responses clients share, emphasizing
the way one’s biological makeup and learning
history can easily lead to anxious responses and
other emotional reactions, and the way that even apparently
“irrational” thoughts can be learned from social
and family influences. For instance, when a client noted
in session that he knew he should not be anxious about


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

a job interview, his therapist responded that anxiety before
an interview is a very natural response given that
he really wants the position, and that we are hardwired
to fear social rejection. This response modeled a different
reaction to his anxiety and was the first step toward
cultivating a new, less self-critical response.

It can be challenging to empathize with and validate
some clients, particularly when they are hostile or
unresponsive. Understanding the learning history and
context that produces and maintains these difficult, but
also in some ways functional, behaviors helps therapists
cultivate compassion. When a therapist expresses
genuine compassion toward a client, often the client’s
reactions change, at least slightly, providing more opportunities
for connection, validation, empathy, and
further change.

Another challenge to the therapeutic alliance can
stem from differences between client and therapist in
aspects of identity (e.g., age, gender, race, religion, ethnicity,
sexual orientation, immigration status, or social
class; Hays, 2008; D. W. Sue & Sue, 2012). Initiating
a discussion of potential differences early in therapy
provides an opportunity for open communication about
potential sources of misunderstanding and may make a
client feel more comfortable bringing up any issues that
emerge throughout the course of therapy. Therapists
take responsibility for learning about a client’s cultural
context on their own, while remaining sensitive to each
client’s individual experiences and life contexts, so that
he/she can consider how cultural and systemic factors
may play a role in the client’s responses and can be used
to promote growth and positive adaptation. Communicating
awareness of, and sensitivity to, the therapist’s
own areas of relative privilege can also contribute to a
stronger therapeutic alliance.

Psychoeducation

Similar to other CBTs, psychoeducation is an important
component of this ABBT. Therapists present concepts,
using handouts, particularly during the first half
of therapy (then revisit these concepts as needed in
the second, application phase of treatment). For each
concept, therapists draw examples from the client’s life
(using monitoring forms, assessment material, or asking
the client specifically for examples) to ensure that
the material is relevant.

Psychoeducation begins with a discussion about the
nature of fear, anxiety, and worry (including a discus


sion of the function of worry), followed by exploration
of the function of emotions more broadly, emphasizing
the habitual nature of our emotional responding
and how repetition strengthens these habits, while interruption
can weaken them. Therapists teach clients
about the natural inclination to avoid painful or threatening
cues, as well as the challenges and costs associated
with trying to rigidly control internal experiences
and avoid anxiety-eliciting situations. Therapists draw
a distinction between clear emotions (that provide information
about a response to a current context) and
muddy emotions (that may be diffuse, confusing, left
over, or longer lasting). Therapists also describe mindfulness
skills, specifically noting the ways these skills
can be used to clarify emotional responses and enhance
participation in valued life activities.

Psychoeducation provides a rationale for the rest of
treatment, encouraging engagement in behaviors that
take significant time (e.g., mindfulness practice) or effort
(e.g., engaging in valued actions). Psychoeducation
can also help to promote a new relationship to internal
experiences on its own. Realizing how one’s emotions
become muddy and overwhelming as a result of a series
of understandable processes (e.g., not getting enough
sleep, still feeling upset about an earlier fight with a
partner) can reduce self-criticism and judgment, which
in turn can reduce muddiness and reactivity. For some
clients, psychoeducation alone leads to engagement in
new behaviors and to new learning that promotes accepting
responses to internal experiences and increased
engagement in life. However, experiential learning is
often needed to supplement this clinical strategy.

Many challenges can arise when presenting psychoeducational
material. First, it can be difficult to attend
to specific client concerns while also presenting extensive
new information. Using client examples as you
teach and frequently asking clients to share their reactions
can help to balance these competing demands.
Also, sometimes clients disagree with material being
presented. For instance, clients may insist that avoidance
is an effective strategy. Arguing with clients is
rarely productive, and it can weaken the therapeutic
relationship. Furthermore, case conceptualizations are
only a hypothesis based on the literature and clinical
observation, so it is important not to cling rigidly to
them. We find it useful, in this situation, to ask whether
clients are willing simply to observe the concept over
the next few weeks to see whether they can learn anything
new about their experience. This promotes a col



Generalized Anxiety Disorder

laborative approach to treatment and helps to engage
clients, while also encouraging valuable feedback on
our conceptualization.

Mindfulness Skills Development

“Mindfulness” (Kabat-Zinn, 2003), or attending to the
present moment with openness, curiosity, and compassion,
is a central skill clients can use to change the
nature of their relationship with their internal experiences
(e.g., beginning to see thoughts as thoughts, or
“decentering”), increase their willingness to have any
reactions that arise, and promote engagement in fulfilling,
meaningful lives. We use a wide range of methods
to help clients bring their awareness to the present
moment, and we greet their experiences with curiosity,
kindness, and compassion.

self‑MoniToring

Self-monitoring is a common method used in all CBTs.
Similar to these approaches, therapy begins with clients
monitoring situations in which worry arises. Each
week, based on what is covered in session, new aspects
of experience are added (e.g., emotions, efforts
to avoid experience, engagement in valued actions).
The process of monitoring worry, other internal experiences,
and behaviors helps to promote awareness and
decentering; clients turn toward their internal experiences
rather than habitually turning away, and they see
each aspect of their experience rather than blending the
components together (e.g., noticing thoughts, emotions,
and behaviors separately). As clients begin to notice
the distinction between emotion and behavior, they are
more able to consider the variety of behavioral options
available to them even when strong emotions arise.

Self-monitoring can be challenging for some clients.
They may forget to complete monitoring forms, see
them as a “homework” requirement done only at the
therapist’s request, or finish them in the waiting room as
opposed to completing them in the moment. Therapists
can help clients to see the usefulness of the practice
by clearly communicating the rationale for monitoring,
underscoring that it is a skill that can be used to clarify
emotions, reduce distress, and increase engagement in
valued activities, and reviewing the monitoring each
session and connecting observations to treatment goals.
Therapists can also flexibly adapt monitoring assignments
to fit with the client’s life while emphasizing the

importance of doing some monitoring in the moment
that a reaction occurs to facilitate the development of
awareness as anxious habitual patterns unfold. For instance,
clients could monitor only one situation a day,
or use phones or audio recorders for monitoring rather
than paper and pen.

forMAl MinDfUlness PrACTiCe

Mindfulness is a skill; therefore, practicing it regularly
can be extremely helpful. Therapists help clients to determine
when that they can set aside some amount of
time in which to draw their awareness, again and again,
to some aspect of their experience, such as the breath,
physical sensations, or thoughts. Mindfulness-based
treatments such as MBCT have clients practice for 45
minutes a day; we generally use shorter mindfulness
practices and allow clients to choose the length of their
practice. We do have all clients practice an adapted progressive
muscle relaxation in which clients tense and
release a series of muscle groups, noticing the sensations
they experience.1 This gives anxious clients an
extended exposure to mindfulness, while providing a
focus for attention that may facilitate more prolonged
practice. Clients vary in how much they keep up this
particular practice versus other, shorter practices.

In our approach, therapists teach clients a progression
of practices across the course of treatment, beginning
with focus on the breath and body, moving to awareness
of taste and sounds, then on to more challenging
practices of awareness of emotions and thoughts. Clients
and therapists practice together first in session,
then discuss the client’s experience with the exercise.
Initially, clients often label the practice as “good” or
“bad,” “relaxing” or “stressful.” Therapists help clients
move toward simply observing and describing their experience
during the practice, recognizing that all practice
is useful and so-called “bad” practice can teach a
lot about how active one’s mind is and how repeatedly
to bring awareness back to the moment despite a wandering
mind.

When discussing in-session practice, therapists draw
connections between the practice and clients’ presenting
problems. For instance, one client reported that
when she practiced mindfulness of her breath, her mind
kept wandering to her frustration with her roommate,
and it was clear that she was bad at mindfulness and
was not ever going to get better. Her therapist related
these self-critical thoughts and negative predictions to


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

those that often arose when the client took on a new
task at work. The therapist suggested that if she practiced
observing critical thoughts with compassion and
curiosity during formal mindfulness, she might be able
to carry these same skills into challenging work situations.


Clients often have trouble setting aside time to
practice mindfulness regularly. Traditional problemsolving
strategies can be used to find moments (during
a subway commute, just after putting the kids to bed)
to practice. Therapists also point out that practicing
mindfulness may help the client become more efficient
and alert throughout the day, so it may be worth some
time. Clients can also use mindfulness as an avoidance
strategy, particularly if they initially find the practice
relaxing. Therapists need to attend to the function of
practice behavior to be sure that clients are not using it
to avoid unwanted internal experiences.

inforMAl MinDfUlness PrACTiCe

Although setting aside time to practice can be an excellent
way to develop any skill, the goal is always to use
the skill while engaging in life. Clients practice mindfulness
informally by engaging mindfully in daily tasks
such as washing the dishes (Nhat Hanh, 1992), eating,
showering, or folding laundry. They gradually begin to
practice in more challenging contexts, such as during
conversations, dates, meetings at work, or community
events. Therapists initially help clients to remember to
practice mindfulness during sessions; over time clients
begin to remind themselves to come back to the present
moment while engaging in therapy, strengthening this
skill so they can use it more effectively in their lives.

lAngUAge ConVenTions

Another way to help clients cultivate a decentered
awareness of their experiences is to bring attention to
their language and introduce a few strategies (drawn
from ACT) that help one disentangle from one’s
thoughts. One is to say (and think) “I’m having the
thought that . . . ” or “I’m having the feeling that . . .
” as opposed to reporting thoughts as facts. Therapists
model this and begin to reframe clients’ reports using
this convention, gradually encouraging clients to make
this change themselves. Similarly, therapists encourage
clients to consider whether replacing “but” with “and”
more accurately captures different situations. For instance,
rather than saying, “I would really like to go

on this date, but I’m too anxious,” a client might say, “I
would like to go on this date, and I’m also experiencing
anxiety.” This highlights that feelings and thoughts do
not have to lead to avoidance or escape behaviors.

Engaging in Actions

Finally, therapists help clients turn their attention and
effort away from trying to control their internal experiences
and instead focus on engaging more fully in
their lives. Clients begin exploring what is important
to them through a series of writing assignments. First,
they describe how anxiety has gotten in the way of their
lives in several domains (relationships, work–school–
household management, and self-nourishment and
community involvement). Next they write about how
they would like to be in these areas, if they did not have
any anxiety. From there, therapists help clients identify
specific areas on which they want to focus. Therapy,
then, involves making behavioral plans each week to
do something the client values, such as making a social
connection, asserting oneself at work, or joining
a community organization. For each behavioral action,
therapists emphasize the importance of choosing an action
regardless of the thoughts and feelings that arise,
and clients apply their mindfulness skills, so that they
are able to do what matters to them even while anxious.

Shifting from habitual avoidance to engagement is
a long, ongoing process. Some clients have difficulty
articulating their values because all of their attentional
and behavioral resources have been directed toward
anxiety management for so long. Once clients have
clarified what they find important, approaching these
actions can be extremely anxiety provoking and hard to
do. However, encouragement from the therapist, cultivation
of mindfulness skills, and breaking tasks down
into specific manageable pieces (e.g., asking a coworker
to lunch, or having one open conversation with a
parent) can help a client become willing to make these
first important behavioral changes even though anxiety
will inevitably be present. Over time, the experience of
engaging in valued activities can be naturally reinforcing.
Nonetheless, continued awareness and practice is
needed so as not to fall back into old, natural patterns
of avoidance due to anxiety.

Many challenges arise in pursuing valued actions.
First, as Hayes and colleagues (2012) note, clients often
think in terms of goals (e.g., finding a partner, losing 15
pounds) as opposed to values (e.g., being emotionally
intimate, being physically healthy). Focusing on want



Generalized Anxiety Disorder

ing to lose 15 pounds can lead to self-criticism in the
moment, which might interfere with that goal. On the
other hand, a person can take actions in the moment
that are consistent with wanting to be physically healthy
(e.g., going to the gym or eating a healthy lunch) that in
turn also help with a goal. Therapists work to help clients
identify the values and meaning that underlie any
stated goals, so that they can engage in actions in the
moment that will be fulfilling and meaningful.

Therapists need to take care not to impose their own
values onto clients. Cultural sensitivity is particularly
important in this aspect of treatment. For instance, one
client we treated with ABBT described a value of being
able to provide financially for his parents, leading him
to choose a profession that to him was less intrinsically
interesting but would allow him to support his family.
His therapist came from a more individualistic background
and had an initial reaction that choosing a more
intrinsically rewarding profession was important. However,
the therapist recognized that this would impose
his own values on the client rather than help the client
to make choices consistent with his own values.

Therapists also need to be sensitive to the real-world
constraints that can keep clients from engaging in actions
that matter to them. External constraints such as
limited resources, inequities, and family contexts need
to be validated and accounted for in developing treatment
assignments. Relatedly, clients may want others
in their lives to act differently. Although this is a very
reasonable desire, changing other people is not always
possible. Clients can request changes in others or take
steps to address injustices in different contexts, but
therapists cannot guarantee that these things will lead
to the changes for which the client is hoping. Instead,
the therapist can help the client make the best choices
possible in the face of these constraints, which can certainly
include asking for changes and also leaving situations
when possible, if necessary.

Relapse Prevention

Anxiety is a natural, habitual response, as is reactivity
to internal experiences and experiential avoidance.
Therapists help clients develop a plan for maintaining
the practices they have found most helpful in treatment,
and to prepare for potential “lapses” in the future.
Clients are encouraged to refer to their handouts
and monitoring sheets when difficulties arise, and to
revisit concepts and practices they found helpful in
treatment.

case stuDy

This composite case is largely based on a single client
but with details from other clients added to illustrate
certain points. Identifying information is altered to protect
confidentiality.

Background Information

Héctor was a 24-year-old Latino man who presented
for treatment after being placed on academic probation.
Although Héctor had an extremely strong academic
record as an undergraduate, he was struggling to
keep up with the course demands in his first semester
of medical school. Héctor initially sought treatment
from his primary care provider for a wide variety of
stress-related symptoms, including frequent headaches,
muscle tension, and gastrointestinal distress. However,
she urged him to seek therapy for what she believed to
be an anxiety disorder.

In the initial assessment, Héctor endorsed symptoms
consistent with GAD. He described a long history of
worry that started in elementary school. His worry focused
centrally on his academic demands. He reported
worrying constantly about the quality of his work, the
sufficiency of his knowledge, and his ability to meet
his, and others, academic-related expectations. Héctor
was the first person in his family to graduate from
college, and his entire extended family was extremely
proud of him and significantly invested in Héctor earning
a medical degree. Héctor’s mother had secured a
second job to help meet his rising tuition costs, one of
his uncles offered to co-sign on a loan, and his cousin
offered him a place to live rent-free. While he was extremely
grateful for their support, Héctor constantly
worried about disappointing them.

Héctor was also troubled by worries about his mother’s
health and well-being. He was concerned that she
was overextending herself with two jobs, and he worried
that she might have a heart attack or fall asleep
when driving home and die in a car accident. Héctor
also worried a fair amount about his two nephews. In
his view, they spent far too much time watching television
and playing video games, and needed more structure
and guidance than his brother was providing.

Héctor described a number of aches and pains that
he attributed to his constant, high level of physical tension.
He noted that he had considerable difficulty falling
asleep each night, as his mind constantly cycled
through a variety of potential, negative outcomes the


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

next day might bring. Not surprisingly, he described
having a very difficult time concentrating, especially
while he was in class and when he attempted to do his
assigned reading. When his anxiety and worry became
too severe, he would skip class and head to the gym.
In the past, when he exercised long enough he would
become so physically fatigued that he would fall asleep
immediately when his “head hit the pillow.” Unfortunately,
that coping strategy recently was becoming less
and less effective. First, he found that he was skipping
class for the gym more and more frequently, to the
point that he was unable to keep up his grades. Moreover,
although he was still falling asleep fairly quickly
postexercise, recently, he would awaken after only 1 or
2 hours of sleep.

When he was in secondary school and college, Héctor
also found that spending time with friends and
family kept his GAD symptoms in check. However, 6
months earlier, he had left his support network behind
in Miami and relocated to Boston for medical school.
Although he initially went to out to eat with some of
his classmates and occasionally attended study sessions
with them, he never felt entirely comfortable at these
events. He worried that his classmates did not think
he belonged at such a prestigious medical school, and
Héctor was acutely aware that he was one of very few
ethnic/minority students.

Engagement Session

In this session, Héctor disclosed that his family did
not know that he was in therapy, and that he was too
ashamed to tell them about his academic issues. Héctor
acknowledged that keeping these secrets was painful
and distressing, particularly because it required him to
distance himself even further from his main source of
social support.

Although Héctor had attended a few counseling sessions
in his first semester of college, he had no other
history of psychotherapy. Héctor described his brief
course of previous therapy as primarily supportive. He
noted that meeting a few times with his Latino male
therapist, mostly to talk about academic stressors, had
been extremely helpful in his transition to college. This
experience made him cautiously optimistic about the
current course of therapy, although he acknowledged a
fear that his problems might now be too severe to overcome
completely.

Given the considerable outside-of-therapy demands
associated with ABBT, the therapist asked Héctor about

potential barriers to treatment. Although Héctor had a
slightly reduced schedule because of his academic probation,
he was still taking three courses and working
20–30 hours a week. The therapist validated Héctor’s
existing commitments, but she also wanted to be realistic
in describing the additional time commitment
that would be required, particularly in the first six to
eight sessions of therapy. The therapist used the training
for a marathon analogy to convey the importance of
setting aside sufficient time for out-of-therapy assignments.
She noted that Héctor’s worry habit was deeply
ingrained, and that learning new methods of responding
would require some commitment to practice. An
athlete training for a marathon cannot keep the same
work/life schedule while adding in training sessions.
Instead, he/she needs to make some temporary accommodations
to make time to run. Similarly, a client with
GAD cannot develop new habits while maintaining the
same busy schedule. Some time and attention must be
allocated temporarily to reflecting on the treatment and
practicing new ways of responding.

Finally, the (white) therapist explored how her gender
and ethnicity might affect treatment.

tHeraPist: It sounds like one of the best things about
your previous course of therapy was that you really
felt understood by your therapist.

Héctor: Yes, I was surprised that I felt so comfortable
with him. I expected that my counselor would be a
woman and I was a little hesitant about talking with
a man at first. . . . I thought he might think of me as
weak for seeking therapy.

tHeraPist: I think most of us go to therapy with expectations
about our therapist. We might expect a
therapist to be older or younger, male or female, or
of a particular ethnicity. Depending on whether or
not the therapist meets our expectations, we may
be more or less comfortable, feel more or less understood.
Did you have any expectations coming in
today?

Héctor: Honestly? I knew I was seeing a woman because
of your name. And I wasn’t sure of your ethnicity.
But frankly, I didn’t really expect to have a
Latina therapist based on the providers I have seen
at this center.

tHeraPist: Do you have any thoughts or concerns
about working with me that you would like to talk
about?


Generalized Anxiety Disorder

Héctor: Not really . . .

tHeraPist: My hope is that we can work really well
together, but it would be understandable if you didn’t
necessarily trust me or feel comfortable with me
right off the bat. You don’t know me at all, and it
can be really difficult to open up to a stranger. Also,
I know that for some people it might matter that I’m
not Latina, I’m white. Sometimes that can make
someone feel like I can’t understand some kinds of
experiences, like those related to being a minority
or a person of color. But my goal is to do whatever
I can to be sensitive to, and understanding of, your
unique experiences. I bring some general expertise
about anxiety to our work, including ways that experiences
with discrimination can relate to anxiety,
sometimes in subtle ways, but you are the expert on
your own experience. So I will always try to check
in with you about the ways in which the things we
discuss and the suggestions I make fit with your experience.
Please feel free to let me know if I say or
do something insensitive, or if you feel like I am not
fully understanding what you are telling me. I am
definitely not perfect, but my intention is to try and
help you as best I can achieve your goals for therapy.

The therapist ended the engagement session by providing
some activities for Héctor to complete before
the next session. First, she explained a monitoring form
used throughout treatment (although the domains to
monitor are changed over time as new session material
is introduced, this version includes only date, situation,
and worry topic as columns) and asked him to begin to
notice when he engaged in worry. She also gave him a
copy of the Valued Living Questionnaire to complete
with the following instructions:

“Sometimes anxiety and worry can prevent us from
taking some actions that are consistent with our
values. For example, you mentioned that you skip
class when you feel too anxious, even though you
also noted that you care deeply about being a good
student. Anxiety and worry can also make people
feel as if they are on automatic pilot, or that their
lives are consumed by things they must do rather
than things they choose to do. This questionnaire is
a first step toward identifying some of the ways in
which anxiety and worry might be interfering with
your life. Sometimes it is painful to think about the
ways our lives are not as we would wish them to be.

But this awareness is a first step toward making a
change. So, notice any feelings that arise as you fill
out the forms, and we will be sure to talk about them
next week.”

Session 1

The goal of Session 1 is to provide an overview of the
treatment structure (client and therapist roles, betweensession
assignments, etc.) and to plan and discuss the
rationale for treatment that is informed by a personalized
ABBT conceptualization of the client’s presenting
problems. The therapist asked Héctor to engage in an
experiential exercise that involved imagining himself
back in one of the anxiety-provoking situations he
noted on his monitoring form. Using guided imagery,
the therapist helped Héctor to notice that his experience
of anxiety was characterized by an interrelated cycle of
thoughts (worries), physiological sensations (tightness
in his shoulders and chest), and behaviors (leaving class
early, heading to the gym).

Héctor: I didn’t realize so much was happening when
I am anxious. Usually as soon as I notice I am anxious
I just do whatever I can to prevent it from escalating.


tHeraPist: That doesn’t surprise me. You have developed
a strong habit. When you get anxious, you immediately
try and distract your attention from your
experience and seek out ways to control or dampen
your emotions. How difficult was it to imagine yourself
back in class on Monday?

Héctor: It was surprisingly easy. I definitely felt just
as anxious remembering how I felt as I did sitting in
the classroom.

tHeraPist: That is a great thing to notice. Something
that is uniquely human is our ability to remember
and imagine events vividly. Like other animals,
we are hardwired to experience fear in the face of
a threat—as if a predator were charging at us. But
humans can also simply imagine a threat in their
minds and experience the same hardwired response
to threat. Do you have any idea what you were imagining
in class that day?

Héctor: On Monday, my mind just went from 0 to
100—I was barely aware of what I was thinking. But
when we went through the exercise today, I noticed
a series of pictures in my mind. First I thought, I am


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

not prepared for class. Then I imagined the professor
yelling at me, my classmates laughing at me, my
family’s disappointment . . .

tHeraPist: Hmm . . . if you imagined all those people
rejecting you at the same time, it is not surprising
that you would feel afraid. We are hardwired to seek
social approval. If the entire academic community,
your friends, and family all rejected you, you would
have a pretty good reason for feeling afraid. Unfortunately,
our minds don’t distinguish present threats
from imagined ones.

The therapist and Héctor discussed the model of
fear, anxiety, and worry guiding ABBT for GAD. The
therapist explained that fear and anxiety serve adaptive
functions. Anxiety allows us to imagine future threats
and prepare for them. Fear energizes us to avoid and
escape danger. In both of these states, our attention narrowly
focuses on the threat and our escape plan, blocking
out other information.

Unfortunately, our ability to think, imagine (the future),
and remember (the past) allows us to imagine
endless threats and to respond with fear even when no
threat is present (i.e., our mental representations develop
the same emotional properties as the events themselves,
leading us to respond to threats that do not exist in the
environment). Moreover, although we are hardwired to
escape or avoid threat, sometimes in order to do the
things that matter to us, we have to approach situations
that will likely elicit anxiety (e.g., allow ourselves to be
vulnerable in order to gain intimacy, take a risk at work
in order to successfully negotiate a challenge). Many of
us respond to this conundrum by harshly judging our
natural responses and doing everything in our power to
avoid experiencing them.

The therapist and Héctor also discussed the function
of worry. Although worry is associated with clear
negative consequences (interferes with concentration,
results in tension and fatigue), it too serves a function.

Héctor: As much as my worry bothers me, in some
ways, I am afraid to give it up. Sometimes it feels
like the only thing I can do to control the uncontrollable.


tHeraPist: Interesting observation. Tell me more
about that.
Héctor: Well, sometimes it feel like if I stop worrying
about my mother’s health, she will have a heart at


tack. Or I believe that if I don’t worry about a test, I
won’t actually study.

tHeraPist: Some people notice that worrying about
minor, everyday matters takes their mind off more
painful thoughts and emotions. Have you ever noticed
anything like that?

Héctor: (beginning to tear up) Sometimes I think
worrying about tests, or being late to class, or what
I should wear to a school event is the only thing that
keeps me from noticing how lonely I am. Sometimes
I feel like if I stopped worrying, I would become so
sad and depressed I might never get out of bed.

Near the end of the session, the therapist summed up
her conceptualization and plan for treatment.

“Anxiety and worry narrow our focus and pull our attention
toward the future. This cycle happens outside
of our awareness and can be difficult to change. In
this treatment, we will use mindfulness skills to address
this habit. Mindfulness increases and expands
our present-moment focus and allows us to notice and
break this cycle. We also have a tendency to judge
and control our emotions because we think they are
preventing us from having a satisfying life. In this
treatment we will explore whether that reaction to
our emotional responses is helpful or harmful, and
we will consider alternative ways of responding. Finally,
worry is anticipatory; thus, it prevents us from
engaging in activities that could be threatening. But
sometimes we want to approach these situations—
especially if they will help us to live the kind of life
we value. In this treatment, we will learn to become
more flexible—to consider different behavioral
responses—rather than automatically avoiding potentially
anxiety-provoking situations.”

At the end of Session 1, the therapist led Héctor in a
mindfulness of breath exercise. She began by guiding
him to notice the way he was sitting in the chair, then
drew his attention to where he could feel his breath in
his body. The therapist then guided Héctor to gently
redirect his awareness back to the sensations of his inhalations
and exhalations over the next several minutes,
while deepening his breath, no matter how many times
his mind wandered to other things. After the therapist
and Héctor discussed his experience of this exercise,
she asked him to practice it daily between sessions.


Generalized Anxiety Disorder

Session 2

Session 2 primarily focuses on an introduction to mindfulness.
The therapist led Héctor in a mindfulness of
breath exercise, then engaged him in a debriefing.

tHeraPist: What did you notice?

Héctor: Well, I am pretty stressed out today. So the
exercise didn’t work as well as it did when I practiced
this week.

tHeraPist: Tell me more about that. How are you defining
“worked”?

Héctor: I used the breathing almost every night this
week to fall asleep. And it actually seemed to help.
At least it calmed me down, so I could get to sleep
quicker. But today, I just felt more stressed out.

tHeraPist: What is really interesting about that is that
although there is no “goal” to mindfulness, sometimes
we do start to expect that it will bring a certain
state of being. But actually, this exercise is about
noticing and accepting whatever state we are in. So
we notice the focus of our attention, guide it to the
breath, notice when it wanders, and guide it back.
Sometimes that process can be pleasant and calming,
but other times it can be frustrating and painful.
But observing that process, whatever the process
happens to be, is practicing mindfulness.

Héctor: Really? I was certain I was supposed to try
and relax.

tHeraPist: We are naturally goal-oriented beings. So
our tendency is to look for the goal in mindfulness.
Fortunately, mindfulness allows us to give up goals,
at least for a moment, and just be. What else did you
notice?

Héctor: I couldn’t keep my attention on my breath. It
was all over the place. I am not sure I have the personality
needed to be mindful.

tHeraPist: What a great observation. First, you noticed
your attention was pulled in different directions.
I’ll bet that happens at other times in the day
as well. It is useful to get to know just how busy our
minds are.

Héctor: I never thought of it like that. I guess it makes
sense that I struggle to concentrate in class if I am
having so many different thoughts all the time.

tHeraPist: Also, I didn’t actually suggest that you
should keep your attention on your breath. Just that

you should notice where your attention is and continually
guide it back to the breath. It is so interesting
how quickly our minds judge whether we are doing
something “right” or “wrong,” isn’t it?

Héctor: (laughing) I sort of know what you are going
to say here, but I also felt like I was breathing the
wrong way. I kept breathing out of my mouth and it
sounded so loud compared to your breath.

tHeraPist: (smiling) Great observation. If our minds
are so judgmental about something as simple and
natural as breathing, just imagine what judgmental
thoughts are present when we are in class, at work,
with friends. It sounds like you really used this exercise
as an opportunity to get to know the habits of
your mind.

The therapist also led Héctor in the Raisin Exercise,
which simply involves the practice of eating one raisin
mindfully. Following this exercise, she focused on
the mindfulness skill of “beginners mind,” essentially
highlighting the ways in which “knowing” what to expect
sometimes prevent us from accurately observing
different experiences. The session ended with the therapist
leading Héctor through a slightly modified progressive
muscle relaxation that was aimed at helping him to
practice observing sensations and letting go of tension
(rather than reduce anxiety).

Session 3

The therapist began Session 3 with the Mindfulness
of Sounds mindfulness exercise. Héctor was able to
see the similarity between this practice and the Raisin
Exercise in Session 2. Specifically, he noticed that it
was difficult for his mind to observe the pitch, tone,
and volume of the sounds around him without trying to
label (a truck backing up) and judge (“That is loud and
annoying”) his experience. The therapist was careful to
normalize this response and to highlight the utility of
becoming aware of what we are all naturally inclined
to do.

After reviewing Héctor’s monitoring and mindfulness
homework, the therapist introduced a new psychoeducational
topic—the function of emotions. Héctor
quickly provided an example of the ways in which emotions
such as fear can serve a communicative function.
He described an incident when he was walking home
from the library late at night. Although he did not hear
or see anything out of the ordinary, Héctor had a sense


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

that he was in danger, so he took a number of precautionary
steps: He took his headphones off, crossed the
street to be in an environment with more lighting, and
called his roommate on his cell phone. The next morning,
Héctor read that there was a mugging the previous
night on campus, and he was convinced that the fear
signals he received protected him from being a victim.
The therapist provided an example of the consequences
of ignoring the messages our emotions provide.

tHeraPist: Imagine you are experiencing sadness and
disappointment because your current job is not fulfilling.
That sadness is uncomfortable, so you naturally
want to get rid of it. You might spend your evenings
zoning out watching television alone, trying to
“relax,” or you might start staying out late at night
with friends, drinking and trying to have a good
time so you don’t notice that you’re feeling sad in
that area of your life. You might start finding reasons
to miss work or start daydreaming when you’re at
work. These strategies are all aimed at reducing your
sadness. And they might work in the short term, but
none of them resolves the problem. What is worse
is that those strategies might even create new problems
as you start sleeping less, doing less well at
work, and running into more conflicts at work. Even
though you are doing everything you can to avoid
feeling sad, the sadness is there for a reason. The first
step to moving forward in that situation is noticing
that you are feeling sad and recognizing that your
work situation is eliciting these emotions. Only then
can you decide what actions to take.

Héctor: That makes sense. But what about the fear I
feel when I think about asking a classmate to study
with me?

tHeraPist: What do you think your fear is telling you
in that situation?

Héctor: That he might think up some excuse to reject
me and say no.

tHeraPist: Absolutely. As humans we are hardwired
to seek social support and approval. It can absolutely
be risky to put ourselves out there to be accepted or
rejected. But here is the thing. While it is important
to acknowledge the message our emotions are sending,
we don’t always have to follow their advice.
Emotions are associated with action tendencies—
when we feel fear, we are prepared to flee, when we
feel anger, we are prepared to fight. But our emotions

don’t actually control our behavior. And often when
we consider taking an action that could be really
meaningful—opening up and appearing vulnerable
to someone or taking on an academic challenge—
our emotions will warn us that such a step is risky.
In these cases, we need to acknowledge the message
we are receiving, yet we can still choose to take the
valued action.

Héctor: I guess that makes sense. I certainly knew
that moving away from my family and starting medical
school was risky. I felt a lot of fear, but I did it
anyways because it is important to my family that
I succeed. My abuela [grandmother] always says
courage is acting with heart. Being afraid, but doing
something anyways, because of love or passion.

However, Héctor also struggled a bit as he tried to
determine the function of his emotions in some other
contexts.

Héctor: I can see how emotions sometimes can serve
a function. But other times the function seems much
less clear to me. For example, I know a little test
anxiety can be helpful and motivating, but why do I
feel terrified some nights when I am studying. I get
so scared and anxious that I become paralyzed. My
problem is that most of the time I am confused by my
emotions and their intensity.

tHeraPist: We make the distinction between what we
call “clear” and “muddy” emotions. Clear emotions
refer to when we have a very strong emotional response
to a particular situation; for instance, we feel
strong fear when a car approaches us on the street,
which is what we might call a “clear” emotional response.
Emotions that are complex, confusing, or too
intense and long-lasting for the situation are what we
call “muddy.”

Together, Héctor and his therapist reviewed how failures
in self-care (e.g., not getting enough sleep or eating
well, not exercising regularly) increase the likelihood
of muddy emotions. They also considered ways that
worry (which involves the ability to imagine things that
have not yet happened) and rumination (which involves
repeatedly remembering past events) both can elicit
emotions that are not at all related to whatever is unfolding
in the present moment. Finally they discussed
the way our “reactions to our reactions” can muddy our
emotional responses.


Generalized Anxiety Disorder

“Another thing that can make our emotions confusing
and muddied is that often when we have an emotional
response, we don’t just have that one response—
we have a series of responses that are triggered by
that first emotion. For instance, we may feel scared,
then angry that we got scared, then afraid the feeling
will grow stronger, then ashamed that we are afraid,
and so on. We may also have thoughts that come up
as responses to a clear emotion, such as “I shouldn’t
feel this way,” “This is a sign that I am a weak person.”
One reaction that we often have is to try to control
emotional responses. We will talk more about
that in the next session. Finally, emotional responses
can also seem much more intense when we start to
feel defined by our emotions—when we see them
as stable traits that represent our personality rather
than natural human responses to events that come
and go.”

Normally Session 3 would end with a review of
the first completed writing assignment (i.e., writing
about how anxiety and worry interferes with relationships,
work–school–household management, and selfnourishment
and community involvement). However,
Héctor admitted that he had not finished it. He noted
that it had been a busy week with exams and that he
found it hard to set aside time for himself. Together,
Héctor and his therapist brainstormed ways he could
schedule in the values writing. However, she also noted
that sitting down and considering the ways that anxiety
is interfering with the things that matter most could be
a very painful exercise. The therapist suggested that
Héctor recognize that the pain served a function (letting
Héctor know that changes were needed for him to
live a more personally fulfilling life), and she pointed
out that seeking therapy was a sign that he acknowledged
that pain and was willing to make some changes.
The therapist also gave Héctor new monitoring forms
that added a column for emotions, so he could begin
to monitor his emotional responses in addition to his
worry.

Session 4

Héctor presented to Session 4 visibly upset. He had just
returned from a visit back home to Miami, and he was
extremely upset over his interactions with his brother.
As he began to describe the situation, the therapist gently
interrupted.

“Excuse me for interrupting you, Héctor, but I have an
important question. I can tell this visit was very upsetting
for you and we will be sure to devote a good
part of today’s session to talking about it. But if you
are willing, I would like us to start out our session
as we always do, with a brief mindfulness practice.
It can really be challenging to practice when you are
experiencing a lot of emotions and thoughts, yet it
can also be extremely helpful. If you are willing,
I would like us to start by becoming aware of the
physical sensations we are currently experiencing. I
would like to hear about your visit, and then there is
another mindfulness exercise that might help us further
explore what you are feeling right now. Would
that be all right with you?”

Héctor agreed and the therapist introduced a mindfulness
exercise that involved increasing awareness of
physical sensations. During the debriefing of the practice,
Héctor admitted that he found it particularly challenging
to keep redirecting his attention from images
of his visit to his physical sensations in the moment.
However, he noted that it became easier over time. The
therapist remarked that Héctor seemed more centered
than he had when he first walked in. Héctor replied that
he did feel more present and ready to discuss his concerns.


tHeraPist: Did you use your monitoring sheet this
weekend to help you work through some of the challenges
that arose during your visit home?

Héctor: Absolutely, I was so upset that I needed to
get my thoughts down on paper. As I wrote here, on
Saturday, when I was at my parent’s house but only
my brother and his sons were home, I was flooded
with worries. My nephews used to be such sweet
little boys, but now they will barely make eye contact
with me when I greet them. They spend all their
time glued to their electronic devices playing violent
video games. And my brother completely ignores
them—all he wants to do is talk to me about his latest
dating adventures.

tHeraPist: Did you notice the specific worries you
were experiencing?

Héctor: Yes, I wrote I am worried that my brother and
nephews are too much for my mother to handle. I
am worried that they are draining her health and finances.
I am worried that my nephews will not get a
good education, and that they will get involved in the


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

wrong crowd. And I am worried my brother is drinking
too much and that he is too selfish.

tHeraPist: Good job observing your responses. How
about your emotions? Were you able to identify what
emotion or emotions were present?

Héctor: I was very upset. Mostly angry I think. I don’t
know—this is one of those situations where I felt
confused about my feelings.

The therapist suggested that Héctor try a mindfulness
practice aimed at observing his emotional responses.
She asked him to close his eyes and vividly imagine
his interaction with his brother, and she instructed him
to notice visual and auditory stimuli, to focus on the
physical sensations in his body, to bring his attention
to the thoughts running through his mind and finally
to his emotions. She reminded him simply to notice his
experience, bringing curiousness and compassion to
what he was experiencing, observing what happened
when he was feeling strong emotions, without altering
or judging them. She reminded him to notice whether
more than one emotion was present, and to observe any
rise and fall in his emotions. After several moments,
she asked him to open his eyes.

tHeraPist: What did you notice?

Héctor: At first, all I felt was angry. Then I noticed
I was feeling afraid. But what really surprised me
is that I felt extremely sad. It’s interesting because
at the time I thought I was just straight up angry,
but thinking back on it I noticed that my emotions
seemed to ebb and flow. I guess another thing that
was interesting is that I started out just feeling the
emotions. But throughout the exercise I started to
notice I was observing them. It was really helpful
to get some distance—before that I think I just felt
consumed with emotion.

tHeraPist: Great observations. Tell me a bit more
about your responses to those emotions. And any
thoughts you have about their function.

Héctor: I think I felt angry because I disagree with
how my brother is raising his sons. But then I got
mad at myself for feeling angry. My brother hasn’t
had the opportunities that I have. Thinking about
that made me feel guilty.

tHeraPist: Did you notice any responses to your feelings
of guilt?
Héctor: I hate feeling guilty. It feels like a tremendous

weight on my chest. I think I tried to distract myself
from that feeling and then I just started imagining
all the problems that could result from my brother’s
screwups and I got consumed with fear and worry.
But then, when you prompted me, I returned back to
observing my emotions. And then the more I focused
on my emotions, I started to realize I felt really, really
sad. But what was interesting was I think I just
accepted it was a sad situation. Usually I can’t stand
feeling sad, I am afraid it means I am going to get
depressed and retreat into my own world. But I think
I recognized that this is just a sad situation. I miss
my family. I wish I could fix my brother’s problems,
but I can’t.

The therapist tied Héctor’s experience to the topic
of clear and muddy emotions. She pointed out that
anger is a natural response that arises when someone
acts against your wishes. And sadness is a normal response
to a painful situation. She also helped Héctor
identify why his anger was initially so intense. In addition
to being angry about the situation on Saturday, he
was also having anger about the many times in the past
when his brother upset him. Héctor was also imagining
that his brother would continue to “screw up,” which
further fueled his anger. The “reactions to reactions”
Héctor experienced also increased the intensity of his
response. For example, when Héctor judged the feeling
of anger as unacceptable, he started to feel guilty. And
when the feeling of guilt was too painful, he distracted
himself with multiple worries about the future.

Next, the therapist spent some time on the main concept
of the session—the limits and consequence of internal
control efforts. She asked Héctor to engage in a
number of experiential exercises aimed at demonstrating
the often paradoxical effects of efforts to control
internal experiences such as thoughts, emotions, and
images. For example, the therapist asked Héctor to
imagine that he “had to get a good night’s sleep” before
a big test. She asked him what might happen if, alarmed
by the late hour, he purposefully tried to induce a state
of sleepiness. Héctor noted that this frequently happened,
and the more he tried, the more distressed and
awake he became.

Finally, the therapist spent some time going over
Héctor’s values assignment. Héctor easily identified
many ways in which his anxiety was interfering
with school and work. He noted that it was harder
and harder to concentrate both during class and while
doing his homework because his mind was consumed


Generalized Anxiety Disorder

with worries—worries about failing class, about letting
down his family, and about his family’s health and
well-being. Héctor also noted that when his anxiety
about his family became too intense, he would call or
plan a visit with them. But he found that when he did
make the time to talk with or be with his family, he
was consumed with worry about the time he was taking
away from his schoolwork. Héctor wrote about his
fear that he would never find a life partner. He was far
too busy with school and his family to date, and he believed
it was his destiny to end up alone. He was terrified
about this possibility because he described himself
as extremely family-oriented.

As the session ended, the therapist gave Héctor a
monitoring form that added a column for “efforts to
control,” so that he could begin to notice these as they
occurred throughout the week. She also provided for
Héctor a second values assignment to complete for the
next session. The therapist noted that often our attempts
to avoid anxiety, worry, and stress cause us to make
subtle shifts in our behavior, so that we begin doing
whatever we are “supposed” to be doing and lose track
of what we want to be doing, or what personally matters
to us as individuals. The therapist reviewed the distinction
between values and goals, emphasizing the importance
of identifying the direction that Héctor wants
to move in rather than solely the goals to achieve. The
therapist noted that this next assignment was aimed
at further exploring three areas of living to see what
changes might be necessary to improve Héctor’s quality
of life.

“Choose two or three relationships that are important
to you. You can either pick actual relationships (your
relationship with your brother) or relationships you
would like to have (“I would like to be part of a couple,”
“I would like to make more friends”). Briefly
write about how you would like to be in those relationships.
Think about how you would like to communicate
with others (e.g., how open vs. private you
would like to be, how direct vs. passive you would
like to be in asking for what you need and in giving
feedback to others). Think about what sort of
support you would like from other people and what
sort of support you can give without sacrificing your
own self-care. I also would like you to write briefly
about the sort of work you would like and why that
appeals to you. Next write about the student you
would like to be with respect to your work habits and
your relationships with your professors and peers.

What is important to you about the product of your
work/studies. How would you like to communicate
to others about your work? How would you like to
respond to feedback? What additional challenges
would you like to take on? Finally, I would like you
to briefly write about the ways in which you would
like to spend your free time. What would you like to
do to better nourish yourself (e.g., nutrition, exercise,
spirituality) or contribute to your community?”

Sessions 5–7

In Sessions 5–7 of treatment, the focus is on encouraging
the client to consider moving from a stance of
resistance and avoidance to one of willingness. A number
of mindfulness and other experiential exercises are
used to help clients practice observing their thoughts,
emotions, and physical sensations as transient events.
For example, Héctor practiced imagining that his
thoughts and feelings were going by on a movie screen
in front of him. Once clients are able to defuse or decenter
from their internal experiences, and they no longer
feel defined or threatened by them, they are often
more willing to approach and engage in a variety of
activities.

Like many clients, Héctor initially struggled a bit
with the concept of willingness. At first Héctor thought
the therapist was suggesting that he should come to
view his anxiety in a more positive light. Or that he
should learn to accept his anxiety because it was what a
“strong man” needed to do. Using a metaphor adapted
from ACT, his therapist tried to clarify the concept of
willingness, likening it to one’s willingness to wade
through a swamp on a journey to a beautiful mountain.

“Taking a stance of willingness suggests that you will
accept and move forward with the thoughts and feelings
(rational or irrational) that appear as you make
your way through life, taking the actions that will
help you obtain the things in life that you value. For
instance, let’s say that you want to ask your classmates
if you can join their study group. To do so will
likely elicit feelings of fear, thoughts about possible
rejection. However, you can be willing to experience
those thoughts and feelings, if they are what arise
when you take actions consistent with your value
to engage in your schoolwork. You may not like the
feelings, you may wish it could be another way, but
you can be willing to experience whatever comes up
in order to take a valued action.


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

“It is as if you are on a journey to a beautiful
mountain. But along the way you come to a disgusting,
murky swamp. You don’t want to walk through
the swamp, and it may not seem fair that you need
to do so. But you can choose to walk through if you
decide that the journey to the mountain is worth it
to you.

“Now if the swamp is to the side of your path, you
do not necessarily need to go through it. And, you
don’t have to dive into the swamp and roll around in
it. And you can put on boots, or walk across a plank,
in an effort to avoid getting dirty. Yet you might still
trip and fall in the swamp, and willingness means
you accept that possibility as you move forward on
the journey of your choosing.”

Several values assignments are used to help clients
set their course or mountain “journey.” As noted earlier,
Héctor was asked to write about his values in three specific
domains. This can be a challenging assignment,
and often clients confuse values with goals, describe
values that suggest the need for control or perfection,
or focus on what they perceive to be insurmountable
obstacles to living consistently with their values. Thus,
often several sessions are devoted to discussing the
values assignment, and it is not uncommon for clients
to revise their values multiple times in session and for
homework. For example, Héctor’s initial writing assignment
produced some values that could have been
problematic for him to pursue.

Héctor: My value in the schoolwork domain is to
achieve the highest grades in all of my coursework. I
want to be the top student in my graduating class so
that I can make my family proud.

tHeraPist: Would aiming to receive a perfect score on
an exam be an example of a value or a goal?
Héctor: Right, grades are outcomes, so I guess those
are goals.

tHeraPist: Imagine that you are working as a physician.
You are surfing the Internet and you stumble
upon a webpage where patients rate, and leave comments
about, their doctor. What would you want the
page to say? My doctor scores well on standardized
tests?

Héctor: (chuckling) Well, no. I guess I would want
them to say that I was caring and compassionate.
And that I was willing to stick with a health problem

until I came up with the right diagnosis and the best
treatment I could provide.

tHeraPist: Great, those sound a bit more like values.
So, would it be fair to say you want to be engaged
with the material you are learning? And that you
want to be kind and compassionate toward your patients
and committed to their health?

Héctor: Yes, that is what I value. I keep thinking my
grades matter most, but I know in my heart that is
not why I am in medical school. I am not here to
impress my instructors and classmates. I want to be a
doctor who makes a difference in the lives of others.

Héctor also struggled a bit with articulating his relationship
values:

Héctor: I wrote that I always wanted to be available
to my mother, whenever she needed me. I want to
be her rock. I get so angry at myself when I am too
tired to return her phone calls at night. Or when she
needs something to be fixed, like the leaky faucet in
the kitchen, and I can’t take care of it because I am
here in Boston and she is in Miami. Also, I feel bad
when she is lonely. I want to prevent her from having
to experience any more pain than she already has.

tHeraPist: I know you care deeply for your mother.
And I can completely understand your desire to care
for her. And yet, much like it is humanly impossible
to prevent yourself from feeling emotions, I think it
is humanly impossible to ensure that our loved ones
are never in pain or in need. Even if you dropped out
of medical school and moved back home, there are
limits to what you can do for her. And that can be a
very difficult and painful thing to accept. It sounds
to me like the value is that you want to maintain a
strong, caring relationship with your mother. Would
you agree?

Héctor: Absolutely.

tHeraPist: And fixing a faucet and returning a call
are actions that are consistent with those values. Are
there other actions you can take that reflect your values?
In other words, if you are in Boston and she is
in Miami, can you care for her without fixing her
faucet?

Héctor: Well, I could talk to her about it. She appreciates
when I listen to her vent about her problems.

tHeraPist: Great, what else?


Generalized Anxiety Disorder

Héctor: I guess I could call a repair man for her. Or
ask my brother to help.

tHeraPist: Wonderful. The point is, there are many
actions one can take that are consistent with a value.
If we define valued action as just one or two responses,
and for whatever reason, we can’t respond
in those ways, we can end up feeling stuck and miserable.
Living consistently with one’s values means
flexibly considering multiple options to act in ways
that are meaningful to us.

Héctor also struggled with articulating his values in
relation to his brother and nephews:

Héctor: I want to be close to my brother and his sons,
but I can’t. It doesn’t matter how I treat them, they
are selfish and they never want to spend time with
me.

tHeraPist: One of the most complicated things about
relationship values is that we only have control over
half of the relationship. You cannot control how your
brother acts; you can only choose how you want to
approach him.

Héctor: Are you saying I should just let my brother
live his life the way he currently does? Allow him to
raise his sons to be disrespectful and rude?

tHeraPist: It is so painful for you to watch your brother
make choices that are inconsistent with your values.
And I know if you could control his behavior
you would. It seems like you keep trying and trying
to figure out how to control a situation that just might
be out of your control. Sometimes mindfulness skills
can help us to clearly accept the reality of a situation.
And by “accept” I mean recognize the reality of the
situation—I don’t mean that you should like or support
his approach. But you may need to accept the
reality that you only have control over some parts of
this very painful situation. It seems to me that you
can control how you choose to define your values
regarding how you relate to your brother. But you
can’t control his behavior. If you act lovingly toward
him and try to establish a close relationship, your
brother may respond in kind. And that bond might
allow you to talk with him about your parenting concerns.
Or you might end up with a closer relationship
and he could continue with his current habits. Or he
may completely reject your efforts to become closer.
Choosing our actions is like aiming an arrow. We

can make choices about how we aim and when we
release the arrow. We don’t have control over where
the arrow lands. However, we may notice where it
lands and use that information to inform the way we
aim or when we shoot the next time. In a similar way,
we can choose the actions we want to take repeatedly,
although we don’t have control over the consequences
of our actions.

Héctor continued to work on defining his values, until
he felt that he could clearly articulate what mattered to
him in the domains of relationship, schoolwork, selfnourishment,
and community involvement. Although
it is necessary for clients to achieve this milestone so
that they can move into the next phase of treatment, it
is important to recognize that values articulation is a
dynamic process. Having defined values is helpful in
guiding the final nine sessions of treatment, but what is
most important is for clients to adopt the general perspective
that valuing can provide a compass for directing
behavior and improving quality of life.

During these sessions, Héctor was given a final version
of the monitoring form that represented an application
of the full model. This included columns for
date/time, situation, first reactions (thoughts, feelings,
sensations), second reactions (efforts to control, muddiness,
willingness, acceptance), and actions/responses
(e.g., avoidance, valued action, application of mindfulness
skills).

Sessions 8–12

The goal of Sessions 8–12 was to personalize the concepts
introduced in the first phase of treatment and help
Héctor to apply mindfulness and engagement in valued
activities to his daily life. At the beginning of each session,
Héctor and the therapist worked together to pick a
mindfulness practice. Each week they purposely chose
exercises, including ones that Héctor found particularly
challenging, those he found most useful, and those that
seemed to best fit his needs given the particular struggle
he was facing (see Table 5.1).

The bulk of these sessions were focused using the
mindfulness and acceptance strategies introduced during
Phase I to increase Héctor’s willingness to engage
in his personally articulated valued actions. Héctor
continued to monitor valued actions taken, missed opportunities,
mindfulness and obstacles to willingness
(see Figure 5.1).


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

table 5.1. Choosing a Mindfulness Practice

Title Focus of attention How it can be helpful Where to find it

Mindfulness of breath

Mindfulness of sounds

3-minute breathing space

Mindfulness of physical
sensations

Mindful progressive
relaxation

Mindfulness of emotions
and physical sensations

Mindfulness of clouds
and sky

Inviting a difficulty in
and working it through
the body

Your personal experience
with self-compassion/
Mindful observation of
self-critical thoughts

Breath ••
Portable MP3 available online
••
Can be centering at www.themindful••
Great introduction to the habits of waythroughanxietybook.com;
the mind (busy, judgmental) Kabat-Zinn (1990); Roemer
& Orsillo (2009); Orsillo &
Roemer (2011)
Sounds ••
Helps us to notice our tendency to MP3 available online; Segal et
categorize/judge al. (2002); Roemer & Orsillo
••
Allows us to practice “beginner’s (2009); Orsillo & Roemer
mind”—seeing things fully as they (2011)
are, not as we imagine they will be
Physical sensations ••
Helps us get centered and present Segal et al. (2002); Roemer
(including breath), when moving from one activity to & Orsillo (2009); Orsillo &
thoughts, emotions another Roemer (2011)
••
Useful when we want to “check in”
with ourselves
Physical sensations ••
Good practice for bringing curiosity MP3 available online; Orsillo &
and compassion to physical Roemer (2011)
sensations that are typically feared
and avoided
••
Brings awareness to sensations
in the body, without judgment or
avoidance
Muscle tension/ ••
Increases awareness of the MP3 available online; Orsillo &
relaxation sensations of tension and relaxation Roemer (2011)
••
Concrete way to practice “letting
go”
••
May elicit a relaxed state
Emotions and/ ••
Increases awareness of the full MP3 available online; Orsillo &
or accompanying range of emotions present Roemer (2011)
physical sensations ••
Helpful when generally distressed
or confused
••
Useful for evaluating clear and
muddy emotions
Thoughts and ••
Allows practice of viewing thoughts MP3 available online; Roemer
feelings, imagery and feelings as transient and & Orsillo (2009); Orsillo &
separate from self Roemer (2011)
••
Helps with decentering/defusion
Physical sensations ••
Helps to cultivate willingness to MP3 available online; Williams
related to painful experience painful emotions et al. (2007); Roemer & Orsillo
experience ••
Useful first step when a client is (2009); Orsillo & Roemer
struggling against accepting a (2011)
painful reality
Self-critical thoughts ••
Brings awareness to experiences of MP3 available online; Orsillo &
criticism in the past and the present Roemer (2011)
••
Helps to identify barriers to selfcompassion
(continued)


Generalized Anxiety Disorder

table 5.1. (continued)

Title Focus of attention How it can be helpful Where to find it
Mountain meditation Mountain imagery— ••
Uses the image of a mountain to MP3 available online; Kabattransience
of events promote the experience of thoughts, Zinn (1995); Roemer & Orsillo
external to the feelings, and emotions as changing (2009); Orsillo & Roemer
mountain and impermanent (2011)
••
Particularly helpful for cultivating a
sense of inner strength or stability,
even in the face of distress and
reactivity

For example, in Session 10, Héctor shared that he
had missed an opportunity to engage in a valued action.
Specifically, one of his favorite instructors had offered
to meet with Héctor to discuss the process of selecting
rotations, but Héctor had cancelled the appointment.

tHeraPist: What did you notice about your response
to his offer?

Héctor: At first I was excited, but as time went on I
became more and more anxious.

tHeraPist: Can you identify the clear emotions that
arose?

Héctor: I actually used the Mindfulness of Emotion
exercise to sort this out a bit. I felt excited about taking
the next step in my education, happy that my in-

VALUED ACTIVITY LOG

Please complete this form at the end of each day.

This week, at the end of each day we would like you to think about an action that you took that was consistent
with one of your values or an opportunity that you missed to take an action consistent with your value. Briefly
describe the action and mark T for taken or M for missed.

On a scale of 0–100 rate how mindful you were during the action or the missed opportunity.

Note any obstacles that you noticed that stopped you from taking action (or could have).

There are no right or wrong answers to this assignment—we all choose not to engage in valued actions for a variety
of reasons. This is just a way for us to start to get a better sense of what may be getting in the way for you so that
you can make choices as to how you would like to proceed.

Date Action
Taken (T) or
missed (M)
Mindfulness
(0–100) Obstacles

figUre 5.1. Values Monitoring Form.


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

structor singled me out, and nervous about the challenges
that lie ahead for me in my career.

tHeraPist: Excellent. Were you also able to observe
your reaction to your reactions?

Héctor: Honestly, not until today. I think at the time
I just got caught up in my reactions rather than observing
them. But during the mindfulness practice
today I noticed some of the same old responses I always
have. I was afraid to feel good about myself,
and my prospects for the future. I had that same
sense that worrying about what could go wrong was
what I needed to do to ensure that I don’t mess up.
I also became pretty critical and judgmental about
my anxiety.

tHeraPist: What do you think you could have done
differently?

Héctor: I have become kind of lax when it comes to
filling out the monitoring forms. But I was thinking
about what you said last week. I do think that
the process of physically completing the form in the
midst of my distress can help me to take a pause . . .
and remember some of my skills.

Session 11 brought a more challenging issue into
therapy. Héctor was extremely distressed over an interaction
he had with a university security officer. Héctor
was on his way back home from a long night studying
when he was approached by a security officer and asked
to produce his university identification card. Although
it was close to midnight, Héctor observed at least five
other students crossing the campus, yet he was the only
one who was questioned. Héctor was already sensitive
to the fact that he had been the only person of color in
the library that night. He was stressed out over exams,
missing his family and friends, and frankly tired of
dealing with the subtle and obvious discrimination he
encountered on a daily basis. Thus, he refused to produce
his identification card and reported that he “lost”
it and shouted at the officer. Although the situation was
eventually sorted out, Héctor was angry, embarrassed
over his behavior in the situation, and confused.

Héctor: I am really struggling with this incident. My
mind is racing, I feel tense all over and I can’t sort
out what is clear and what is muddy and, more importantly,
what valued action I could have chosen.

tHeraPist: It is natural to experience a rush of conflicting
thoughts and emotions in such a painful en


counter. I am so sorry that, given the racism inherent
in our society, you are subjected to differential treatment
because of how you look. This structural problem
exists outside of you and isn’t your fault. And
I really understand how the pain and the anger can
build up when you have to deal with things like this
all the time. I certainly don’t want to suggest that you
have to change who you are, when the system needs
changing. However, I would like us to work with this
situation to help you find an effective way of dealing
with this kind of thing because we both know that
racism isn’t going to go away immediately, and that
means you have to make choices about how you want
to respond. If you are willing, let’s spend some time
with a mindfulness practice to see if that helps us
gain some clarity.

Héctor: I don’t feel very open right now, but I do think
“Inviting a Difficulty In and Working with It through
the Body” (see Figure 5.2) could be a first step.

Following the exercise, Héctor appeared more settled,
although he also had tears in his eyes.

tHeraPist: What did you notice?

Héctor: It was pretty easy to locate the tension—it
was in the pit of my stomach. But I really struggled
with opening up to it. My first response was “I don’t
want to let go off the struggle against racism. Why
should I accept it”? But then I remembered the last
time we did this exercise. And I reminded myself
that I only had to be open to the present moment. I
remembered that acceptance didn’t mean resigning
myself to a situation. Instead, I focused on accepting
that the incident had occurred and that I was rigidly
holding tension in my body.

tHeraPist: I am really impressed that you were able to
do that. What happened next?

Héctor: I continued to breathe into my stomach and I
worked on letting go of my tension. Once my body
became more relaxed I turned my attention to my
thoughts about the incident.

tHeraPist: And what did you observe?

Héctor: I had thoughts about racism and how unjust it
is for people to be treated differently based on their
appearance. I felt angry, which I think was a clear
emotion, but then I started to feel ashamed of my
behavior.

tHeraPist: Was that reaction clear or muddy?


Generalized Anxiety Disorder

Before you begin this exercise, think of a difficulty you’re experiencing right now. It doesn’t have to be a significant
difficulty, but choose something that you find unpleasant, something that is unresolved. It may be something
you are worried about, an argument or misunderstanding you’ve had, something you feel angry, resentful, guilty,
or frustrated about. If nothing is going on right now, think of some time in the recent past when you felt scared,
worried, frustrated, resentful, angry, or guilty, and use that.

Noticing the way you are sitting in the chair or on the floor. Noticing where your body is touching the chair or
floor. Bringing you attention to your breath for a moment. Noticing the in-breath . . . and the out-breath. . . . Now
gently widening your awareness, take in the body as a whole. Noticing any sensations that arise, breathing with
your whole body.

When you are ready, bringing to mind whatever situation has been bringing up difficult emotions for you.
Bringing your attention to the specific emotions that arise and any reactions you have to those emotions. And as
you are focusing on this troubling situation and your emotional reaction, allowing yourself to tune in to any physical
sensations in the body that you notice are arising . . . becoming aware of those physical sensations . . . and then
deliberately, but gently, directing your focus of attention to the region of the body where the sensations are the
strongest in the gesture of an embrace, a welcoming . . . noticing that this is how it is right now . . . and breathing
into that part of the body on the in-breath and breathing out from that region on the out-breath, exploring the
sensations, watching their intensity shift up and down from one moment to the next.

Now, seeing if you can bring to this attention an even deeper attitude of compassion and openness to
whatever sensations, thoughts, or emotions you are experiencing, however unpleasant, by saying to yourself from
time to time, “It’s OK. Whatever it is, it’s already here. Let me open to it.”

Staying with the awareness of these internal sensations, breathing with them, accepting them, letting them
be, and allowing them to be just as they are. Saying to yourself again, if you find it helpful, “It’s here right now.
Whatever it is, it’s already here. Let me be open to it.” Softening and opening to the sensation you become aware
of, letting go of any tensing and bracing. If you like, you can also experiment with holding in awareness both the
sensations of the body and the feeling of the breath moving in and out as you breathe with the sensations moment
by moment.

And when you notice that the bodily sensations are no longer pulling your attention to the same degree, simply
return 100% to the breath and continue with that as the primary object of attention. And then gently bringing your
awareness to the way you are sitting in the chair, your breath, and, when you are ready, opening your eyes.

figUre 5.2. Inviting a difficulty in and working with it through the body. From Williams, Teasdale, Segal, and Kabat-
Zinn (2007, pp. 151–152). Copyright 2007 by The Guilford Press. Adapted by permission.

Héctor: Well, I think a bit of both. I definitely was able
to bring some compassion to myself. No one wants to
be treated differently based on his/her appearance.

tHeraPist: That is great. I know it is not easy for you
to take a compassionate stance toward your thoughts
and actions. What do you think was clear about the
response?

Héctor: I am ashamed of my behavior. It is inconsistent
with my values to treat anyone the way I treated
that officer, even if he/she deserves it. Frankly, I
don’t care what he thinks of me, but I care what I
think about myself.

tHeraPist: It sounds like you said and did some things

that were inconsistent with your values. I wonder,
though, if you can bring some compassion to yourself
for that. Although we intend to behave consistently
with our values, we all have lapses. This was
a highly charged situation, and you were vulnerable
going into it. The important thing is that you are now
even more aware of your values. Are there any consistent
actions you can take this week?

Héctor: This incident made me realize that my values
have been a bit too off balance lately. I have been paying
a lot of attention to the schoolwork domain and
a pretty good amount of attention to the relationship
domain, but I think I need to take some actions consistent
with my values regarding self-nourishment


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

and community. At the beginning of the semester I
grabbed a flyer for the Latino Medical Student Association,
and I think I am going to contact them to see
if there are some activities I can get involved with.

tHeraPist: That sounds great.

Héctor: I also think I might try and meet with someone
from campus security. I think I want to apologize
for my behavior, but I also want to talk to them
about cultural sensitivity training. And don’t worry,
I didn’t forget about the arrow thing we talked about
a few weeks ago. I can only aim the arrow; I can’t
control where it lands. I know I might not change
their practices, but these actions are consistent with
my values.

Sessions 13–16

Héctor completed a treatment reflection writing assignment
that set the stage for the final four sessions of
therapy. He identified a few specific valued actions that
he wanted to take before the end of therapy. He also
recognized that although he was maintaining a pretty
steady formal mindfulness practice, he had paid less attention
to informal mindfulness. Héctor also had made
great gains in increasing his self-compassion, but he
felt that he needed more practice while he still had the
support of therapy.

Thus, Sessions 13–15 continued to follow the structure
of Sessions 8–11, but with added attention to issues
of maintenance. The therapist become less and less
directive throughout this time, allowing Héctor to address
obstacles and experience success himself. During
this time, Hector began to date and expand his social
network, feel more satisfied with his relationships with
his family members, and find more success and satisfaction
in his schoolwork.

During the final session, the therapist predicted that
there would be times when Héctor would feel overwhelmed
by emotion, drift away from his mindfulness
practice, and lose sight of his values, despite all the notable
gains he reported. She described these “lapses” as
a natural part of the process of life and helped Héctor to
make plans for how to cope. Specifically, she suggested
that he review the handouts in his binder, begin selfmonitoring
again, increase or reengage in mindfulness
practice, and consider doing some values writing. The
therapist and Héctor collaboratively developed a personalized
list of elements that were particularly helpful
for him and added that list to his binder. Héctor ex


pressed sadness at saying good-bye to his therapist, and
also excitement at feeling able to continue his progress
on his own and use the time allocated to therapy to engage
in other valued actions moving forward.

coNclusioN

Evidence suggests that this ABBT for GAD can target
symptoms of GAD, comorbid presenting problems, and
proposed mechanisms that underlie these clinical presentations,
while helping clients to engage in their lives
in satisfying ways. This chapter has presented a conceptual
basis for this treatment, as well as guidelines
for its flexible application, while remaining responsive
to the specific context of a given client. More research
is needed to better understand mechanisms and processes
of change, as well as how to disseminate this
treatment in community and primary care settings.

aCknowledgMents

We thank the therapists, students, and clients we have worked
with over the years for all they have taught us, as well as National
Institutes of Health for funding our work (Grant No.
MH074589). We also thank Dave Barlow, Tim Brown, Bonnie
Brown, and the staff at the Center for Anxiety and Related
Disorders for supporting our research over the past 10 years.
We dedicate this chapter to Tom Borkovec, whose seminal
work in the treatment of GAD is the sturdy foundation on
which our work stands.

note

1. Audio recordings of this exercise, as well as other mindfulness
exercises we use, are available at www.mindfulwaythroughanxietybook.
com. Scripts for many of these
mindfulness exercises are available in Roemer and Orsillo
(2009) and Orsillo and Roemer (2011).
referenCes

American Psychiatric Association. (1994). Diagnostic and

statistical manual of mental disorders (4th ed.). Washing


ton, DC: Author.
American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and

statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.). Arling


ton, VA: Author.
Andrews, G., Hobbs, M. J., Borkovec, T. D., Beesdo, K.,

Craske, M. G., Heimberg, R. G., et al. (2010). Generalized


Generalized Anxiety Disorder

worry disorder: A review of DSM-IV generalized anxiety
disorder and options for DSM-V. Depression and Anxiety,
27(2), 134–147.

Arch, J. J., Eifert, G. H., Davies, C., Vilardaga, J. C. P., Rose,

R. D., & Craske, M. G. (2012). Randomized clinical trial
of cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) versus acceptance
and commitment therapy (ACT) for mixed anxiety disorders.
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,
80(5), 750–765.
Ballenger, J. C., Davidson, J. R. T., Lecrubier, Y., Nutt, D.
J., Borkovec, T. D., Rickels, K., et al. (2001). Consensus
statement on generalized anxiety disorder from the international
consensus group on depression and anxiety. Journal
of Clinical Psychiatry, 62, 53–58.

Behar, E., DiMarco, I. D., Hekler, E. B., Mohlman, J., &
Staples, A. M. (2009). Current theoretical models of generalized
anxiety disorder (GAD): Conceptual review and
treatment implications. Journal of Anxiety Disorders,
23(8), 1011–1023.

Belanger, L., Ladouceur, R., & Morin, C. M. (2005). Generalized
anxiety disorder and health care use. Canadian
Family Physician, 51(10), 1362–1363.

Blevins, D., Roca, J. V., & Spencer, T. (2011). Life guard:
Evaluation of an ACT-based workshop to facilitate reintegration
of OIF/OEF veterans. Professional Psychology:
Research and Practice, 42(1), 32–39.

Bond, F. W., Hayes, S. C., Baer, R. A., Carpenter, K. M.,
Guenole, N., Orcutt, H. K., et al. (2011). Preliminary
psychometric properties of the Acceptance and Action
Questionnaire–II: A revised measure of psychological inflexibility
and experiential avoidance. Behavior Therapy,
42, 676–688.

Borkovec, T. D., Alcaine, O. M., & Behar, E. (2004). Avoidance
theory of worry and generalized anxiety disorder.
In R. G. Heimberg, C. L. Turk, & D. S. Mennin (Eds.),
Generalized anxiety disorder: Advances in research and
practice. (pp. 77–108). New York: Guilford Press.

Borkovec, T. D., & Costello, E. (1993). Efficacy of applied
relaxation and cognitive-behavioral therapy in the treatment
of generalized anxiety disorder. Journal of Consulting
and Clinical Psychology, 61(4), 611–619.

Borkovec, T. D., & Hu, S. (1990). The effect of worry on
cardiovascular response to phobic imagery. Behaviour Research
and Therapy, 28(1), 69–73.

Borkovec, T. D., & Roemer, L. (1995). Perceived functions of
worry among generalized anxiety disorder subjects: Distraction
from more emotionally distressing topics? Journal
of Behavior Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry,
26(1), 25–30.

Borkovec, T. D., & Ruscio, A. M. (2001). Psychotherapy for
generalized anxiety disorder. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry,
62, 37–42.

Borkovec, T. D., & Sharpless, B. (2004). Generalized anxiety
disorder: Bringing cognitive-behavioral therapy into the
valued present. In S. C. Hayes, V. M. Follette, & M. M.

Linehan (Eds.), Mindfulness and acceptance: Expanding
the cognitive-behavioral tradition (pp. 209–242). New
York: Guilford Press.

Brown, L. A., Forman, E. M., Herbert, J. D., Hoffman, K.
L., Yuen, E. K., & Goetter, E. M. (2011). A randomized
controlled trial of acceptance-based behavior therapy and
cognitive therapy for test anxiety: A pilot study. Behavior
Modification, 35(1), 31–53.

Bruce, S. E., Machan, J. T., Dyck, I., & Keller, M. B. (2001).
Infrequency of “pure” GAD: Impact of psychiatric comorbidity
on clinical course. Depression and Anxiety, 14(4),
219–225.

Chodron, P. (2007). Practicing peace in times of war. Boston:
Shambhala.

Cisler, J. M., & Koster, E. H. W. (2010). Mechanisms of attentional
biases towards threat in anxiety disorders: An
integrative review. Clinical Psychology Review, 30(2),
203–216.

Covin, R., Ouimet, A. J., Seeds, P. M., & Dozois, D. J. A.
(2008). A meta-analysis of CBT for pathological worry
among clients with GAD. Journal of Anxiety Disorders,
22(1), 108–116.

Davidson, J. R. T., Bose, A., Korotzer, A., & Zheng, H.
(2004). Escitalopram in the treatment of generalized anxiety
disorder: Double-blind, placebo controlled, flexibledose
study. Depression and Anxiety, 19(4), 234–240.

Dimidjian, S., & Linehan, M. M. (2009). Mindfulness practice.
In W. T. O’Donohue & J. E. Fisher (Eds.), General
principles and empirically supported techniques of cognitive
behavior therapy (pp. 425–434). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.

Di Nardo, P. A., Brown, T. A., & Barlow, D. H. (1994). Anxiety
Disorders Interview Schedule for DSM-IV. Albany,
NY: Graywind.

Dugas, M. J., Brillon, P., Savard, P., Turcotte, J., Gaudet, A.,
Ladouceur, R., et al. (2010). A randomized clinical trial
of cognitive-behavioral therapy and applied relaxation for
adults with generalized anxiety disorder. Behavior Therapy,
41(1), 46–58.

Etkin, A., & Schatzberg, A. F. (2011). Common abnormalities
and disorder-specific compensation during implicit regulation
of emotional processing in generalized anxiety and
major depressive disorders. American Journal of Psychiatry,
168(9), 968–978.

Evans, S., Ferrando, S., Findler, M., Stowell, C., Smart, C., &
Haglin, D. (2008). Mindfulness-based cognitive therapy
for generalized anxiety disorder. Journal of Anxiety Disorders,
22(4), 716–721.

Fuchs, C., Lee, J. K., Roemer, L., & Orsillo, S. M. (2013).
Using mindfulness- and acceptance-based treatments
with clients from nondominant and/or marginalized backgrounds:
Clinical considerations, meta-analysis findings,
and introduction to the special series. Cognitive and Behavioral
Practice, 20(1), 1–12.

Fuchs, C., West, L. M., Graham, J. R., Hayes-Skelton, S. A.,
Orsillo, S. M., & Roemer, L. (2012, April). Exploring the


CLINICAL HANDBOOK OF PSYCHOLOGICAL DISORDERS

acceptability of mindfulness-based treatment among individuals
from non-dominant cultural backgrounds. In J.

R. Graham (Chair), Examining Mindfulness and Anxiety
across Diverse Methods and Contexts Symposium presented
at the annual meeting of the Anxiety Disorders Association
of America, Arlington, VA.
Gelenberg, A. J., Lydiard, R. B., Rudolph, R. L., Aguiar, L.,
Haskins, J. T., & Salinas, E. (2000). Efficacy of venlafaxine
extended-release capsules in nondepressed outpatients
with generalized anxiety disorder: A 6-month randomized
controlled trial. Journal of the American Medical Association,
283(23), 3082–3088.

Gentes, E. L., & Ruscio, A. M. (2011). A meta-analysis of
the relation of intolerance of uncertainty to symptoms of
generalized anxiety disorder, major depressive disorder,
and obsessive–compulsive disorder. Clinical Psychology
Review, 31(6), 923–933.

Germer, C. K. (2005). Anxiety disorders: Befriending fear.
In C. K. Germer, R. D. Siegel, & P. R. Fulton (Eds.), Mindfulness
and psychotherapy (pp. 152–172). New York:
Guilford Press.

Gratz, K. L., & Roemer, L. (2004). Multidimensional assessment
of emotion regulation and dysregulation: Development,
factor structure, and initial validation of the
Difficulties in Emotion Regulation Scale. Journal of Psychopathology
and Behavioral Assessment, 26(1), 41–54.

Gross, J. J. (2002). Emotion regulation: Affective, cognitive,
and social consequences. Psychophysiology, 39(3),
281–291.

Gross, J. J., & Levenson, R. W. (1997). Hiding feelings: The
acute effects of inhibiting negative and positive emotion.
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 106(1), 95–103.

Hayes, S. A., Orsillo, S. M., & Roemer, L. (2010). Changes
in proposed mechanisms of action during an acceptancebased
behavior therapy for generalized anxiety disorder.
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 48(3), 238–245.

Hayes, S. C., Strosahl, K. D., & Wilson, K. G. (2012). Acceptance
and commitment therapy: The process and practice
of mindful change (2nd ed.). New York: Guilford Press.

Hayes, S. C., Wilson, K. G., Gifford, E. V., Follette, V. M., &
Strosahl, K. (1996). Experiential avoidance and behavioral
disorders: A functional dimensional approach to diagnosis
and treatment. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,
64(6), 1152–1168.

Hayes-Skelton, S. A., Roemer, L., & Orsillo, S. M. (2013). A
randomized clinical trial comparing an acceptance based
behavior therapy to applied relaxation for generalized anxiety
disorder. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,
81(5), 761–773.

Hays, P. A. (2008). Addressing cultural complexities in practice:
Assessment, diagnosis, and therapy (2nd ed.). Washington,
DC: American Psychological Association.

Heatherington, L., Harrington, N. T., Harrington, J., Neimeyer,
K. F., Weinberg, S. C., & Friedlander, M. L. (2013).
Applying group cognitive behavior therapy for anxiety

disorders in community settings: Retention, outcome, and
clinical considerations. Manuscript under review.

Heuzenroeder, L., Donnelly, M., Haby, M. M., Mihalopoulos,
C., Rossell, R., Carter, R., et al. (2004). Cost-effectiveness
of psychological and pharmacological interventions for
generalized anxiety disorder and panic disorder. Australian
and New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry, 38(8),
602–612.

Hidalgo, R. B., Tupler, L. A., & Davidson, J. R. T. (2007). An
effect-size analysis of pharmacologic treatments for generalized
anxiety disorder. Journal of Psychopharmacology,
21(8), 864–872.

Hoffman, D. L., Dukes, E. M., & Wittchen, H. (2008). Human
and economic burden of generalized anxiety disorder. Depression
and Anxiety, 25(1), 72–90.

Issakidis, C., Sanderson, K., Corry, J., Andrews, G., & Lapsley,
H. (2004). Modelling the population cost-effectiveness
of current and evidence-based optimal treatment for anxiety
disorders. Psychological Medicine, 34(1), 19–35.

Kabat-Zinn, J. (1990). Full catastrophe living: Using the wisdom
of your body and mind to face stress, pain, and illness.
New York: Delta.

Kabat-Zinn, J. (1995). Wherever you go there you are: Mindfulness
meditation in everyday life. New York: Hyperion.

Kabat-Zinn, J. (2003). Mindfulness-based interventions in
context: Past, present, and future. Clinical Psychology:
Science and Practice, 10(2), 144–156.

Katzman, M. A. (2009). Current considerations in the treatment
of generalized anxiety disorder. CNS Drugs, 23(2),
103–120.

Kennedy, B. L., & Schwab, J. J. (1997). Utilization of medical
specialists by anxiety disorder patients. Psychosomatics,
38(2), 109–112.

Kessler, R. C., Berglund, P., Demler, O., Jin, R., Merikangas,

K. R., & Walters, E. E. (2005). Lifetime prevalence and
age-of-onset distributions of DSM-IV disorders in the National
Comorbidity Survey Replication. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 62(6), 593–602.
Kocovski, N. L., Fleming, J. E., & Rector, N. A. (2009).
Mindfulness and acceptance-based group therapy for social
anxiety disorder: An open trial. Cognitive and Behavioral
Practice, 16(3), 276–289.

Ladouceur, R., Gosselin, P., & Dugas, M. J. (2000). Experimental
manipulation of intolerance of uncertainty: A
study of a theoretical model of worry. Behaviour Research
and Therapy, 38(9), 933–941.

Lee, J. K., Fuchs, C., Roemer, L., & Orsillo, S. M. (2009).
Cultural considerations in acceptance-based behavior
therapies. In L. Roemer & S. M. Orsillo (Eds.), Mindfulness-
and acceptance-based behavioral therapies in practice
(pp. 215–228). New York: Guilford Press.

Lee, J. K., Orsillo, S. M., Roemer, L., & Allen, L. B. (2010).
Distress and avoidance in generalized anxiety disorder:
Exploring the relationships with intolerance of uncertainty
and worry. Cognitive Behaviour Therapy, 39(2), 126–136.


Generalized Anxiety Disorder

Levitt, J. T., Brown, T. A., Orsillo, S. M., & Barlow, D. H.
(2004). The effects of acceptance versus suppression of
emotion on subjective and psychophysiological response
to carbon dioxide challenge in patients with panic disorder.
Behavior Therapy, 35(4), 747–766.

Linehan, M. M. (1993). Cognitive-behavioral treatment
of borderline personality disorder. New York: Guilford
Press.

Logue, M. B., Thomas, A. M., Barbee, J. G., & Hoehn-Saric,

R. (1993). Generalized anxiety disorder patients seek evaluation
for cardiological symptoms at the same frequency
as patients with panic disorder. Journal of Psychiatric Research,
27(1), 55–59.
Lovibond, S. H., & Lovibond, P. F. (1995). Manual for the
Depression Anxiety Stress Scales. Sydney: Psychology
Foundation of Australia.

Marten, P. A., Brown, T. A., Barlow, D. H., Borkovec, T. D.,
Shear, M. K., & Lydiard, R. B. (1993). Evaluation of the
ratings comprising the associated symptom criterion of
DSM-III-R generalized anxiety disorder. Journal of Nervous
and Mental Disease, 181(11), 676–682.

Mennin, D. S., & Fresco, D. M. (2014). Emotion regulation
therapy. In J. J. Gross (Ed.), Handbook of emotion regulation
(2nd ed., pp. 469–490). New York: Guilford Press.

Mennin, D. S., Holaway, R. M., Fresco, D. M., Moore, M.
T., & Heimberg, R. G. (2007). Delineating components of
emotion and its dysregulation in anxiety and mood psychopathology.
Behavior Therapy, 38(3), 284–302.

Meyer, T. J., Miller, M. L., Metzger, R. L., & Borkovec, T.

D. (1990). Development and validation of the Penn State
Worry Questionnaire. Behaviour Research and Therapy,
28(6), 487–495.
Michelson, S. E., Lee, J. K., Orsillo, S. M., & Roemer, L.
(2011). The role of values-consistent behavior in generalized
anxiety disorder. Depression and Anxiety, 28(5),
358–366.

Mussell, M., Kroenke, K., Spitzer, R. L., Williams, J. B. W.,
Herzog, W., & Löwe, B. (2008). Gastrointestinal symptoms
in primary care: Prevalence and association with depression
and anxiety. Journal of Psychosomatic Research,
64(6), 605–612.

Najmi, S., & Wegner, D. M. (2008). Thought suppression
and psychopathology. In A. J. Elliot (Ed.), Handbook of
approach and avoidance motivation (pp. 447–459). New
York: Psychology Press.

Neff, K. D. (2003). The development and validation of a
scale to measure self-compassion. Self and Identity, 2(3),
223–250.

Newman, M. G., Castonguay, L. G., Borkovec, T. D., Fisher,
A. J., Boswell, J. F., Szkodny, L. E., et al. (2011). A
randomized controlled trial of cognitive-behavioral therapy
for generalized anxiety disorder with integrated techniques
from emotion-focused and interpersonal therapies.
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 79(2),
171–181.

Nhat Hanh, T. (1992). Peace is every step: The path of mindfulness
in everyday life. New York: Bantam Books.

Olatunji, B. O., & Wolitzky-Taylor, K. B. (2009). Anxiety
sensitivity and the anxiety disorders: A meta-analytic
review and synthesis. Psychological Bulletin, 135(6),
974–999.

Orsillo, S. M., & Roemer, L. (2011). The mindful way through
anxiety: Break free from chronic worry and reclaim your
life. New York: Guilford Press.

Orsillo, S. M., Roemer, L., & Barlow, D. H. (2003). Integrating
acceptance and mindfulness into existing cognitivebehavioral
treatment for GAD: A case study. Cognitive
and Behavioral Practice, 10(3), 222–230.

Orsillo, S.M., Roemer, L., & Salters-Pedneault, K. (2008,
November). Acceptance-based behavioral therapy for
GAD: Predictors of change. Paper presented at the annual
meeting of the Association of Behavioral and Cognitive
Therapies, Orlando, FL.

Przeworski, A., Newman, M. G., Pincus, A. L., Kasoff, M.
B., Yamasaki, A. S., Castonguay, L. G., et al. (2011). Interpersonal
pathoplasticity in individuals with generalized
anxiety disorder. Journal of Abnormal Psychology,
120(2), 286–298.

Rickels, K., Zaninelli, R., McCafferty, J., Bellew, K., Iyengar,
M., & Sheehan, D. (2003). Paroxetine treatment of generalized
anxiety disorder: A double-blind, placebo-controlled
study. American Journal of Psychiatry, 160(4), 749–756.

Revicki, D. A., Travers, K., Wyrwich, K. W., Svedsäter, H.,
Locklear, J., Mattera, M., et al. (2012). Humanistic and
economic burden of generalized anxiety disorder in North
America and Europe. Journal of Affective Disorders,
140(2), 103–112.

Roemer, L., & Borkovec, T. D. (1994). Effects of suppressing
thoughts about emotional material. Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 103(3), 467–474.

Roemer, L., Lee, J. K., Salters-Pedneault, K., Erisman, S.
M., Orsillo, S. M., & Mennin, D. S. (2009). Mindfulness
and emotion regulation difficulties in generalized anxiety
disorder: Preliminary evidence for independent and overlapping
contributions. Behavior Therapy, 40(2), 142–154.

Roemer, L., Molina, S., & Borkovec, T. D. (1997). An investigation
of worry content among generally anxious individuals.
Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 185(5),
314–319.

Roemer, L., & Orsillo, S. M. (2007). An open trial of an
acceptance-based behavior therapy for generalized anxiety
disorder. Behavior Therapy, 38(1), 72–85.

Roemer, L., & Orsillo, S. M. (2009). Mindfulness-and
acceptance-based behavioral therapies in practice. New
York: Guilford Press.

Roemer, L., Orsillo, S. M., & Salters-Pedneault, K. (2008).
Efficacy of an acceptance-based behavior therapy for
generalized anxiety disorder: Evaluation in a randomized
controlled trial. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,
76(6), 1083–1089.


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

Romera, I., Fernández-Pérez, S., Montejo, Á. L., Caballero,
F., Caballero, L., Arbesú, J. Á., et al. (2010). Generalized
anxiety disorder, with or without co-morbid major depressive
disorder, in primary care: Prevalence of painful somatic
symptoms, functioning and health status. Journal of
Affective Disorders, 127(1–3), 160–168.

Sauer-Zavala, S., Boswell, J. F., Gallagher, M. W., Bentley,

K. H., Ametaj, A., & Barlow, D. H. (2012). The role of
negative affectivity and negative reactivity to emotions in
predicting outcomes in the unified protocol for the transdiagnostic
treatment of emotional disorders. Behaviour
Research and Therapy, 50(9), 551–557.
Segal, Z. V., Williams, J. M., & Teasdale, J. D. (2002).
Mindfulness-based cognitive therapy for depression: A
new approach to preventing relapse. New York: Guilford
Press.

Siev, J., & Chambless, D. L. (2007). Specificity of treatment
effects: Cognitive therapy and relaxation for generalized
anxiety and panic disorders. Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 75(4), 513–522.

Sobczak, L. R., & West, L. M. (2013). Clinical considerations
in using mindfulness- and acceptance-based approaches
with diverse populations: Addressing challenges in service
delivery in diverse community settings. Cognitive and Behavioral
Practice, 20(1), 13–22.

Sorensen, S. M., Hayes-Skelton, S. A., Roemer, L., & Orsillo,
S. M. (2012, June). Working alliance across an
acceptance-based behavior therapy and applied relaxation
for clients with GAD. Poster presented at the annual
meeting of the Society for Psychotherapy Research, Virginia
Beach, VA.

Stapinski, L. A., Abbott, M. J., & Rapee, R. M. (2010). Fear
and perceived uncontrollability of emotion: Evaluating the
unique contribution of emotion appraisal variables to prediction
of worry and generalised anxiety disorder. Behaviour
Research and Therapy, 48(11), 1097–1104.

Stöber, J., & Bittencourt, J. (1998). Weekly assessment of
worry: An adaptation of the Penn State Worry Questionnaire
for monitoring changes during treatment. Behaviour
Research and Therapy, 36(6), 645–656.

Sue, D. W., & Sue, D. (2012). Counseling the culturally diverse:
Theory and practice (6th ed.). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.

Sue, S. (1998). In search of cultural competence in psychotherapy
and counseling. American Psychologist, 53(4),
440–448.

Thayer, J. F., Friedman, B. H., & Borkovec, T. D. (1996). Au


tonomic characteristics of generalized anxiety disorder
and worry. Biological Psychiatry, 39(4), 255–266.

Treanor, M., Erisman, S. M., Salters-Pedneault, K., Roemer,
L., & Orsillo, S. M. (2011). Acceptance-based behavioral
therapy for GAD: Effects on outcomes from three theoretical
models. Depression and Anxiety, 28(2), 127–136.

Wang, P. S., Lane, M., Olfson, M., Pincus, H. A., Wells, K.
B., & Kessler, R. C. (2005). Twelve-month use of mental
health services in the united states: Results from the National
Comorbidity Survey Replication. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 62(6), 629–640.

Waters, A. M., & Craske, M. G. (2005). Generalized anxiety
disorder. In M. M. Antony, D. R. Ledley, & R. G. Heimberg
(Eds.), Improving outcomes and preventing relapse
in cognitive-behavorial therapy (pp. 77–127). New York:
Guilford Press.

Wells, A. (2005). The metacognitive model of GAD: Assessment
of meta-worry and relationship with DSM-IV generalized
anxiety disorder. Cognitive Therapy and Research,
29(1), 107–121.

Wells, A., Welford, M., King, P., Papageorgiou, C., Wisely,
J., & Mendel, E. (2010). A pilot randomized trial of metacognitive
therapy vs applied relaxation in the treatment of
adults with generalized anxiety disorder. Behaviour Research
and Therapy, 48(5), 429–434.

Whisman, M. A. (2007). Marital distress and DSM-IV psychiatric
disorders in a population-based national survey.
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 116(3), 638–643.

Williams, J. M. G., Teasdale, J. D., Segal, Z. V., & Kabat-
Zinn, J. (2007). The mindful way through depression:
Freeing yourself from chronic unhappiness. New York:
Guilford Press.

Williams, K. E., Chambless, D. L., & Ahrens, A. (1997).
Are emotions frightening?: An extension of the fear of
fear construct. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 35(3),
239–248.

Wilson, K. G., & Murrell, A. R. (2004). Values work in acceptance
and commitment therapy: Setting a course for
behavioral treatment. In S. C. Hayes, V. M. Follette, & M.

M. Linehan (Eds.), Mindfulness and acceptance: Expanding
the cognitive-behavioral tradition (pp. 120–151). New
York: Guilford Press.
Wilson, K. G., Sandoz, E. K., Kitchens, J., & Roberts, M.
(2010). The Valued Living Questionnaire: Defining and
measuring valued action within a behavioral framework.
Psychological Record, 60(2), 249–272.


CHaPter 6

emotional Disorders

A Unified Transdiagnostic Protocol

laura a. PayNe
kristeN k. ellarD
toDD J. farchioNe
christoPher P. fairholMe
DaviD h. Barlow

in this chapter we describe the most recently developed treatment protocol from the
Center for Anxiety and related Disorders at Boston University. in this “unified” transdiagnostic
protocol, therapeutic principles common to psychological treatment of the various
emotional disorders have been distilled and integrated into a single protocol that is,
in theory, applicable to the full range of emotional disorders. Unlike protocols for specific
problems or disorders described in other chapters, this new approach is only beginning to
benefit from efforts to establish extensive empirical validation. But the components that
make up this treatment have achieved wide and deep empirical support, and initial outcomes
of this protocol are promising. What is new about this approach is the systematic
manner in which the treatment components are applied across disorders, as well as theoretical
developments leading to reconceptualization of the principal target of treatment
as a common, higher order temperament undergirding disorders of emotion rather than
specific DsM‑defining system clusters. The major advantage, of course, in addition to
greatly simplifying dissemination by eliminating numerous overlapping single‑disorder
protocols, is that this approach also takes into consideration the extensive comorbidity
often found among emotional disorders. This approach is illustrated in the treatment of
“Joseph.”—D. H. B.

When the first edition of this book was published
in 1985 it was the dawn of evidence-based psychological
treatments. Descriptions of only those treatments
with sufficient empirical support that were broadly applicable
to large numbers of individuals with various
forms of psychopathology at that time were included.
Over succeeding editions of this book some new treatment
approaches with wide appeal and strong empirical
support have been added, whereas others have been

deleted. In addition, the field has matured to the point
where public health services around the world have
directed that evidence-based psychological treatments
become an integral part of health care delivery systems
due to their effectiveness, efficiency, and durability
(Clark, 2012; Nathan & Gorman, 2007; Ruzek, Karlin,
& Zeiss, 2012). It is also a sign of the maturity of a field
to examine closely the limitations of existing evidence.
Obviously, a considerable number of patients still do

237


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

not respond as well as would be desirable to our current
arsenal of psychological (or drug) treatments, and there
is plenty of room for improvement.

Another problem that has become apparent, particularly
in the context of emotional disorders, is that there
now exists a plethora of treatment protocols for each of
the discrete anxiety and mood disorders. Although these
protocols, by and large, have proven useful and been
well received, it takes a significant amount of training to
become sufficiently familiar with the distinct protocols
to integrate them into clinical practice (Barlow, Bullis,
Comer, & Ametaj, 2013). Unless these treatments
become more “user-friendly” as recommended, clinicians
are less likely to have a sufficient understanding
of, or access to, these evidence-based treatments for
the emotional disorders (McHugh & Barlow, 2012).
In this chapter, we present a unified protocol (UP) for
the transdiagnostic treatment of emotional disorders.
“Emotional disorders” in our conception include not
only the anxiety, depressive, obssessive–compulsive,
and trauma-related disorders but also other classes of
disorders in which the experience and regulation of
emotion plays a prominent role, such as the somatic
disorders, dissociative disorders, and, to some extent,
the eating disorders. Borderline personality disorder
can also be conceptualized as a disorder of extreme
emotional dysregulation (Sauer-Zavala & Barlow, 2013;
Neacsiu & Linehan, Chapter 10, this volume) and may
fit within our UP conceptualization. Our science and
practice have advanced sufficiently that there are now
several strong arguments for developing such an approach,
in addition to the very practical advantage of
substantially reducing the number of existing protocols.
We touch on these arguments here before describing the
treatment components of the UP in some detail, in keeping
with the long-standing format of this book.

ratioNale for a uNifieD aPProach

Perhaps the strongest argument for a unified transdiagnostic
treatment approach to emotional disorders is an
emerging body of evidence supporting commonalities
in the etiology of these disorders that we have summarized
recently in the form of a new etiological model referred
to as “triple vulnerability” (Barlow, 1991, 2000,
2002; Suárez, Bennett, Goldstein, & Barlow, 2009). Of
course, it is important to note that shared etiological
pathways or pathophysiological processes are not yet
firmly established, and that emotional disorders and

their subtypes may each turn out to be associated with
unique underlying pathology (reflecting a true categorical
organization) with identifiable taxa. Yet we believe
that the evidence on shared pathological processes is
sufficiently strong at present to justify a transdiagnostic
treatment approach.

A second argument focuses on conceptions of the
major emotional disorders that emphasize their commonalities
rather than their differences. The “spectrum”
approach is one manifestation of this conception.
For example, high rates of comorbidity suggest considerable
overlap among disorders. The observed effects
of current psychological treatments on comorbid conditions
also point to at least a partial nonspecificity
of treatment response. From a phenomenological perspective,
emerging research on the latent structure of
dimensional features of emotional disorders reveals a
hierarchical structure that can accommodate these disorders.
The sections to follow briefly review evidence
relevant to these arguments.

Etiology

We have described in some detail an interacting set
of vulnerabilities or diatheses relevant to the development
of anxiety, anxiety disorders, and related emotional
disorders. This “triple vulnerability” theory
encompasses a generalized biological vulnerability, a
generalized psychological vulnerability, and a specific
psychological vulnerability emerging from early learning
(Barlow, 2000, 2002; Suárez et al., 2009). Much
of the research on generalized biological and psychological
vulnerabilities has focused on a temperament
labeled, variously, “neuroticism,” “negative affect,”
“behavioral inhibition,” or “trait anxiety.” Although
the relationships among these closely related traits and
temperaments have yet to be worked out fully, it seems
that they substantially overlap and represent a common
theme associated with a biological vulnerability
to develop emotional disorders (Barlow, 2000, 2002;
Campbell-Sills, Liverant, & Brown, 2004; Suárez et
al., 2009). We have come to refer to this temperament
by its most traditional label “neuroticism” (Barlow,
Sauer-Zavala, Carl, Bullis, & Ellard, in press; Eysenck,
1947). A generalized biological vulnerability involves
nonspecific genetic contributions to the development
of neuroticism. Additionally, early life experiences fostering
a sense that events, particularly negative events,
are unpredictable or uncontrollable, contribute to a
generalized psychological vulnerability, or diathesis,


Emotional Disorders

to develop neuroticism later on. If a generalized biological
and a generalized psychological vulnerability
happen to line up and are potentiated by the influence
of life stress, the likely result is a development of the
two closely related clinical syndromes of generalized
anxiety disorder (GAD) and/or depressive disorders.
Notice that false alarms (panic attacks) may also occur
as a function of stressful life events, facilitated by high
levels of baseline anxiety. But these false alarms seem
to have a different heritability than anxiety and are not
necessarily implicated in a clinical disorder. For that
to occur, an additional layer of a more specific psychological
vulnerability must be considered. In particular,
certain learning experiences seem to focus anxiety on
specific life circumstances, and these circumstances or
events are associated with a heightened sense of threat
or danger. For example, specific early learning experiences
seem to determine whether individuals may view
somatic sensations, intrusive thoughts, or social evaluation
as specifically dangerous (Barlow, 2002; Bouton,
Mineka, & Barlow, 2001); that is, to take one example,
individuals with social anxiety often have in their background
admonitions from parents or family always to
be on their best behavior and to look their best, to avoid
the dreaded consequence of being negatively evaluated
or “disapproved of” by others. It is this specific psychological
vulnerability that, when coordinated with the
generalized biological and psychological vulnerabilities
mentioned earlier, seems to contribute to the development
of discrete anxiety disorders such as social
anxiety disorder, panic disorder, and specific phobias.
This model is also applicable to obsessive–compulsive
and trauma and stressor-related disorders. For instance,
in obsessive–compulsive disorder (OCD), individuals
often report learning from authority figures that having
a thought is as bad as engaging in the action (i.e.,
having the thought about shaking a newborn infant to
quiet it is as bad as actually shaking the infant). Existing
evidence for this “triple vulnerability” model has
been reviewed in detail elsewhere (Bouton et al., 2001;
Chorpita & Barlow, 1998; Suárez et al., 2009) and is
consistent with the overriding importance of common
factors in the genesis and presentation of emotional disorders.


Latent Structure of the Emotional Disorders

Whereas the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders, fourth and fifth editions (DSM-
IV-TR and DSM-5; American Psychiatric Associa


tion, 2000, 2013) highlight a “splitting approach” to
nosology, in an attempt to achieve high rates of diagnostic
reliability, this achievement may have come at
the expense of diagnostic validity; that is, the current
system may be highlighting categories that are minor
variations of more fundamental underlying syndromes.
Quantitative approaches using latent variable methodology
are now capable of examining the full range of
anxiety and mood disorders, and their interrelationships,
without the constraints of existing (possibly) artificial
categories (Brown, Chorpita, & Barlow, 1998;
Chorpita, Albano, & Barlow, 1998; Clark, 2005; Clark
& Watson, 1991; Watson, 2005). We have been studying
this question for a number of years. For example,
Brown and colleagues (1998), using a sample of 350
patients with DSM-IV anxiety and mood disorders,
confirmed a hierarchical structure to the emotional disorders.
In this structure, trait negative affect and trait
positive affect were identified as crucial higher-order
factors to the DSM-IV disorder factors, with significant
paths from negative affect to each of the five DSM-IV
disorder factors (GAD, social phobia, panic disorder,
OCD, and major depression). Interestingly, low positive
affect emerged with significant paths to major depression
and social phobia only. In this model, autonomic
arousal represents the phenomenon of panic, and this
arousal emerges as a lower-order factor with significant
paths from panic disorder and GAD (where the relationship
was negative).

A separate study followed 606 patients with DSM-
IV anxiety and mood disorders over the course of 2
years found further support for this hierarchical model
(Brown, 2007). Replicating earlier cross-sectional findings,
the two higher-order temperament dimensions of
neuroticism/behavioral inhibition/negative affectivity
and behavioral activation/positive affectivity accounted
for virtually all of the covariance among DSM-IV
disorder constructs (GAD, social phobia, and major
depression). Furthermore, the rate of change in neuroticism/
behavioral inhibition over the study period accounted
for virtually all of the covariance among the
rate of change in DSM-IV disorder constructs. Findings
such as these suggest that commonalities among
emotional disorders outweigh the differences. We have
concluded from this research that DSM-IV emotional
disorder categories are best considered as useful concepts
or constructs that emerge as “blips” on a general
background of neuroticism/behavioral inhibition but
may not be the best way to organize nosology (Brown
& Barlow, 2009).


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

Overlap among Disorders

At the diagnostic level, the overlap among the emotional
disorders is most evident in the high rates of current
and lifetime comorbidity (e.g., Brown, Campbell,
Lehman, Grisham, & Mancill, 2001; Kessler et al.,
1996; Roy-Byrne, Craske, & Stein, 2006; Tsao, Mystkowski,
Zucker, & Craske, 2002, 2005). Results from
Brown, Campbell, and colleagues (2001) indicate that
55% of patients with a principal anxiety disorder had
at least one additional anxiety or depressive disorder
at the time of assessment. But if one examines for the
presence of a disorder over the lifetime of the patient,
whether it is present or not at the time of interview, this
rate increases to 76%. To take one example, 60% of 324
patients diagnosed with panic disorder with or without
agoraphobia (PD/A) were determined to meet criteria
for either an additional anxiety or mood disorder, or
both. Specifically 47% presented with an additional
anxiety disorder and 33% with an additional mood
disorder. When lifetime diagnoses are considered, the
percentages rise to 77% experiencing any anxiety or
mood disorder, breaking down to 56% for any anxiety
disorder and 60% for any mood disorder. If posttraumatic
stress disorder (PTSD) or GAD were the principal
(most severe) diagnoses, comorbidity rates were
highest. Merikangas, Zhang, and Aveneoli (2003) followed
almost 500 individuals for 15 years and found
that relatively few people suffer from anxiety or depression
alone. When a single disorder did occur at one
point in time, the additional mood state would almost
certainly emerge later.

Several possible explanations for these high rates of
comorbidity have been reviewed extensively elsewhere
(Brown & Barlow, 2002). Among these are relatively
trivial issues with overlapping definitional criteria; artifactual
reasons, such as differential base rates of occurrence
in our setting; and the possibility that disorders
are sequentially related, and that the features of
one disorder act as risk factors for another disorder.
For example, depression seems to follow PDA, and
PDA seems to follow PTSD. But the more intriguing
explanation, for our purposes, first offered by individuals
such as Gavin Andrews and Peter Tyrer (Andrews,
1990, 1996; Tyrer, 1989; Tyrer et al., 1998), is that this
pattern of comorbidity argues for the existence of what
has been called a “general neurotic syndrome.” Andrews
and Tyrer have suggested that the difference in
the expression of emotional disorder symptoms (individual
variation in the prominence of social anxiety,

panic attacks, anhedonia, etc.) is simply a trivial variation
in the manifestation of a broader syndrome. This,
in turn, is consistent with “triple vulnerability” models
mentioned earlier, that anxiety (and mood) disorders
emerge from shared psychosocial and biological/genetic
diatheses. If this is the case, then a unified treatment
protocol cutting across current diagnostic categories
to address core features of the anxiety and mood
disorders could be a more parsimonious, and, perhaps,
powerful option.

We have reviewed the genetic and neurobiological
evidence on the commonalities among anxiety
and depressive states in some detail elsewhere (Barlow,
2002, Chaps. 3, 6, 7, & 8; Bouton, 2005; Brown,
2007; Suárez et al., 2009). For example, most work on
genetic contributions to anxiety and depression supports
the early dictum of Ken Kendler (1996; Kendler
et al., 1995), “same genes different environment”
(Hettema, Neale, & Kendler, 2001; Rutter, Moffit, &
Caspi, 2006). Consistent with a theory of an underlying
genetic vulnerability, genetic variations have been
linked to both trait anxiety and negative emotionality
(or neuroticism) (Montag, Fiebach, Kirsch, & Reuter,
2011; Stein, Campbell-Sills, & Gelernter, 2009), and
have been found to influence the later development of
psychopathology following life stressors (Caspi et al.,
2003). Recently, a growing body of literature in genetics
has observed links between genetic polymorphisms
and both the function and structure of neural pathways
implicated in emotional processing, suggesting an association
between a genetic predisposition, inefficient or
maladaptive emotion processing, and the development
of emotion disorders. For example, genetic variations
have been associated with hyperactivation in neural
structures implicated in emotion generation (Drabant
et al., 2012; Lonsdorf et al., 2011; Munafò, Brown, &
Hariri, 2008), reduced gray matter volume in limbic
regions, and reduced functional connectivity between
emotion-generating regions and structures implicated
in their inhibitory control (Pezawas et al., 2005).

Increased perceptions of emotions as uncontrollable
and intolerable, increased avoidant processing,
and increased attempts at emotional control have also
been demonstrated across disorders (Campbell-Sills,
Barlow, Brown, & Hofmann, 2006a, 2006b; Weinberg
& Hajcak, 2010; Weiser, Pauli, Weyers, Alpers,
& Mühlberger, 2009). Intolerance of uncertainty and
distress has been demonstrated across a full range of
disorders, including depression, GAD, social anxiety,
and OCD (Boelen, Vrinssen, & van Tulder, 2010; Bo



Emotional Disorders

swell, Thompson-Holland, Farchione, & Barlow, 2013;
Lee, Orsillo, Roemer, & Allen, 2010). In addition, a
growing number of studies have shown that individuals
with anxiety and mood disorders tend to use maladaptive
emotion regulation strategies, including attempts to
avoid or dampen the intensity of uncomfortable emotions,
that ultimately backfire and contribute to the
maintenance of their symptoms (e.g., Campbell-Sills et
al., 2006a, 2006b; Liverant, Brown, Barlow, & Roemer,
2008; Mennin, Heimberg, Turk, & Fresco, 2005; Tull
& Roemer, 2007). Taken together, the evidence from
genetics, neuroscience, behavioral studies, and psychopathology
research suggests that a common, overlapping
feature across disorders is the propensity toward
increased emotional reactivity and inefficient or deficient
regulatory control that is coupled with a heightened
tendency to view these experiences as aversive
and is manifest in attempts to alter, avoid, or control
emotional responding.

In summary, the existing literature supports several
arguments for stepping back from individual DSM diagnostic
categories and associated disorder-specific
psychological protocols, and considering a more unified
transdiagnostic approach based on new findings on
the nature of psychopathology and from the emerging
field of emotion science. In addition, current evidencebased
cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) protocols for
emotional disorders have much in common and reduce
to three broad principles of change: altering emotionbased
misappraisals of salient events; preventing avoidance
of negative, emotionally charged internal or external
triggers, as well as modifying emotion-driven
behaviors (EDBs) and facilitating extinction of fear;
and reducing anxiety and distress over the experience
of intense emotion. A full explanation of this protocol
and a description of its application with a patient follows.


treatMeNt variaBles

Setting

All assessments and treatments of patients are conducted
in the Center for Anxiety and Related Disorders
(CARD) at Boston University. Our clinic receives over
500 new admissions per year, with many patients being
offered treatment after their initial intake assessments.
CARD, in addition to housing staff psychologists and
a psychiatrist, is also a training center for doctoral

students and psychiatric residents. At any given time,
numerous National Institutes of Health (NIH)–funded
treatment and research studies are ongoing at the Center.
Regarding diagnostic breakdown of treatmentseeking
patients, the most common diagnosis assigned
is GAD, followed by social phobia, PD/A, specific
phobia, OCD, and PTSD, but the full range of “neurotic
spectrum” disorders are assessed and treated. A
small percentage of patients are assigned “coprincipal
diagnoses,” which refers to cases in which two separate
diagnoses are judged to be of equal severity.

Prior to the intake evaluation, each patient is mailed
a packet of questionnaires to complete and bring to the
assessment, which are scored and interpreted subsequent
to the interview. The majority of the intake appointment
comprises administration of the Anxiety
Disorders Interview Schedule (for DSM-5 [ADIS-5;
Brown, Di Nardo, & Barlow, 2014] or for DSM-IV
[ADIS-IV; Di Nardo, Brown, & Barlow, 1994]). Following
completion of the entire assessment process,
consensus diagnoses are determined during a weekly
staff meeting, after which the patient is provided diagnostic
feedback and treatment recommendations.
Based on the information from the interview, the patient
may be offered one of several treatment options at
the Center, or a referral in the community.

Format

Treatment with the UP is typically conducted in an
individual format, although it has been successfully
conducted in a group format with patients with mixed
principal emotional disorder diagnoses. The treatment
described in this chapter reflects the individual treatment
protocol, which allows for greater attention to the
description and application of treatment components
during each session. However, when administered in a
group setting, patients are easily able to see the commonalities
among their diverse presenting complaints,
and this understanding often creates a strong bond
among group members. Therefore, it may be useful to
adapt the protocol for group treatment as we have done
at CARD.

Therapist Variables

The UP has been administered by therapists with varying
degrees of clinical experience and expertise with
the protocol. To our knowledge, both junior therapists
(even therapists who have never had experience with


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

cognitive-behavioral treatments) and senior therapists
(i.e., therapists with at least 4 or more years of treatment
experience) have been able to adapt to the UP
without significant difficulty. Certainly, a background
in cognitive-behavioral techniques may be helpful
when utilizing the protocol (e.g., facilitating cognitive
reappraisal, and designing and conducting exposures).
Evidence suggests some benefit to therapist experience,
at least when treating PDA with a highly structured
CBT protocol (Huppert et al., 2001).

The UP is an emotion-focused treatment approach;
that is, the focus of every exercise is on eliciting and
changing responses to a variety of emotions and emotional
cues. Perhaps one of the most challenging aspects
for the therapist is to be able to create and utilize
emotion-provoking exposures effectively, which begin
early in treatment and continue throughout its course.
Most importantly, the therapist must have a sense of
when a patient is avoiding the process of experiencing,
expressing, or accepting emotions, and this is often signaled
by very subtle behavioral cues, such as avoiding
eye contact, changing the topic of discussion, arriving
late for a session, and not completing (or “overdoing”)
homework assignments. Each of these behaviors represents
attempts to control uncomfortable emotions
through either direct avoidance or overcontrol. It is essential
that the therapist be able to recognize and address
such behaviors when they occur, thereby allowing
the opportunity for an effective emotion exposure and
discussion of avoidance to facilitate emotional processing.


A second challenge for the therapist is to be able to
tolerate and experience the expression of emotion by
the patient. It is common for less experienced therapists
to quickly “rationalize away” the patient’s emotional
reactions; however, this only feeds into the cycle of
emotions and avoidance. At every step, the therapist
should encourage the expression and acceptance of
emotion, while guiding the patient in how to “examine”
it, without letting the emotion “take over.” In such
cases, modeling from a senior therapist and/or extensive
supervision may be helpful instruction for less experienced
therapists in how to allow their patients to be
“emotional.”

Client Variables

As previously mentioned, the rate of comorbidity
among patients with a principal anxiety or mood disorder
is approximately 55% (Brown, Campbell, et al.,

2001), depending on the principal diagnosis. In most
CBT protocols, comorbid diagnoses are never a focus
of treatment, although successful treatment of a principal
anxiety disorder often results in decreases in comorbidity
(e.g., Allen et al., 2010; Brown, Antony, &
Barlow, 1995). One advantage of a unified treatment
approach is that symptoms related to comorbid diagnoses
can be discussed in treatment sessions and may
even be the focus of an emotion exposure. For example,
a patient with GAD who experiences chronic worry
about daily matters may also feel anxious in social situations.
Therefore, that patient’s in-session emotion exposure
might comprise a conversation with a stranger
or giving a speech to a small group of people. Contrary
to traditional protocols, it is the experience of any emotion
that is the target of treatment, which may be particularly
beneficial for patients with significant comorbidity
or for those who would like to address multiple
concerns during the course of treatment.

Concurrent Drug Treatment

Many patients who present for treatment are also taking
some form of psychoactive medication. At CARD,
patients are required to have stabilized on the dosage
of medication prior to the intake interview, so that
the therapist has a clear picture of actual symptoms
(as opposed to symptoms that may be caused by the
initial addition or removal of a medication). Whereas
concurrent use of medications such as tricyclic antidepressants
and selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
(SSRIs) does not appear to have a negative impact on
treatment outcome initially, once the medications are
removed, evidence suggests that patients who received
medication alone or CBT in addition to medication are
more likely to relapse (e.g., Barlow, Gorman, Shear, &
Woods, 2000; Heimberg et al., 1998; Liebowitz et al.,
1999). The exact mechanisms underlying the return
of symptoms are unclear, although some authors have
suggested that patients may attribute the success of the
treatment to the use of medication and, once it is withdrawn,
no longer believe they have the ability to manage
their symptoms. However, in a recent investigation
using data from a multisite comparative study for the
treatment of panic disorder, results indicated that patients
who received CBT plus pill placebo were equally
likely to believe they had received medication as patients
who had actually received the medication (Raffa
et al., 2008). Yet those in the CBT plus placebo condition
were less likely to relapse compared to those who


Emotional Disorders

had received either CBT plus medication or medication
alone. Therefore, it appears unlikely that the higher relapse
rates in the medication conditions were due solely
to this “attribution hypothesis.” One other hypothesis
to explain greater relapse in patients receiving psychopharmacological
treatment is that the medication
provides an unintended “protective” effect against increased
physiological arousal and anxiety. However,
eliciting anxiety and panic is a core component of CBT
protocols, so patients taking medication (1) may have
experienced greater physical sensations when the medication
was removed and/or (2) were never able fully to
confront the physiological arousal and panic during the
course of treatment. However, these hypotheses have
yet to be fully investigated.

One additional consideration is the use of benzodiazepines
on a p.r.n., or “as needed,” basis during the
course of treatment. Following conceptions outlined in
the UP, any strategy used to reduce the intensity of emotions
in the moment is considered an emotional avoidance
strategy, and ultimately contributes to increasing
levels of anxiety and emotional reactivity. Therefore,
the use of benzodiazepines (or other fast-acting medications)
is discouraged, particularly if the medications
are carried with the person as a “safety signal.”

assessMeNt

Case Study

Joseph is a 25-year-old, single man who, at the time
of intake, worked as a freelance music teacher and an
independent musician, occasionally performing his
music at small local venues. Joseph came to our Center
seeking help for long-standing, debilitating emotional
issues that were standing in the way of his ability to
attain personal and professional goals. Joseph reported
a long history of struggles with anxiety and depression
that were exacerbated and compounded by issues with
his physical health.

During his intake interview, Joseph reported significant
and oftentimes paralyzing social anxiety, describing
significant fear of being evaluated negatively,
and of others seeing him as a burden or “in the way.”
This fear had caused him to avoid important social engagements
throughout his life, such as birthday parties
or other special occasions, and he often turned down
invitations for casual gatherings at bars or at friends’
homes. He found himself becoming increasingly iso


lated because of this, and felt that some of his friends
were “giving up” on him. In addition, his fears of being
burdensome to others prevented him from asserting
himself, which would often cause significant interference.
For example, Joseph reported that he wanted to
find a job as a music teacher for elementary schoolchildren,
but asking others to provide information that was
necessary for the completion of job applications, which
was nearly impossible for him, would cause Joseph
to miss deadlines or promising opportunities. Joseph
noted that he has experienced social anxiety his whole
life, but that it became more intense for him following
a diagnosis of diabetes when he was 9 years old. He
described always feeling like a burden on others since
that time, and feeling like he was always “in the way.”
Notably, these feelings extend even to walking down
a public sidewalk—one of his most feared situations
is inadvertently bumping into someone walking in the
other direction, for fear that he has inconvenienced or
caused that person to judge him negatively. Joseph reported
that his social anxiety currently is more interfering
than ever, as it is preventing him from finding work,
and his social life is now “nonexistent.”

In addition, Joseph described significant embarrassment
related to symptoms of irritable bowel syndrome
(IBS), which had begun 5 years previously. Specifically,
Joseph noted that he avoids any situation from which
he cannot leave if he begins to experience stomach
problems. He avoids eating all fruits or any type of food
that might trigger bloating or loose bowels and reports
that he wakes up 3 hours before he needs to leave for
work in order to use the bathroom several times before
leaving the house, in an attempt to avoid having any unexpected
bowel movements while in public situations.
He estimated using the bathroom up to five times each
morning before leaving for work. In addition, Joseph
reported that his fear of having an unexpected bowel
movement has prevented him from traveling long distances
in cars, attending movies or sporting events, or
engaging in any activity where quick access to a restroom
is not possible. He reported that his greatest fear
related to these symptoms was that he would embarrass
himself in front of others, either by becoming flatulent
or losing control of his bowels altogether.

Joseph also described significant anxiety and worry
about a number of different areas in his life. He worries
about making small mistakes in his work, such
as grammatical errors. He worries about his potential
performance at work should he secure a teaching position,
fearing that he would ultimately get fired from his


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

job for some mistake he might make. Joseph worries
about his finances and being able to support himself, as
well as about the health of his parents and their wellbeing.
He also reported worrying about community and
world affairs but noted that he controls these worries by
“avoiding the news at all costs.” Joseph reports that his
worries are difficult to control, and they interfere with
his ability to concentrate. He feels restless, tense, irritable,
and often has trouble sleeping when he worries.
He noted that he spends about 90% of the average day
worrying about something, and that these worries have
interfered with his social life, his overall well-being,
and his ability to find a job.

Joseph also described significant anxiety related
to intrusive doubting thoughts, and thoughts that he
might cause accidental harm to others. He described
difficulty leaving his house in the morning for fear that
he might inadvertently leave the stove on or the house
unlocked, leaving his roommates vulnerable to fire or
burglary. These thoughts drive him to check repeatedly
to see that he has locked doors, extinguished candles,
or turned off the oven and stove sufficiently, which can
take up to an hour. Joseph also notably never received
his driver’s license for fear that he might accidently run
someone over or cause an accident while driving. He
reported that his doubting thoughts and thoughts of accidentally
causing others harm are extremely distressing
to him and make him feel like he is an awful person
who cannot be trusted.

Finally, Joseph reported feelings of depression and
lack of interest in activities for the past year, since graduating
from college. He often has difficulty sleeping at
night and reports sleeping too much during the day. He
experiences a feeling of “heaviness” and lack of energy,
has difficulty concentrating on things. He experiences
constant feelings of guilt and worthlessness, and has
periodic thoughts of suicide, although he reported no
plan or intent. Joseph reported that every few weeks
he cuts himself on his legs and chest using a singleedged
razor, in order to relieve tension and calm himself
down. Joseph stated that although his feelings of
depression are “bothersome,” he is also “used to them”
because they have been present much of his life.

Objective assessment of Joseph’s emotional state via
self-report questionnaires resulted in a score of 51 on
the Social Interaction Anxiety Scale (SIAS; Mattick &
Clarke, 1998), reflecting severe social anxiety; a score
of 49 on the Beck Depression Inventory–II (BDI-II;
Beck, Steer, & Brown, 1996), reflecting severe depression;
and a score of 80 on the Penn State Worry Ques


tionnaire (PSWQ; Meyer, Miller, Metzger, & Borkovec,
1990), reflecting moderate to severe levels of worry.
His score on the Work and Social Adjustment Scale
(WSAS; a modification of a scale introduced by Hafner
& Marks, 1976) suggested that Joseph was experiencing
severe interference in his life from these emotional
symptoms. A diagnostic interview using the ADIS-IV
revealed a principal diagnosis of social anxiety disorder
at a clinical severity rating (CSR; described below)
of 7, and additional diagnoses of GAD (CSR = 6), OCD
(CSR = 5), and major depressive disorder (MDD; CSR
= 5).

Interviews

A number of structured and semistructured clinical
interviews may be appropriate for diagnosing Axis I
disorders. The Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-
IV (SCID; First, Spitzer, Gibbon, & Williams, 1996) is
widely used and assesses diagnoses. Because this interview
is highly structured and focuses only on current
symptom count, it achieves a high degree of interrater
reliability for many diagnoses. However, this interview
does not include dimensional ratings of frequency and
severity of symptoms, so it may be less useful for more
detailed profiling of emotional disorders.

The Anxiety Disorders Interview Schedules for DSM
(ADIS-5; Brown, Di Nardo, & Barlow, 2014), a semistructured,
diagnostic clinical interview, focuses on
DSM diagnoses of anxiety, OCD and related disorders,
and trauma- and stressor-related disorders and their accompanying
mood states, as well as somatic symptoms
and dissociative disorders, and substance and addictive
disorders. The information derived from the interview
using the ADIS allows clinicians to determine differential
diagnoses and gain a clear understanding of the
level and severity of each diagnosis. We refer to the updated
DSM-5 version from this point forward. Principal
and additional diagnoses are assigned a CSR on a scale
from 0 (No symptoms) to 8 (Extremely severe symptoms),
with a rating of 4 or above (Definitely disturbing/
disabling) passing the clinical threshold for DSM
diagnostic criteria. Inquiries about suicidal ideation are
part of this interview. The ADIS-IV has demonstrated
excellent to acceptable interrater reliability for the anxiety
and mood disorders (Brown, Di Nardo, Lehman, &
Campbell, 2001).

Two additional clinician-rated measures that provide
a wider range of scores are the (1) Structured Interview
Guide for the Hamilton Anxiety Rating Scale (SIGH



Emotional Disorders

A; Shear, Vander Bilt, & Rucci, 2001) and the (2) Structured
Interview Guide for the Hamilton Depression
Rating Scale (SIGH-D; Williams, 1988). The SIGH-A
was developed to create a structured format for administering
the Hamilton Anxiety Rating Scale (HARS;
Hamilton, 1959). Respondents are asked to indicate the
presence and severity of a number of symptoms that
may have been present over the past week, including
anxious mood, tension, sleep problems, irritability, and
so forth. The rater is also asked to rate the interview
behavior of the patient. The SIGH-A includes specific
instructions on administration and anchor points for
assigning severity ratings. This measure demonstrated
good interrater and test–retest reliability (Shear et al.,
2001). In addition, scores are similar to (although consistently
higher than) the HARS.

Similar to the SIGH-A, the SIGH-D was developed
to provide more specific instructions for administration
and scoring of the Hamilton Depression Rating
Scale (HDRS; Hamilton, 1960). Again, patients are
questioned about the presence and severity of a range
of depressive symptoms over the past week, including
depressed mood, suicidal ideation, fatigue, feelings of
hopelessness, weight loss, and so forth. The SIGH-D
also demonstrated good interrater and test–retest reliability,
and produces scores similar to the HDRS (Williams,
1988).

Medical Evaluations

Medical evaluations are generally recommended prior
to assignment of diagnoses and initiation of treatment
to rule out organic causes for symptoms of emotional
disorders. Some conditions, such as hypothyroidism,
hyperthyroidism, hypoglycemia, mitral valve prolapse,
or alcohol or substance withdrawal, may elicit symptoms
similar to those associated with GAD or PDA. Although
the diagnosis of such medical conditions does
not preclude the need for a psychological treatment, it
is generally recommended that such conditions be examined
by a physician because an alternative treatment
may be clinically indicated.

Self‑Monitoring

Self-monitoring forms are an important part of the
treatment protocol for several reasons. First, the therapist
is able to discuss specific situations or events that
occurred over the past week and may have contributed
to emotional reactions. Such records can facilitate dis


cussions of concepts presented during the treatment
sessions and help the therapist integrate the general
treatment components into the patient’s specific symptoms.
Second, some evidence suggests that patients’
retrospective recall of past episodes of anxiety may
be inflated, particularly when recalling panic attacks
(Margraf, Taylor, Ehlers, Roth, & Agras, 1987; Rapee,
Craske, & Barlow, 1990). Self-monitoring forms allow
for a prospective, and possibly more accurate, account
of anxiety episodes and may therefore be more useful
therapeutically. In addition, consistent with the themes
outlined in the UP, practicing awareness of emotions in
the present moment is believed to be an important component
of changing maladaptive patterns of emotional
responding. The very nature of self-monitoring requires
patients to disengage, even briefly, from the habitual
anxious process to write down concrete thoughts, feelings,
and behaviors, helping them to begin to adopt a
more objective stance toward their own emotional experiences.
Developing this habit will ultimately aid patients
in beginning to change emotional reactions and
resulting behaviors.

Treatment forms used in the UP include selfmonitoring
forms for emotional awareness, automatic
appraisals, emotion avoidance, as well as forms tracking
interoceptive and situational exposure. Figure 6.1
illustrates the Monitoring Emotions and EDBs in Context
(MEEC) form used in the UP. This form is given
for several weeks at the beginning of treatment to begin
to orient patients to tracking their own emotional responses.
As new skills are introduced (i.e., cognitive
reappraisal, changing EDBs), new self-monitoring
forms typically replace the MEEC. For instance, once
the skill of altering action tendencies associated with
emotions is introduced, patients are asked to monitor
situations, EDBs, and identify a new response incompatible
with the original EDB on the Changing EDBs
monitoring form (see Figure 6.2).

Several problems may arise with the introduction
and completion of self-monitoring forms. First, some
patients may not be compliant with completion of monitoring
forms and homework assignments, which is an
important issue to be addressed in the therapy session.
Adopting a motivation enhancement approach, eliciting
reasons underlying the patient’s ambivalence regarding
completing the homework or monitoring can
be a valuable technique (i.e., eliciting reasons why the
patient might not wish to complete the homework and
perceived benefits to not completing it). This process is
crucial as it allows the therapist to identify maladaptive


A’sAntecedents
R’sResponses
C’sConsequences
Date/Time Situation/Trigger Thoughts Feelings Behaviors What happened next?

figUre 6.1. Monitoring Emotions and EDBs in Context (MEEC) form.

246


Situation/Trigger Emotion EDB New (incompatible) response Consequence

figUre 6.2. Changing EDBs monitoring form.

247


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

cognitive appraisals and emotional reasons contributing
to the lack of completion of monitoring forms. Once
such reasons are identified, therapeutic strategies such
as cognitive reappraisal may also be used to increase
patients’ willingness to complete homework forms
by addressing some of the reasons for noncompliance
raised by the patient. Furthermore, selectively reflecting
the benefits of completing the homework and the
costs associated with noncompliance can help to build
motivation to complete homework forms. In some
cases, especially when patient self-efficacy for completion
is low, completion of homework forms themselves
may become an emotion exposure, and progress toward
this goal should be reinforced accordingly.

Another common problem with the completion of
self-monitoring may be the tendency for some patients
(particularly those with more obsessive or “perfectionistic”
features, commonly seen in GAD and OCD) to
“overdo” the homework forms; that is, the patient may
write an extremely long and involved description of a
situation and his/her reactions to it. This is common
with patients who feel a need to “unload” every piece
of information about the event. Although the patient
is doing the homework, his/her overengagement may
also be facilitating the anxious/worry process. If this
becomes evident, the therapist may want to discuss the
tendency to overengage in the homework as an emotional
avoidance strategy (or as an EDB) and encourage
patients to try to monitor situations and events
using one- or two-word descriptions, or even implement
a time limit to help ensure that patients do not
spend lengthy periods of time generating their descriptions.

%%%CUT%%%
Questionnaires

In our research we employ a number of self-report
questionnaires over the course of treatment. We describe
most of them here, realizing that for purely clinical
purposes only a subset would be needed. Two general
(diagnosis nonspecific) questionnaires designed to
measure symptoms and impairment associated with
those symptoms are administered weekly prior to session
to track symptoms and impairment across the
course of treatment. A larger questionnaire battery is
administered pre-, mid-, and posttreatment, and every
four sessions during treatment, in order to gain a more
comprehensive picture of patients’ presenting concern,
as well as their overall functioning and quality
of life. This battery comprises general questionnaires

(measures designed to assess a range of symptoms associated
with anxiety and mood disorders, as well as
disorder-specific measures designed to track symptoms
associated with specific disorders).

Weekly General Measures

The Overall Anxiety Severity and Impairment Scale
(OASIS; Norman, Cissell, Means-Christensen, & Stein,
2006), a brief, five-item questionnaire developed as a
continuous measure of anxiety-related symptom severity
and impairment, can be used across anxiety disorders,
with multiple anxiety disorders, and with subthreshold
anxiety symptoms. This measure has good
internal consistency, excellent test–retest reliability,
and convergent and divergent validity (Campbell-Sills
et al., 2009; Norman et al., 2006). The Overall Depression
Severity and Impairment Scale (ODSIS; Bentley,
Gallagher, Carl, Farchione, & Barlow, 2013), a direct
adaptation of the OASIS, is modified to be applicable
for depression. It is a brief, five-item questionnaire that
assesses dimensional depression-related symptom severity
and impairment that can be used across depressive
disorders, with varied comorbid presentations, and
with subthreshold depressive symptoms. Both measures
focus on severity of and impairment associated
with particular symptoms over the past week, offering
a general, diagnosis nonspecific measure designed to
track changes as they occur over the course of treatment.


Additional General Measures

In the Positive and Negative Affect Schedule—Trait
version (PANAS; Watson, Clark, & Tellegen, 1988), a
brief, reliable, and valid measure of positive and negative
affect, individuals rate how frequently they experience
20 feeling or emotion words in general. The
PANAS assesses core negative affect and deficits in
positive affect in those disorders with this characteristic
(i.e., agoraphobia, social anxiety disorder, depression)
and is useful in determining changes in positive
and negative affect over the course of treatment. In an
effort to establish degree of interference from symptoms
in various domains of living, the WSAS (Hafner
& Marks, 1976) includes five items that ask participants
to rate the degree of interference caused by their
symptoms in work, home management, private leisure,
social leisure, and family relationships. The WSAS, a
descriptive measure of subjective interference in vari



Emotional Disorders

ous domains of living, has been successfully used in
previous studies (e.g., Brown & Barlow, 1995).

Quality of Life and Well-Being Measures

The Quality of Life and Enjoyment Satisfaction Questionnaire
(QLESQ; Endicott, Nee, Harrison, & Blumenthal,
1993), a 14-item measure that assesses enjoyment
and satisfaction across different life areas in the
past week, is widely used and has been validated for
use in clinical populations and shown to be sensitive
to change (Endicott et al., 1993). The Mental Health
Continuum—Short Form (MHC-SF; Keyes, 2005,
2006; Keyes et al., 2008; Lamers, Westerhof, Bohlmeijer,
ten Klooster, & Keyes, 2011; Westerhof & Keyes,
2009) is a 14-item measure designed to assess social,
emotional, and psychological well-being. The measure
has shown excellent internal consistency and discriminant
validity in both adolescents and adults in the United
States, the Netherlands, and South Africa (Keyes,
2005, 2006; Keyes et al., 2008; Lamers et al., 2011;
Westerhof & Keyes, 2009).

Diagnosis-Specific Measures

In addition to the general (diagnosis nonspecific) measures,
it is important to assess symptoms specific to the
individual’s specific diagnostic presenting concerns.
We use the following measures that assess symptom
severity over the past week and can be administered
both as self-report and clinician-rated measures, increasing
their clinical utility. The Yale–Brown Obsessive–
Compulsive Scale–II (Y-BOCS-II; Storch, Larson,
Price, Rasmussen, Murphy, & Goodman, 2010)
is a revised version of the Y-BOCS (Goodman et al.,
1989), designed to assess the presence and severity of
OCD symptoms.

The Panic Disorder Severity Scale (PDSS; Shear et
al., 1997), a seven-item scale, provides ratings of the
core features of panic disorder (panic frequency, distress
during panic, anticipatory anxiety, panic-related
avoidance of situations and sensations) and the degree
of work and social impairment/interference due to
PD/A (Shear et al., 1997).

The Liebowitz Social Anxiety Scale (LSAS; Liebowitz,
1987) is a widely used 24-item scale designed
to assess the range of social interaction and performance
situations that patients with social anxiety may
fear and/or avoid (Heimberg et al., 1999; Safren et al.,
1999).

The Generalized Anxiety Disorder Severity Scale
(GADSS; Shear, Belnap, Mazumdar, Houck, & Rollman,
2006) is a six-item assessment that evaluates the
core features of GAD.

The PTSD Symptom Scale (PSS; Foa, Riggs, Dancu,
& Rothbaum, 1993) is a 17-item measure designed to
assess DSM-IV symptoms of PTSD. Each item, corresponding
to the symptoms of PTSD, comprises one
brief question that is rated from 0 (Not at all) to 3 (5 or
more times per week/Very much). This measure yields
a total PTSD severity score, as well as Reexperiencing,
Avoidance, and Arousal subscores (Foa & Tolin,
2000).

Functional Analysis

Regardless of the diagnosis, a clear functional analysis
of the patient’s behavior is essential prior to beginning
treatment. Several components are important to consider
when diagnosing a patient based on a functional
analysis. These include a close examination of symptom
topography (including duration of illness, physical
sensations, level of distress and interference from
symptoms), triggers (situations, physical symptoms,
places, thoughts, etc.), cognitions (beliefs about symptoms
and misappraisals), behavioral responses to emotions
(including avoidance of situations, places, people,
or triggers, as well as escape behaviors), and the consequences
of behavioral reactions (limiting quality of
life, reduced “comfort zone,” etc.).

Joseph, at the diagnostic level, met criteria for several
distinct anxiety and mood disorders. His primary
concern involved anxiety and avoidance of social situations
due to fears of being judged or disliked by others.
These fears had been present since Joseph was a
young child and clearly fit with a diagnosis of social
phobia. However, Joseph also experienced anxiety related
to intrusive thoughts about causing potential harm
to others. His intrusive doubting thoughts and thoughts
of accidental harm to others, coupled with a number
of compulsive checking behaviors, which took up at
least an hour per day, were consistent with a diagnosis
of OCD. Joseph also presented with significant anxiety
and uncontrollable worry about his ability to perform
well at work, his finances, and the health of his family,
along with several associated physical symptoms.
These worries, although involving social situations to
some degree, also included more diffuse worries related
to potential future negative outcomes. These worries
were present even outside the context of a depressive


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

episode. Thus, an additional diagnosis of GAD was
also assigned. Finally, Joseph’s reported symptoms of
depression in the past year, along with accompanying
lack of interest in activities, sleep difficulties, lack of
energy, and poor concentration, resulted in a diagnosis
of MDD.

Whereas Joseph’s symptoms merited the assignment
of multiple co-occurring disorders, it is important
to note that at the phenomenological level, these
diagnosis-specific symptoms tended to interact and exacerbate
one another, such that each disorder-specific
cluster of symptoms was not necessarily occurring in
isolation. This was an important consideration for treatment,
and it provided a strong argument for a unified,
transdiagnostic approach. For example, Joseph’s low
self-esteem, driven by his depressogenic ruminations,
fueled his sense of being “less than” and increased the
perceived potential to be evaluated negatively by others.
This anxiety focused on negative evaluation in turn
increased Joseph’s more general anxiety and fueled his
EDBs, for example, checking, which was often set in
motion as a way to control a feared potential outcome
of doing something wrong (checking locks to prevent
loss of property), causing real harm to others (prevent
fire by checking stoves, candles, etc.), or embarrassing
himself in public (using the bathroom several times
before work to prevent a flare-up of IBS symptoms).
These anxieties were in turn congruent with his beliefs
about himself as being “in the way” and a “bad person.”
Joseph’s vigilance relative to his IBS symptoms was
also fueled by anxiety related to negative evaluation,
and an increased focus on his physical symptoms was
usually coupled with increased levels of anticipatory
anxiety. Joseph’s worries about potential future failures
at work, his finances, and his family’s health were also
congruent with a general belief that he would inevitably
do something wrong and cause the “bottom to fall
out,” or that some negative, unexpected outcome was
always on the horizon. Joseph linked this sense of unpredictability
and uncontrollability to his childhood diagnosis
of diabetes, which also was his earliest memory
of being “in the way.” He recalled several childhood
incidents in which the adults in his life appeared “put
out” by having to monitor his eating and insulin levels;
he recalled developing a sense that he was a burden
on others, although he recalled his sense of being “less
than” developing much earlier on. Thus, all of these
beliefs, behaviors, and physiological responses were interacting
in Joseph’s emotional experiences, regardless
of their specific diagnostic classification, and affecting

his ability to function in an adaptive way. Treatment
of Joseph’s symptoms with the UP, which focuses on
how the interactions of thoughts, feelings and behaviors
at any given moment influence overall emotional experiences
and subsequent actions, allowed us to target
Joseph’s phenomenological patterns of dysfunction directly
rather than focus on one diagnosis-specific cluster
of symptoms at a time.

coMPoNeNts of treatMeNt

The structure of the UP outlines five core treatment
modules and three additional modules, designed to be
delivered in 12–18, 50- to 60-minute individual treatment
sessions, held on a weekly basis. Final sessions
may be held every other week to allow patients to consolidate
gains and to provide somewhat of a “taper” off
the weekly therapy. This format for the final sessions
is not a requirement, though, and it may be more beneficial
for the patient to continue to have weekly sessions
if he/she might potentially have trouble using the
treatment concepts consistently without the weekly reinforcement
of sessions. Therefore, spacing of the final
sessions is determined by the therapist, who takes into
consideration the patient’s progress and any anticipated
difficulties after treatment.

The five core treatment modules designed to target
aspects of emotion processing and regulation are as follows:
(1) increasing present-focused emotion awareness
(Module 3); (2) increasing cognitive flexibility (Module
4); (3) identifying and preventing patterns of emotion
avoidance and maladaptive EDBs (Module 5); (4)
increasing awareness and tolerance of emotion-related
physical sensations (Module 6); and (5) interoceptive
and situation-based emotion-focused exposure (Module
7). Preceding these core components is a module
focused on enhancing motivation and readiness for
change and treatment engagement (Module 1), as well
as an introductory module providing psychoeducation
about the nature of emotions and a framework for understanding
emotional experiences (Module 2). A final
module reviews progress over treatment and develops
relapse prevention strategies (Module 8). This treatment,
which takes place in the context of provoking
emotional expression (emotion exposure) through situational,
internal, and somatic (interoceptive) cues, as
well as through standard mood induction exercises, differs
from patient to patient only in the situational cues
and exercises utilized. In addition, “exposure” is not


Emotional Disorders

conceptualized as a mechanism of action. Rather, successfully
provoking emotions creates a setting condition
to implement the essential treatment components.
Emotion exposures begin with general stimuli (e.g.,
mood induction and interoceptive provocation) and are
later tailored to address each patient’s particular concerns
and symptoms. Although each session addresses
a specific component of the protocol, the expectation
is that patients then “carry through” to future sessions
the strategies they learn (e.g., patients learn cognitive
reappraisal strategies in Module 4 but are expected to
continue to use cognitive reappraisal throughout the remainder
of treatment).

Module 1: Motivation Enhancement
for Treatment Engagement

In this initial treatment module, which is grounded
in the principles and therapeutic techniques utilized
in motivational interviewing (MI; Miller & Rollnick,
2013), therapists work to increase the patient’s readiness
and motivation for behavior change, and to foster
a sense of self-efficacy, or the patient’s belief in his/
her ability to change. This module was included in the
protocol in reaction to recent research by Westra and
colleagues (Westra, Arkowitz, & Dozois, 2009; Westra
& Dozois, 2006) suggesting that MI may enhance the
efficacy of CBT for anxiety disorders. This module utilizes
two specific motivational exercises: (1) a decisional
balance exercise, in which the therapist works with
the patient to identify and weigh the pros and cons of
changing versus staying the same; and (2) a treatment
goal-setting exercise that helps patients more clearly
articulate achievable and concrete goals for treatment.
This module, and the principles and techniques contained
therein, are primarily used to help “set the stage”
for subsequent learning that takes in the core modules.
However, the principles can also be applied throughout
the course of treatment to enhance treatment engagement
and maintain patient motivation for behavior
change.

Module 2: Psychoeducation and Tracking
of Emotional Experiences

Following the initial motivation enhancement session,
patients are provided with psychoeducation about the
nature and function of emotions. This component is
common to most CBT protocols, although the focus
is expanded to include the function of many different

emotions (anger, sadness, etc.), in addition to the function
of anxiety. In this module (which typically occurs
over the course of one to two sessions), patients are
provided information about the cognitive, physiological,
and behavioral sequelae of emotional reactions and
how these three components interact. It is important
that the patient begin to consider that his/her reactions
are functional and serve the purpose of providing information
about the environment, in addition to protection
from harm. This three-component model is then
applied to a recent situation or event that the patient
experienced, so that he/she may better understand the
aspects of each component and how they interact. Patients
also learn how to monitor and track more carefully
their emotional responses and, as a result, are
expected to develop greater awareness of their own
patterns of emotional responding, including potential
maintaining factors (e.g., common triggers and/or environmental
contingencies).

Another important aspect of psychoeducation is the
concept of negative reinforcement. Specifically, this is
a detailed discussion of how the patient’s behavioral response
to an emotional episode (usually escape or some
form of emotional avoidance) is problematic because it
reduces the emotion in the short term (i.e., by removing
the person from the emotional stimulus) but reinforces
the cycle of emotions in the long term (i.e., by teaching
the person that escape/avoidance is the only way
to manage these feelings in the future). It is extremely
important that the patient understand the connection
between behavioral responses and reinforcement of
emotion, so that he/she is better able to appreciate the
purpose and function of emotion exposures introduced
in future sessions.

Module 3: Emotion Awareness Training

The first core module (which typically occurs over the
course of one to two treatment sessions) is designed
to help patients further identify how they are reacting
and responding to their emotions by promoting a
more nonjudgmental, present-focused approach to the
experience of emotions. Often, patients report feeling
that their emotions are confusing, or that they seem to
just happen “automatically,” and/ or in such way that
they are outside of the patient’s immediate awareness
(i.e., “unconsciously”). Through this module, patients
learn to become more aware of the interaction among
thoughts, feelings, and behaviors and to view their emotions
in a more objective and present-focused manner.


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

This occurs within the specific context of the situation
in which the emotional experience is unfolding. The
focus on present-moment experiences is important and
is believed to put the patient in a better position to more
clearly identify patterns of emotional responding and/
or the emotion regulation strategies being employed in
the particular situation. In turn, this renders the patient
better able to modify the emotional response adaptively
to make it more consistent or compatible with ongoing
situational or motivational demands. Furthermore, secondary
reactions to the patient’s emotional experiences
are also explored, and the therapist introduces the idea
that it is not the emotions per se that are problematic,
but rather how the patient reacts to the emotion. As
these reactions tend to be judgment-laden (e.g., seeing
anxiety as a sign of one’s inability to cope an indication
of weakness, or a sign of failure) and are often not
based on information from the present-moment context,
they can prevent the processing of potentially corrective
information that would allow for a change in the
emotional response. It is expected that as patients develop
a more nonjudgmental stance toward their emotions,
they will be better able to identify the specific
thoughts, physical sensations, and behaviors that may
be contributing to their distress, and thus be in a better
position to implement strategies for adaptively altering
their emotional response. These skills are developed
through the practice of brief mindfulness and emotion
induction exercises.

Module 4: Cognitive
Appraisal and Reappraisal
(Increasing Cognitive Flexibility)

Cognitive therapy, initially developed by Aaron T. Beck
to treat depression (Beck, 1967; Beck, Rush, Shaw, &
Emery, 1979; also discussed in-depth in Young, Rygh,
Weinberger, & Beck, Chapter 7, this volume), has become
a fundamental part of psychological treatments.
Individuals with emotional disorders are likely to have
appraisals and interpretations of external events that are
characterized by cognitive biases, such as the tendency
to overestimate the likelihood of the occurrence of
negative events and to underestimate the ability to cope
with these events. Thus, the aim of cognitive therapy is
to evaluate objectively the likelihood of these negative
appraisals and to incorporate more realistic, evidencebased
appraisals of the outcome of a situation. On the
surface, this technique may appear to be a way to suppress
or control negative thoughts by “rationalizing”

them, and occasionally, this is how cognitive therapy
is incorrectly used, as noted by Hayes, Strosahl, and
Wilson (1999). However, this strategy can also be conceptualized
from an emotion regulation perspective,
especially if reappraisals are considered one of many
possible interpretations of a situation.

The primary aim of this module is to foster greater
flexibility in thinking (this module is typically administered
in one or two sessions). This is accomplished
first by helping patients develop an understanding of
how they interpret or appraise situations, and how their
appraisals influence patterns of emotional responding,
then by teaching them to generate numerous alternative
attributions and appraisals when experiencing strong
emotional experiences. As their initial interpretations
are typically more negative or anxious, patients are
encouraged to be more flexible in their thinking (i.e.,
to generate alternative appraisals) and are taught reappraisal
strategies.

As adapted in our usage, the UP focuses on correcting
two fundamental misappraisals often found in individuals
with emotional disorders: the probability of a
negative event happening (probability overestimation)
and the consequences if the negative event does happen
(catastrophizing) (Barlow & Craske, 2007; Craske
& Barlow, 2006). Although a number of other misappraisals
are noted in other, traditional CBT protocols,
most misappraisals can be condensed into one of the
two appraisals listed here.

Module 5: Prevention of Emotion Avoidance
and Modifying EDBs

Module 5 generally comprises one to two sessions. The
concept of emotion avoidance is likely to be particularly
important for patients who do not physically avoid
or escape situations but still experience high levels of
anxiety without much relief. The therapist should convey
that even if the person stays physically in the situation,
he/she is likely to engage in a number of other
subtle behaviors to prevent full emotional arousal. In
the UP, emotional avoidance strategies are behaviors
that prevent the full experience of emotion in a situation,
as opposed to EDBs, which are behavioral consequences
of the experience of emotion (described later
in the chapter). Any technique or strategy the patient
uses to reduce or to down-regulate emotions may be
conceptualized as an emotional avoidance strategy, and
it is essential that emotional avoidance be identified and
eliminated prior to engagement in emotion exposures,


Emotional Disorders

to allow for full emotional processing. Therefore, a very
detailed description of individual emotional avoidance
strategies must be obtained for each patient.

We have identified three general categories of emotion
avoidance strategies: (1) subtle behavioral avoidance,
(2) cognitive avoidance, and (3) safety signals (see
Table 6.1 for examples). Subtle behavioral avoidance
strategies may include a number of different behaviors,
with certain behaviors occurring more frequently with
particular disorders. For example, the avoidance of caffeine
in panic disorder or social phobia (prior to a social
engagement) is an attempt to keep physiological symptoms
from becoming strong in anxiety-provoking situations.
Patients with social phobia may also avoid eye
contact or wear sunglasses when interacting in social
settings. Individuals with GAD may excessively plan,
prepare, or write “to do” lists in an attempt to control

potentially negative outcomes. At the same time, procrastination
is also a form of subtle behavioral avoidance,
if a particular task or project seems too emotionally
arousing for the patient. It is very important to
conduct a functional analysis of the subtle behaviors to
determine which ones are avoidance strategies, that is,
behaviors that serve to reduce or avoid emotional experience
and are functional responses to situations. And,
notably, what may be an avoidance strategy for one person
may be a functional response for another. Cognitive
avoidance strategies are typically more difficult to identify
because they tend to occur outside of the patient’s
awareness. Some of these strategies include distraction,
“tuning out,” and mentally checking lists or reviewing
past conversations. However, data also suggest
that worry and rumination actually function as a way
to down-regulate and avoid emotions (e.g., Borkovec,

table 6.1. examples of emotional avoidance strategies

Emotional avoidance strategy Disorder most usually associated

1. Subtle behavioral avoidance
••
Avoid eye contact Social phobia
••
Avoid drinking caffeine PDA
••
Attempt to control breathing PDA
••
Avoid exercise/physiological arousal (interoceptive avoidance) PDA/depression
••
Avoid touching sink/toilet OCD
••
Procrastination (avoiding emotionally salient tasks) GAD
2. Cognitive avoidance
••
Distraction (reading a book, watching television) Depression/PDA
••
“Tune out” during a conversation Social phobia
••
Reassure self that everything is OK GAD
••
Try to prevent thoughts from coming into mind OCD
••
Distraction from reminders of trauma PTSD
••
Force self to “think positive” Depression
••
Worry GAD
••
Rumination Depression
••
Thought suppression All disorders
3. Safety signals
••
Carry cell phone PDA/GAD
••
Carry empty medication bottles PDA
••
Hold onto “good luck” charms OCD
••
Carry items that are associated with positive experiences GAD/depression
(e.g., teddy bears, pictures)
••
Have mace at all times PTSD
••
Carry water bottle PDA
••
Have reading material/prayer books on hand GAD
••
Carry sunglasses or item to hide face/eyes Social phobia


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

1994). The function of worry is to enable the person
to prepare for a possible threat. However, when someone
experiences chronic worry and associated anxiety,
his/her attention is focused on the future as opposed
to the present moment. Research has shown that when
confronted with an emotionally arousing event, chronic
worriers do not experience the full emotional impact of
that event because (1) they have been “bracing” themselves
for something bad to happen, and (2) their focus
has already shifted to other, future negative outcomes
(Borkovec, Hazlett-Stevens, & Diaz, 1999). Therefore,
the worry functions as a cognitive avoidance strategy
and only serves as a maladaptive attempt to gain control
over seemingly uncontrollable future events. Obsessions,
common to individuals with OCD, may also
function in a similar manner.

Safety signals are most common to patients with
PDA, although may also be present in individuals with
GAD, OCD, or other emotional disorders. Safety signals
include any object that the patient carries to feel
more safe or “comfortable,” particularly if he/she is
entering an emotionally arousing situation. Safety signals
can range from actual medication (e.g., benzodiazepines
for reducing physiological arousal or medications
for gastrointestinal distress) to empty medication
bottles, to “lucky” objects (a talisman, teddy bear,
“lucky” pen, etc.). Regardless of the object itself, if its
function is to help the patient reduce emotional arousal
in the moment, then it also is problematic because it
feeds into the cycle of negative reinforcement.

In addition to changing patterns of emotion avoidance,
this module also focuses on helping patients identify
and subsequently change EDBs. Data and hypotheses
from emotion science suggest that the most efficient
and effective way to change emotions is by changing
responses to them (Barlow, 1988; Izard, 1971); thus, it
is conceivable that the mechanism of change during an
exposure is to prevent the action tendency associated
with a particular emotional experience. Over the past
several decades, research has focused on these action
tendencies, and changing action tendencies has become
an important treatment component for anxiety, as well
as other emotional disorders (Barlow, 1988; Linehan,
1993). For example, Beck and colleagues (1979) based
a large part of their treatment for depression on changing
the action tendencies of their patients to behave in
a “passive, retarded, and apathetic manner” (p. 312).
More recently, behavioral activation strategies have
become a central feature of newer treatments for de


pression (Dimidjian et al., 2006; Jacobson, Martell, &
Dimidjian, 2001); for a more in-depth discussion, see
Dimidjian, Martell, Herman-Dunn, and Hubley (Chapter
9, this volume).

To distinguish action tendencies from avoidance
strategies (described earlier), the UP has termed these
behavioral responses to emotions as “emotion-driven
behaviors” (EDBs). Whereas the function of emotional
avoidance strategies is to down-regulate or suppress
emotions, EDBs include a specific set of “reactive”
behaviors associated with each emotion. For example,
the EDB for a panic attack is escape (fight or flight),
whereas that for anxiety is hypervigilance. Similarly,
the emotion of anger elicits an EDB of attacking–
defending, and the EDB for sadness is cognitive, emotional,
and physical slowing and withdrawal (see Table

6.2 for examples of EDBs associated with different
emotional disorders). It is important to note, however,
that the therapist must focus on changing EDBs, in addition
to preventing emotional avoidance. For example,
a patient with social phobia may be able to maintain eye
contact and fully engage in social situations but escape
the situation when his anxiety rises to the level of panic.
On the contrary, this same patient may be able to stay in
the situation as long as needed, but he may be distracting
himself the whole time or avoiding conversations
with people. Clearly, both scenarios are problematic
because the patient is preventing himself from learning
that he can experience emotions at their fullest without
leaving the situation. It should also be noted that, in
practice, avoidance and EDBs may be difficult to distinguish,
and this distinction can be downplayed with a
given patient, if necessary or clinically relevant.
After the concept of EDBs is introduced, patients
begin to track EDBs on the self-monitoring forms and
eventually focus on changing EDBs. This can be a very
concrete exercise for the patient because he/she is instructed
to “do something different than he/she would
typically do.” The Changing EDBs monitoring form is
illustrated in Figure 6.2.

Module 6: Awareness and Tolerance
of Physical Sensations

This module (typically one session) was designed to
increase patients’ awareness of the role of physical sensations
as a core component of emotional experiences
and to promote increased tolerance of these sensations.
In this module, patients are asked to engage in a series


Emotional Disorders

table 6.2. examples of emotion-driven behaviors and incompatible behaviors

Disorder
most usually
EDBs associated Incompatible behaviors
Calling relatives to check on safety GAD Restricting contact/calling relatives
Perfectionistic behavior at work or home GAD Leaving things untidy or unfinished
Checking locks, stove, or other appliances OCD Repeatedly locking–unlocking and turning on–off until memory
is unclear
Leaving (escaping from) a theater, PDA Move to the center of the crowd. Smile or produce nonfearful
religious service, or other crowded area facial expressions
Social withdrawal Depression Behavioral activation
Leaving (escaping) a social situation Social phobia Staying in situation and approaching people
Verbally/physically attacking someone PTSD Remove self from situation and/or practice relaxation techniques
when in an argument
Hypervigilance All disorders Focus attention on specific task at hand; meditation; relaxation

of interoceptive exposure (IE) exercises designed to induce
physical sensations analogous to those typically
associated with naturally occurring feelings of anxiety
and emotional distress (e.g., shortness of breath,
heart palpitations, dizziness), which themselves often
become cues for anxiety through interoceptive conditioning
(Barlow, 2002). Examples of IE exercises include
hyperventilation, spinning (while standing and/
or in a chair), running in place, and breathing through
a thin straw. The use of IE has largely been confined to
the treatment of PDA, and has been shown to be effective
in reducing panic attack frequency and the fear of
physical sensations that occurs as a primary feature of
the disorder (e.g., Barlow et al., 2000; Craske, Rowe,
Lewin, & Noriega-Dimitri, 1997). However, given the
fact that heightened physiological arousal, and sensitivity
to physical sensations, is observed in other emotional
disorders, IEs are applied across diagnoses, regardless
of whether the physical sensations represent a
specific focus of the patient’s anxiety.

Module 7: Interoceptive
and Situational Exposures

In this final core module, treatment concepts are practiced
and extended during in-session emotion expo


sures created by the therapist and individually tailored
to the patient’s presenting symptoms (this module is the
longest; typically lasting four to six sessions). Through
exposure to both internal and external cues, patients
ultimately increase their tolerance of intense and uncomfortable
emotional experiences. In-session exposures
can range from an imaginal exposure to a past
emotional event (for PTSD or GAD), a conversation
with a stranger (for social phobia), going into a dirty
bathroom (for OCD), or watching a sad movie or movie
clip (for MDD or dysthymia). Furthermore, for some
patients, continued engagement in IEs may be indicated
to promote greater tolerance of uncomfortable physical
sensations. The goal of the exposures is gradually
to introduce situations and experiences that serve as
external triggers for emotional experiences. By eliciting
the emotions that patients have been avoiding, they
have the opportunity to practice the techniques taught
in treatment (present-focused awareness, cognitive reappraisal,
modifying EDBs, and prevention of emotion
avoidance). In this sense, exposure to the emotion itself
is the necessary mechanism of action for change. Thus,
the actual situational context of the exposure becomes
less important. Therapists must be creative in the design
of the exposure to maximize the emotion provocation
for the patient.


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

Module 8: Relapse Prevention

Treatment concludes with a general review of treatment
principles and a discussion of the patient’s progress
(usually one session). In this module, therapist and
patient identify specific strategies for maintaining and
extending treatment gains and for responding to future
difficulties that may arise. For instance, it is emphasized
that a return of anxiety and/or mood difficulties
does not reflect relapse and, instead, may be a more
natural fluctuation of emotions that can be addressed
using the skills developed in treatment.

DetaileD DescriPtioN of Protocol

The following session descriptions and accompanying
transcripts are from the case of “Joseph,” described
earlier, treated by one of the authors (K. K. E).

Introduction: Overview of General Treatment
Format and Procedures

During the introductory session, the goals of the treatment
program are identified and reviewed. The UP
aims to help clients become aware of and better understand
emotional experiences and reactions, and
to counter maladaptive responses to uncomfortable
emotions. Modifying maladaptive responses can help
reduce the intensity and frequency of uncomfortable
emotions, while still allowing clients to experience
them in an adaptive way. It is also important to emphasize
that modifying these responses can be challenging,
and that change often does not occur in a linear fashion.

Prior to the first treatment module, the therapist also
provides a general introduction to treatment logistics,
including general session length and structure, the role
of therapist and client, and the importance of prioritizing
treatment and completing out-of-session practice.
The collaborative nature of treatment is emphasized,
including the importance of feedback from the patient.
Although the UP is ideally delivered in 12–18 sessions
of 50–60 minutes each because the UP is based in a
modular format, a flexible number of sessions can be
used in each module, which may vary the total number
of sessions across clients.

Following this introduction to treatment is a detailed
review of the presenting complaint. In this review, the
therapist focuses on the emotions that result in the most
distress and/or interference in the patient’s life, the

situations and contexts in which those emotions occur,
and how the patient has attempted to manage these
emotions. Below, Joseph describes anxiety related to a
new job opportunity:

tHeraPist: You mentioned you recently were offered
an opportunity to teach over the summer. Can you
tell me more about that?

JosePH: Well, I know I should be excited about it.
It’s something I really want to do, teaching urban
schoolkids music, but it’s stressing me out because I
know I’m going to screw it up.

tHeraPist: How so?

JosePH: Well, in order to teach the class I need to
schedule the classrooms and get supplies, but I don’t
know who I’m supposed to talk to in order to arrange
that, and I’m afraid if I send the person who hired me
an e-mail, she is going to think I am stupid or incompetent,
or that she made a mistake hiring me because
I don’t know what I’m doing.

tHeraPist: And how are you coping with the anxiety
now?

JosePH: Well, not very well, I think. I just feel like hiding,
like this whole thing was a big mistake. I’m sort
of hoping it will just work out somehow, but I don’t
know how. I’ve been avoiding e-mailing her, but I
haven’t talked to anyone else about it either. I keep
waking up at night thinking about it, and it feels just
like a pit in my stomach.

tHeraPist: So it sounds like it is also affecting your
sleep?

JosePH: Yes.

tHeraPist: Have you come up with any solutions to
your problem yet?
JosePH: No, I just feel like a deer in the headlights right
now, like I’m frozen, stuck.
tHeraPist: Have you thought about asking someone
else at the school for advice?
JosePH: No way, I could never do that!

Note that in this early exchange, the therapist has
already obtained important information about the patient’s
emotional experiences and the ways in which he
copes with uncomfortable emotions. In this case, Joseph
is experiencing a great deal of anxiety related to a
new job opportunity. The therapist is already gathering
information about some of Joseph’s negative automatic


Emotional Disorders

appraisals (e.g., Joseph’s assumption that by asking for
information or help, others will see him as incompetent),
anxiety-related physical sensations (e.g., a “pit” in
his stomach), and maladaptive behaviors (e.g., worry,
rumination, avoidance, procrastination). The therapist
is also able to elicit information about how helpful the
patient’s current ways of responding to uncomfortable
emotions are to him. In this case, Joseph is experiencing
a great deal of anxiety but has been unable to come
up with any solution to his problem, and is “frozen,
stuck.”

Although the therapist will spend a significant portion
of the session reviewing Joseph’s presenting complaints
and gathering additional information about his
responses to emotions, this process will continue across
the first several treatment sessions. As the therapist obtains
additional information about strategies (adaptive
or maladaptive) for managing emotions, emotional or
situational avoidance, and engagement in EDBs, this
is then integrated into the patient’s functional analysis
and the treatment plan may be adjusted accordingly.

Module 1: Motivation Enhancement
for Treatment Engagement

This module focuses on achieving the goals of preparing
and developing each patient’s willingness to make
identified behavioral changes, based on the MI principals
and techniques developed by Miller and Rollnick
(2013). Specifically, the principles of (1) expressing
empathy, (2) developing discrepancy, (3) rolling with
resistance, and (4) supporting self-efficacy are used in
this module and throughout the course of treatment to
support behavior change. In this module, the therapist
explores motivational issues with the patient, through
exercises designed to build motivation (through the
Decisional Balance Worksheet) and to enhance selfefficacy
(using the Treatment Goal-Setting Worksheet).
The aim of these exercises is to highlight potential obstacles
to change, as well as to identify specific, concrete
goals, respectively.

tHeraPist: Let’s take a look at your Decisional Balance
Worksheet. You noted some pros for change,
including being more social and working at a job you
enjoy. What about some cons for change?

JosePH: Well, sometimes it’s easier just to avoid dealing
with these situations altogether.

tHeraPist: Right, and it is important to note and be

honest with yourself about this because there is part
of you here that wants to change, and another part
that has learned that, at least in the short-term, it’s
easier to just stay the same. What about cons for
staying the same?

JosePH: Well, if I don’t ever face my anxiety, I might
not ever get to have a social life, or the job I want.

tHeraPist: So, on the one hand, you want to change
how you deal with your anxiety so that you can have
the life you want, and at the same time, this change
is harder than just avoiding?

JosePH: Yes, that’s right.

tHeraPist: Acknowledging both of these parts of
yourself is important because it is actually quite normal
to have some apprehension or ambiguity about
change. By being open with yourself about this, you
are in a much better position to weigh out your decision
whether or not to engage in treatment because
it will be about weighing out a choice rather than
judging yourself for success or failure. If you find
yourself wavering during treatment, you will be able
to recognize that this may be related to your feelings
of apprehension or ambiguity about change, which
is quite normal, and not because you are necessarily
failing in some way.

Module 2

