THE GUILFORD PRESS


CliniCal Handbook
of PsyCHologiCal disorders


Also from David H. Barlow

Anxiety and Its Disorders:
The Nature and Treatment of Anxiety and Panic, Second Edition

David H. Barlow

Chronic Anxiety:
Generalized Anxiety Disorder and Mixed Anxiety–Depression

Edited by Ronald M. Rapee and David H. Barlow

Handbook of Assessment and Treatment Planning
for Psychological Disorders, Second Edition

Edited by Martin M. Antony and David H. Barlow

Psychological Treatment of Panic

David H. Barlow and Jerome A. Cerny


CliniCAl HAnDBook of

PsyCHologiCAl
DisorDers

A Step-by-Step Treatment Manual

fiftH edition

edited by

david H. barlow


THe gUilforD Press
new york london


© 2014 The Guilford Press
A Division of Guilford Publications, Inc.
72 Spring Street, New York, NY 10012
www.guilford.com

All rights reserved

No part of this book may be reproduced, translated, stored in a retrieval system,
or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying,
microfilming, recording, or otherwise, without written permission from the publisher.

Printed in the United States of America

This book is printed on acid-free paper.

Last digit is print number: 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

The authors have checked with sources believed to be reliable in their efforts to
provide information that is complete and generally in accord with the standards
of practice that are accepted at the time of publication. However, in view of the
possibility of human error or changes in behavioral, mental health, or medical
sciences, neither the authors, nor the editor and publisher, nor any other party who
has been involved in the preparation or publication of this work warrants that the
information contained herein is in every respect accurate or complete, and they are
not responsible for any errors or omissions or the results obtained from the use of such
information. Readers are encouraged to confirm the information contained in this
book with other sources.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

Clinical handbook of psychological disorders : a step-by-step treatment manual /
edited by David H. Barlow.—Fifth edition.

pages cm
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-1-4625-1326-0 (hardcover)

1. Behavior therapy—Handbooks, manuals, etc. 2. Medical protocols—
Handbooks, manuals, etc. I. Barlow, David H., editor of compilation.
RC489.B4C584 2014
616.89′142—dc23

2013027134


To Beverly
For love, loyalty, and dedication


About the editor

David H. Barlow, PhD, ABPP, is Professor of Psychology and Psychiatry and Founder
and Director Emeritus of the Center for Anxiety and Related Disorders at Boston
University. He has published over 500 articles and book chapters and over 60 books
and clinical manuals—some translated into more than 20 languages, including Arabic,
Chinese, Hindi, and Russian—primarily in the areas of emotional disorders and clinical
research methodology. Dr. Barlow’s books include Handbook of Assessment and
Treatment Planning for Psychological Disorders, Second Edition, and Anxiety and
Its Disorders, Second Edition. He has been the recipient of numerous awards, including,
most recently, the Career/Lifetime Achievement Award from the Association for
Behavioral and Cognitive Therapies. He is past president of the Society of Clinical
Psychology and the Association for Behavioral and Cognitive Therapies and past editor
of the journals Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice and Behavior Therapy.
Dr. Barlow’s research has been continually funded by the National Institutes of Health
for over 40 years.

vii


Contributors

David H. Barlow, PhD, Center for Anxiety and Related Disorders and Department
of Psychology, Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts

Aaron T. Beck, MD, Department of Psychiatry, Perelman School of Medicine
at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; Beck Institute
for Cognitive Behavior Therapy, Bala Cynwyd, Pennsylvania

Larry E. Beutler, PhD, ABPP, Department of Clinical Psychology, Palo Alto University,
Palo Alto, California

Kathryn L. Bleiberg, PhD, Department of Psychiatry, Weill Cornell Medical College,
Cornell University, New York, New York

Andrew Christensen, PhD, Department of Psychology, University of California,
Los Angeles, California

Zafra Cooper, DPhil, Department of Psychiatry, University of Oxford,
Oxford, United Kingdom

Michelle G. Craske, PhD, Department of Psychology, University of California,
Los Angeles, California

Sona Dimidjian, PhD, Department of Psychology and Neuroscience, University of Colorado,
Boulder, Colorado

Brian D. Doss, PhD, Department of Psychology, University of Miami, Coral Gables, Florida

Kristen K. Ellard, PhD, Department of Psychiatry, Massachusetts General Hospital,
Boston, Massachusetts

Christopher G. Fairburn, DM, Department of Psychiatry, University of Oxford,
Oxford, United Kingdom

viii


Contributors

Christopher P. Fairholme, PhD, Center for Anxiety and Related Disorders,
Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts

Todd J. Farchione, PhD, Center for Anxiety and Related Disorders and Department
of Psychology, Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts

Edna B. Foa, PhD, Department of Psychiatry and Center for the Treatment and Study
of Anxiety, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania

Martin E. Franklin, PhD, Department of Psychiatry, Perelman School of Medicine
at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania

Allison G. Harvey, PhD, Department of Psychology, University of California,
Berkeley, California

Sarah H. Heil, PhD, Vermont Center on Behavior and Health, Departments of Psychiatry
and Psychology, University of Vermont, Burlington, Vermont

Richard G. Heimberg, PhD, Adult Anxiety Clinic and Department of Psychology,
Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania

Ruth Herman-Dunn, PhD, private practice and Department of Psychology,
University of Washington, Seattle, Washington

Stephen T. Higgins, PhD, Vermont Center on Behavior and Health,
Departments of Psychiatry and Psychology, University of Vermont, Burlington, Vermont

Samuel Hubley, MA, Department of Psychology and Neuroscience, University of Colorado,
Boulder, Colorado

Neil S. Jacobson, PhD (deceased), Department of Psychology, University of Washington,
Seattle, Washington

Katherine A. Kaplan, PhD, Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences,
Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California

Marsha M. Linehan, PhD, Department of Psychology, University of Washington,
Seattle, Washington

Leanne Magee, PhD, Division of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Department of Child
and Adolescent Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, The Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania

John C. Markowitz, MD, Department of Psychiatry, Columbia University College
of Physicians and Sugeons; Department of Psychiatry, New York State Psychiatric
Institute; Department of Psychiatry, Weill Medical College, Cornell University,
New York, New York

Christopher R. Martell, PhD, Martell Behavioral Activation Research Consulting,
and Department of Psychology, University of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin


Contributors


Barbara S. McCrady, PhD, Center on Alcoholism, Substance Abuse, and Addictions,

and Department of Psychology, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, New Mexico
David J. Miklowitz, PhD, Department of Psychiatry, Semel Institute for Neuroscience
and Human Behavior, David Geffen School of Medicine, Los Angeles, California

Candice M. Monson, PhD, Department of Psychology, Ryerson University, Toronto,

Ontario, Canada
Andrada D. Neacsiu, PhD, Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences,
Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina

John C. Norcross, PhD, ABPP, private practice and Department of Psychology,

University of Scranton, Scranton, Pennsylvania
Susan M. Orsillo, PhD, Department of Psychology, Suffolk University,
Boston, Massachusetts

Laura A. Payne, PhD, Department of Pediatrics, David Geffen School of Medicine,

University of California, Los Angeles, California
Patricia A. Resick, PhD, Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences,
Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, North Carolina

Shireen L. Rizvi, PhD, Graduate School of Applied and Professional Psychology,

Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, Piscataway, New Jersey
Lizabeth Roemer, PhD, Department of Psychology, University of Massachusetts,
Boston, Massachusetts

Jayne L. Rygh, PhD, private practice, New York, New York

Stacey C. Sigmon, PhD, Vermont Center on Behavior and Health, Departments of Psychiatry
and Psychology, University of Vermont, Burlington, Vermont
Nicholas Tarrier, PhD, School of Psychological Sciences, University of Manchester,

Manchester, United Kingdom

Rumina Taylor, DClinPsy, Institute of Psychiatry, King’s College London,
and South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom
Arthur D. Weinberger, PhD (retired), Cognitive Therapy Center of New York,

New York, New York
Jennifer G. Wheeler, PhD, private practice, Seattle, Washington
Jeffrey E. Young, PhD, Department of Psychiatry, Columbia University,

and Schema Therapy Institute of New York, New York, New York


Preface

evidence-based practice (EBP) is one of those ideas that comes along occasionally and takes
the world by storm. Although some of the tenets of EBP have been around for decades (as
has this handbook), it is only in the past 15 years that EBP has been formally identified as a
systematic method of delivering clinical care (Institute of Medicine, 2001; Sackett, Strauss,
Richardson, Rosenberg, & Haynes, 2000).

Since that time, the “tipping point” (Gladwell, 2000) for EBP has clearly occurred, and
health care policymakers and governments, as well as professional societies around the world,
have collectively decided that the delivery of health care, including behavioral health care,
should be based on evidence (APA Task Force on Evidence-Based Practice, 2006). Fulfilling
this mandate comprises the goals of EBP, and has also been the goal of this book since the first
edition was published in 1985.

The fifth edition of this book continues to represent a distinct departure from any number
of similar books reviewing advances in the treatment of psychological disorders from the
perspective of EBP. Over the past two decades, we have developed a technology of behavior
change that necessarily differs from disorder to disorder.

This technology comprises a variety of techniques or procedures with more or less proven
effectiveness for a given disorder (and increasingly for classes of disorders). Naturally, we have
more evidence of the effectiveness of these treatments for some disorders than for others. It also
has become more apparent since the earlier editions that considerable clinical skill is required
to apply this technology most effectively. Therefore, this book, in its fifth edition, is not another
review of therapeutic procedures for a given problem with recommendations for further
research. Rather, it is a detailed description of actual treatment protocols in which experienced
clinicians implement the technology of behavior change in the context of the most frequently
encountered disorders.

In this edition, the originators of some of the best-known treatment protocols have revised
and updated the descriptions of their interventions to reflect the latest developments in
an increasingly powerful array of psychological therapies. Among these revisions to existing
chapters, several deserve comment. Monson, Resick, and Rizvi (Chapter 2) have updated their
chapter on posttraumatic stress disorder, describing the tragic case of a soldier fresh from the
battlefields of Iraq. Their successful treatment of this individual suffering from the unspeak


xi


xii Preface

able (and intolerable) trauma of war is one consequence of today’s headline news stories that
seldom makes it into print. Drug abuse continues as a scourge that ruins individual lives, the
functioning of families, and the very fabric of society. Higgins, Sigmon, and Heil (Chapter 14)
present the latest iterations of their approach, which is applicable to all serious drugs of abuse.
Chapters on schizophrenia and other psychotic disorders, borderline personality disorder, bipolar
disorder, and a number of anxiety disorders, along with depression, written in almost all
cases by the originators of these leading protocols, have been updated considerably to reflect
the latest evidence for the most effective approaches to these common but debilitating problems.


In addition, three original treatment protocols make their appearance for the first time in
this edition. Brief psychological treatments for insomnia represent one of the success stories in
EBP, with marked superiority to popular sleep medications, yet many clinicians who frequently
confront severe sleep problems and disorders among their patients are unaware of these strategies.
Because of the success of these treatment approaches, the American Academy of Sleep
Medicine recommends these protocols as a first-line treatment for people with all forms of insomnia,
including those currently using hypnotic drugs. The protocol described by Kaplan and
Harvey (Chapter 16) represents an advanced and successful approach to this problem.

Roemer and Orsillo (Chapter 5) describe a new acceptance-based treatment for generalized
anxiety disorder that reflects in a clever and creative way many of the principles espoused
by the so-called “third-wave” approach to psychological disorders. Initial results from this
protocol are impressive.

Norcross and Beutler (Chapter 15), experienced and well-known therapists, present their
“treatment matching” strategic approach in the context of a young woman suffering from polysubstance
abuse and depression. While standard cognitive-behavioral and systems approaches
are recognizable in this treatment description, in an explicit manner the authors highlight
transdiagnostic but empirically supported therapist and relationship factors that clearly deserve
description in this book.

Finally, there is growing consensus that the future of EBP will be to distill principles of
effective change that cut across diagnostic conditions, making them more generally applicable.
Two of these “unified” or “transdiagnostic” protocols appear in this fifth edition. In Chapter 6
(Payne, Ellard, Farchione, Fairholme, and Barlow), we present our own unified transdiagnostic
approach to emotional disorders, and Fairburn and Cooper (Chapter 17) describe a transdiagnostic
approach to eating disorders that they originated with their colleagues.

In all chapters, the nuts and bolts of clinical application are emphasized.

As with the previous editions, this book was motivated by countless clinical psychology
graduate students, psychiatric residents, and other mental health professionals, either in
training or in practice, asking, “But how do I do it?” Realizing that there is no single source
in which to find step-by-step treatment protocols for use as a guide to practice, this book attempts
to fill the void. To accomplish this purpose, a number of specific topics are common to
most chapters. Each chapter begins with a brief review of our knowledge of the specific disorder
(or class of disorders), followed by a description of the particular model or mini-theory
that guides the technology utilized with the disorder in question. This model, or mini-theory,
typically answers the question: What particular facets of the disorder should be assessed and
treated? While clinical application always dilutes theoretical models, clinicians will recognize
cognitive-behavioral and systems approaches, with some psychodynamic contributions, as the
predominant theoretical context.


Preface xiii

This model is followed by a description of the typical setting in which the treatment is
carried out. The setting varies from disorder to disorder, ranging from the more usual office
setting to the home environment of the patient. Authors provide similar detailed descriptions
of the social context of treatment (e.g., the importance of the involvement of family or friends)
as well as therapist and client variables that are important within the context of the particular
problem. For example, therapist variables that may be important in implementing techniques
for treatment of agoraphobia or couple distress are described. In addition, authors discuss the
implications for treatment of client variables, such as dependency and unassertiveness in individuals
with panic disorder with agoraphobia.

A detailed description of the actual step-by-step process of assessment and treatment follows,
liberally sprinkled in many chapters with transcripts of therapy sessions. Important components
of this process are the specifics of the rationale given to the patient before treatment,
as well as typical problems that arise during the implementation of the technology. Where data
exist, authors provide information on clinical predictors of success or failure.

In accomplishing the rather ambitious goals just described, I was very fortunate in this
edition of the book, as in previous editions, to have leading clinicians and researchers document
in some detail how they actually treat their patients. Once again, these authorities reported that
the number of details they had to include in order to convey how they actually applied their
treatment programs went far beyond their expectations. My hope is that practicing clinicians
and clinical students everywhere will benefit from acquaintance with these details.

In closing, I would like to express my deep appreciation to Amantia Ametaj, my research
and administrative assistant during the editing of this book. She worked with me and the authors
every step of the way. I am sure this information will come in handy as she is now pursuing
her own doctorate in clinical psychology.

DaviD H. Barlow, PhD

referenCes

APA Task Force on Evidence-Based Practice. (2006). Evidence-based practice in psychology. American

Psychologist, 61, 271–285.
Gladwell, M. (2000). The tipping point: How little things can make a big difference. Boston: Little,

Brown.
Institute of Medicine. (2001). Crossing the quality chasm: A new health system for the 21st century.

Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
Sackett, D. L., Strauss, S. E., Richardson, W. S., Rosenberg, W., & Haynes, R. B. (2000). Evidence-based

medicine: How to practice and teach EBM (2nd ed.). London: Churchill Livingstone.


Contents

1. Panic Disorder and Agoraphobia
Michelle G. craske and DaviD h. Barlow
1
2. Posttraumatic stress Disorder
canDice M. Monson, Patricia a. resick, and shireen l. rizvi
62
3. social Anxiety Disorder
richarD G. heiMBerG and leanne MaGee
114
4. obsessive–Compulsive Disorder
Martin e. Franklin and eDna B. Foa
155
5. An Acceptance‑Based Behavioral Therapy
for generalized Anxiety Disorder
lizaBeth roeMer and susan M. orsillo
206
6. emotional Disorders: A Unified Transdiagnostic Protocol
laura a. Payne, kristen k. ellarD, toDD J. Farchione,
christoPher P. FairholMe, and DaviD h. Barlow
237
7. Cognitive Therapy for Depression
JeFFrey e. younG, Jayne l. ryGh, arthur D. weinBerGer,
and aaron t. Beck
275
8. interpersonal Psychotherapy for Depression
kathryn l. BleiBerG and John c. Markowitz
332

xv


xvi Contents

9. Behavioral Activation for Depression
sona DiMiDJian, christoPher r. Martell, ruth herMan‑Dunn,
and saMuel huBley
353
10. Borderline Personality Disorder
anDraDa D. neacsiu and Marsha M. linehan
394
11. Bipolar Disorder
DaviD J. Miklowitz
462
12. schizophrenia and other Psychotic Disorders
nicholas tarrier and ruMina taylor
502
13. Alcohol Use Disorders
BarBara s. MccraDy
533
14. Drug Use Disorders
stePhen t. hiGGins, stacey c. siGMon, and sarah h. heil
588
15. evidence‑Based relationships and responsiveness
for Depression and substance Abuse
John c. norcross and larry e. Beutler
617
16. Treatment of sleep Disturbance
katherine a. kaPlan and allison G. harvey
640
17. eating Disorders: A Transdiagnostic Protocol
christoPher G. FairBurn and zaFra cooPer
670
18. Couple Distress
anDrew christensen, JenniFer G. wheeler, Brian D. Doss,
and neil s. JacoBson
703
Author index 733
subject index 751


CHaPter 1

Panic Disorder and Agoraphobia

Michelle G. craske
DaviD h. Barlow

The treatment protocol described in this chapter represents one of the success stories
in the development of evidence‑based psychological treatments. results from numerous
studies indicate that this approach provides substantial advantages over placebo medication
or alternative psychosocial approaches containing “common” factors, such as positive
expectancies and helpful therapeutic alliances. in addition, this treatment forms an
important part of every clinical practice guideline in either public health or other sources
from countries around the world, describing effective treatments for panic disorder and
agoraphobia. results from numerous studies evaluating this treatment protocol, both individually
and in combination with leading pharmacological approaches, suggest that
this appvroach is equally effective as the best pharmacological approaches in the short
term and more durable over the long term. But this treatment protocol has not stood still.
for example, we have learned a great deal in recent years about neurobiological mechanisms
of action in fear reduction, and the best psychological methods for effecting these
changes and newly developed acceptance‑based procedures have proven efficacious. in
this chapter we present the latest version of this protocol, incorporating these changes
and additions in the context of changes to diagnostic criteria in DsM‑5, all as illustrated
in a comprehensive account of the treatment of “Julie.”—D. H. B.

Advances continue in the development of biopsychosocial
models and cognitive-behavioral treatments for
panic disorder and agoraphobia. The conceptualization
of panic disorder as an acquired fear of certain bodily
sensations, and agoraphobia as a behavioral response
to the anticipation of related bodily sensations or their
crescendo into a full-blown panic attack, continues to
be supported by experimental, clinical, and longitudinal
research. Furthermore, the efficacy of cognitivebehavioral
treatments that target fear of bodily sensations
and associated agoraphobic situations is well
established. In addition to presenting an up-to-date

review of treatment outcome data, this chapter covers
recent theoretical and empirical developments in
reference to etiological factors, the role of comorbid
diagnoses in treatment, ways of optimizing learning
during exposure therapy, and the effect of medication
on cognitive-behavioral treatments. The chapter concludes
with a detailed, session-by-session outline of
cognitive-behavioral treatment for panic disorder and
agoraphobia. This protocol has been developed in our
clinics; the full protocol is detailed in available treatment
manuals (Barlow & Craske, 2006; Craske & Barlow,
2006).

1


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

Nature of PaNic aND aGoraPhoBia

Panic Attacks

“Panic attacks” are discrete episodes of intense fear
or discomfort, accompanied by physical and cognitive
symptoms, as listed in the DSM-5 panic attack checklist
(American Psychiatric Association, 2013). Panic
attacks are discrete by virtue of their sudden or abrupt
onset and brief duration, as opposed to gradually building
anxious arousal. Panic attacks in panic disorder
often have an unexpected quality, meaning that from
the patient’s perspective, they appear to happen without
an obvious trigger or at unexpected times. Indeed, the
diagnosis of panic disorder is defined by recurrent “unexpected”
panic attacks, followed by at least 1 month
of persistent concern about their recurrence and their
consequences, or by a significant change in behavior
consequent to the attacks (American Psychiatric Association,
2013).

As with all basic emotions (Izard, 1992), panic attacks
are associated with strong action tendencies:
Most often, these are urges to escape, and less often,
urges to fight. These fight and flight tendencies usually
involve elevated autonomic nervous system arousal
needed to support such fight–flight reactivity. Furthermore,
perceptions of imminent threat or danger, such as
death, loss of control, or social ridicule, often accompany
such fight–flight reactivity. However, the features of
urgency to escape, autonomic arousal, and perception
of threat are not present in every self-reported occurrence
of panic. For example, despite evidence for elevated
heart rate or other indices of sympathetic nervous
system activation during panic attacks on average (e.g.,
Wilkinson et al., 1998), Margraf, Taylor, Ehlers, Roth,
and Agras (1987) found that 40% of self-reported panic
attacks were not associated with accelerated heart rate.
Moreover, in general, patients with panic disorder are
more likely than nonanxious controls to report arrhythmic
heart rate in the absence of actual arrhythmias
(Barsky, Cleary, Sarnie, & Ruskin, 1994). Heightened
anxiety about signs of autonomic arousal may lead patients
to perceive cardiac events when none exist (Barlow,
Brown, & Craske, 1994; Craske & Tsao, 1999). We
believe that self-reported panic in the absence of heart
rate acceleration or other indices of autonomic activation
reflects anticipatory anxiety rather than true panic
(Barlow et al., 1994), especially because more severe
panic attacks are more consistently associated with accelerated
heart rate (Margraf et al., 1987). Sometimes

individuals report intense abrupt fear in the absence of
perceptions of threat or danger. This has been termed
“noncognitive” panic (Rachman, Lopatka, & Levitt,
1988; see Kircanski, Craske, Epstein, & Wittchen,
2009). Finally, the urgency to escape is sometimes
weakened by situational demands for continued approach
and endurance, such as performance expectations
or job demands, thus creating discordance between
behavioral responses on the one hand, and verbal
or physiological fear responses on the other.

A subset of individuals with panic disorder experience
nocturnal panic attacks. “Nocturnal panic” refers
to waking from sleep in a state of panic with symptoms
that are very similar to panic attacks during wakeful
states (Craske & Barlow, 1989; Uhde, 1994). Nocturnal
panic does not refer to waking from sleep and panicking
after a lapse of waking time, or nighttime arousals
induced by nightmares or environmental stimuli
(e.g., unexpected noises). Instead, nocturnal panic is an
abrupt waking from sleep in a state of panic, without
an obvious trigger. Nocturnal panic attacks reportedly
most often occur between 1 and 3 hours after sleep
onset, and only occasionally more than once per night
(Craske & Barlow, 1989). Surveys of select clinical
groups suggest that nocturnal panic is relatively common
among individuals with panic disorder: 44–71%
report having experienced nocturnal panic at least
once, and 30–45% report repeated nocturnal panics
(Craske & Barlow, 1989; Krystal, Woods, Hill, &
Charney, 1991; Mellman & Uhde, 1989; Roy-Byrne,
Mellman, & Uhde, 1988; Uhde, 1994). Individuals who
suffer frequent nocturnal panic often become fearful
of sleep and attempt to delay sleep onset. Avoidance of
sleep may result in chronic sleep deprivation, which in
turn precipitates more nocturnal panics (Uhde, 1994).

“Nonclinical” panic attacks occur occasionally in
approximately 3–5% of people in the general population
who do not otherwise meet criteria for panic disorder
(Norton, Cox, & Malan, 1992). Also, panic attacks
occur across a variety of anxiety and mood disorders
(Barlow et al., 1985), as well as substance use, personality
disorders and psychoses (Craske et al., 2010)
and are not limited to panic disorder. Indeed, the ubiquity
of panic attacks has been emphasized in DSM-5
(American Psychiatric Association, 2013) where panic
attacks are designated as a potential specifier for any
DSM disorder. As stated earlier, the defining feature of
panic disorder is not the presence of panic attacks per
se, but involves additional anxiety about the recurrence
of panic or its consequences, or a significant behavioral


Panic Disorder and Agoraphobia

change because of the panic attacks. It is the additional
anxiety about panic combined with catastrophic cognitions
in the face of panic that differentiate between the
person with panic disorder and the occasional nonclinical
panicker (e.g., Telch, Lucas, & Nelson, 1989) or the
person with other anxiety disorders who also happens
to panic. The following scenario exemplifies the latter
point.

Patient: Sometimes I lay awake at night thinking
about a million different things. I think about what
is going to happen to my daughter if I get sick. Who
will look after her, or what would happen if my husband
died and we didn’t have enough money to give
my daughter a good education? Then I think about
where we would live and how we would cope. Sometimes
I can work myself up so much that my heart
starts to race, my hands get sweaty, and I feel dizzy
and scared. So I have to stop myself from thinking
about all those things. I usually get out of bed and
turn on the TV—anything to get my mind off the
worries.

tHeraPist: Do you worry about the feelings of a racing
heart, sweating, and dizziness happening again?

Patient: No. They’re unpleasant, but they are the least
of my concerns. I am more worried about my daughter
and our future.

This scenario illustrates the experience of panic that
is not the central focus of the person’s anxiety. More
likely, this woman has generalized anxiety disorder,
and her uncontrollable worry leads her to panic on occasion.
The next example is someone with social anxiety
disorder, who becomes very concerned about panicking
in social situations, because the possibility of a
panic attack increases her concerns about being judged
negatively by others.

Patient: I am terrified of having a panic attack in
meetings at work. I dread the thought of others noticing
how anxious I am. They must be able to see my
hands shaking, the sweat on my forehead, and worst
of all, my face turning red.

tHeraPist: What worries you most about others noticing
your physical symptoms?
Patient: That they will think that I am weird or
strange.

tHeraPist: Would you be anxious in the meetings if
the panic attacks were gone?

Patient: I would still be worried about doing or saying

the wrong thing. It is not just the panic attacks that

worry me.

tHeraPist: Are you worried about panic attacks in any

other situations?
Patient: Formal social events and sometimes when I

meet someone for the first time.

In this case, even though the patient experiences
panic attacks, the real concern is about being judged
negatively by others consequent to panic attacks, and
the panic attacks do not occur in situations other than
social ones. Hence, this presentation is most aptly described
as social anxiety.

Agoraphobia

“Agoraphobia” refers to avoidance or endurance with
dread of situations from which escape might be difficult
or help is unavailable in the event of a panic-like
symptoms (including but not limited to panic attacks)
or other incapacitating symptoms, such as loss of bowel
control or vomiting, disorientation (especially in children),
or sense of falling (especially in older adults)
(American Psychiatric Association, 2013). Typical agoraphobic
situations include shopping malls, waiting in
line, movie theaters, traveling by car or bus, crowded
restaurants, and being alone. “Mild” agoraphobia is
exemplified by the person who hesitates about driving
long distances alone but manages to drive to and from
work, prefers to sit on the aisle at movie theaters but
still goes to movies, and avoids crowded places. “Moderate”
agoraphobia is exemplified by the person whose
driving is limited to a 10-mile radius from home and
only if accompanied, who shops at off-peak times and
avoids large supermarkets, and who avoids flying or
traveling by train. “Severe” agoraphobia refers to very
limited mobility, sometimes even to the point of becoming
housebound.

Relationship between Panic and Agoraphobia

The relationship between panic and agoraphobia is
complex. On the one hand, not all persons who panic
develop agoraphobia, and the extent of agoraphobia that
emerges is highly variable (Craske & Barlow, 1988).
Various factors have been investigated as potential predictors
of agoraphobia. Although agoraphobia tends
to increase as history of panic lengthens, a significant


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

proportion of individuals panic for many years without
developing agoraphobic limitations. Nor is agoraphobia
related to age of onset or frequency of panic (Cox,
Endler, & Swinson, 1995; Craske & Barlow, 1988;
Kikuchi et al., 2005; Rapee & Murrell, 1988). Some
studies report more intense physical symptoms during
panic attacks when there is more agoraphobia (e.g., de
Jong & Bouman, 1995; Goisman et al., 1994; Noyes,
Clancy, Garvey, & Anderson, 1987; Telch, Brouillard,
Telch, Agras, & Taylor, 1989). Others fail to find
such differences (e.g., Cox et al., 1995; Craske, Miller,
Rotunda, & Barlow, 1990). On the one hand, fears of
dying, going crazy, or losing control do not relate to
level of agoraphobia (Cox et al., 1995; Craske, Rapee,
& Barlow, 1988). On the other hand, concerns about social
consequences of panicking may be stronger when
there is more agoraphobia (Amering et al., 1997; de
Jong & Bouman, 1995; Rapee & Murrell, 1988; Telch,
Brouilard, et al., 1989). In addition, Kikuchi and colleagues
(2005) found that individuals who develop agoraphobia
within 6 months of the onset of panic disorder
have a higher prevalence of generalized anxiety disorder
but not major depression. However, whether social
evaluation concerns or comorbidity are precursors or
are secondary to agoraphobia remains to be determined.
Occupational status also predicts agoraphobia,
accounting for 18% of the variance in one study (de
Jong & Bouman, 1995). Perhaps the strongest predictor
of agoraphobia is sex; the ratio of males to females
shifts dramatically in the direction of female predominance
as level of agoraphobia worsens (e.g., Thyer,
Himle, Curtis, Cameron, & Nesse, 1985).

On the other hand, not everyone with agoraphobia
has a history of panic attacks or even panic-like symptoms,
although a history of panic is much more common
in treatment-seeking samples of individuals with
agoraphobia than in epidemiological samples (Wittchen,
Gloster, Beesdo-Baum, Fava, & Craske, 2010).
Nonetheless, the prevalence of agoraphobia without a
history of panic disorder, panic attacks, or panic-like
symptoms was reported to be at least as high as the
combined rates of panic disorder with and without agoraphobia
across all epidemiological studies (Wittchen
et al., 2010). Approximately 50% of individuals from
community samples who endorse agoraphobia do not
endorse panic attacks. Furthermore, agoraphobia without
panic-like features appears to be as impairing as
panic disorder without agoraphobia, although the
combination is usually associated with even more impairment.
In addition, some differences exist between

them in terms of incidence, comorbidity, and response
to treatment (Wittchen et al., 2010). For these reasons,
panic disorder and agoraphobia are now recognized
as two distinct, albeit highly comorbid, disorders in
DSM-5 (American Psychiatric Association, 2013).

PreseNtiNG features

From the latest epidemiological study, the National
Comorbidity Survey Replication (NCS-R; Kessler,
Berglund, Demler, Jin, & Walters, 2005; Kessler,
Chiu, Demler, & Walters, 2005) 12-month prevalence
estimates for panic disorder are approximately 2% in
adults and adolescents. Lower estimates have been reported
for some Asian, African and Latin American
countries, ranging from 0.1 to 0.8% (Lewis-Fernandez
et al., 2010). The 12-month rates for agoraphobia are
approximately 1.7%, and the lifetime morbid risk is
3.7% (Kessler et al., 2012).

The modal age of onset for panic disorder is late
teenage years and early adulthood (Kessler, Berglund,
et al., 2005). In fact, although panic disorder is rare
below the age of 14, a substantial proportion of adolescents
report panic attacks (e.g., Hayward et al., 1992),
and panic disorder in children and adolescents tends
to be chronic and comorbid with other anxiety, mood,
and disruptive disorders (Biederman, Faraone, Marrs,
& Moore, 1997). Treatment is usually sought much
later, around age 34 (e.g., Noyes et al., 1986). Similarly,
agoraphobia may occur in childhood but the incidence
peaks in late adolescence and early adulthood (Beesdo,
Knappe, & Pine, 2007; Bittner et al., 2007); the mean
age of onset is 17 years (Kessler et al., 2012), and older
in the absence of history of panic disorder or panic attacks.
Rates of panic disorder decline in older adults,
possibly diminishing to subclinical levels (Wolitzky-
Taylor, Castriotti, Lenze, Stanley, & Craske, 2010).
Similarly, 12-month prevalence rates for agoraphobia
reduce to 0.4% in individuals over the age of 65 years
(Kessler et al., 2006). The overall ratio of females to
males is approximately 2:1 (Kessler et al., 2006) and, as
mentioned already, the ratio shifts dramatically in the
direction of female predominance as level of agoraphobia
worsens (e.g., Thyer et al., 1985).

Rarely do the diagnoses of panic disorder or agoraphobia
occur in isolation. Commonly co-occurring
Axis I conditions include specific phobias, social phobia,
dysthymia, generalized anxiety disorder, major
depressive disorder, and substance abuse (e.g., Brown,


Panic Disorder and Agoraphobia

Campbell, Lehman, Grishman, & Mancill, 2001; Goisman,
Goldenberg, Vasile, & Keller, 1995; Kessler,
Chiu, et al., 2005). Also, 25–60% of persons with
panic disorder also meet criteria for a personality disorder,
mostly avoidant and dependent personality disorders
(e.g., Chambless & Renneberg, 1988). However,
the nature of the relationship with personality disorders
remains unclear. For example, comorbidity rates
are highly dependent on the method used to establish
Axis II diagnosis, as well as the co-occurrence of depressed
mood (Alneas & Torgersen, 1990; Chambless
& Renneberg, 1988). Moreover, the fact that abnormal
personality traits improve and some “personality disorders”
even remit after successful treatment of panic
disorder (Black, Monahan, Wesner, Gabel, & Bowers,
1996; Mavissakalian & Hamman, 1987; Noyes, Reich,
Suelzer, & Christiansen, 1991) raises questions about
the validity of Axis II diagnoses. The issue of comorbidity
with personality disorders and its effect on treatment
for panic disorder and agoraphobia is described in
more detail in a later section.

Finally, panic disorder and agoraphobia tend to be
chronic conditions, with severe financial and interpersonal
costs (Wittchen et al., 2010). Only a minority
of untreated individuals remit without subsequent
relapse within a few years if not treated (Emmelkamp
& Wittchen, 2009; Katschnig & Amering, 1998; Roy-
Byrne & Cowley, 1995). Also, individuals with panic
disorder overutilize medical resources compared to the
general public and individuals with other “psychiatric”
disorders (e.g., Katon et al., 1990; Roy-Byrne et al.,
1999).

history of PsycholoGical treatMeNt
for PaNic DisorDer aND aGoraPhoBia

It was not until the publication of DSM-III (American
Psychiatric Association, 1980) that panic disorder with
or without agoraphobia was recognized as a distinct
anxiety problem. Until that time, panic attacks were
viewed primarily as a form of free-floating anxiety.
Consequently, psychological treatment approaches
were relatively nonspecific. They included relaxation
and cognitive restructuring for stressful life events in
general (e.g., Barlow, O’Brien, & Last, 1984). Many
presumed that pharmacotherapy was necessary for the
control of panic. In contrast, the treatment of agoraphobia
was quite specific from the 1970s onward, with
primarily exposure-based approaches to target fear and

avoidance of specific situations. However, relatively
little consideration was given to panic attacks in either
the conceptualization or treatment of agoraphobia.
The development of specific panic control treatments
in the middle to late 1980s shifted interest away from
agoraphobia. Interest in agoraphobia was subsequently
renewed, specifically in terms of whether panic control
treatments are sufficient for the management of agoraphobia,
and whether their combination with treatments
that directly target agoraphobia is superior overall. We
address these questions in more detail after describing
the conceptualization that underlies cognitivebehavioral
approaches to the treatment of panic and
agoraphobia.

coNcePtualizatioN of etioloGical
aND MaiNtaiNiNG factors for PaNic
DisorDer aND aGoraPhoBia

Several independent lines of research (Barlow, 1988;
Clark, 1986; Ehlers & Margraf, 1989) converged in
the 1980s on the same basic conceptualization of panic
disorder as an acquired fear of bodily sensations, particularly
sensations associated with autonomic arousal.
Psychological and biological predispositions are believed
to enhance the vulnerability to acquire such fear.
These interacting vulnerabilities have been organized
into an etiological conception of anxiety disorders in
general, referred to as “triple vulnerability theory”
(Barlow, 1988, 2002; Suárez, Bennett, Goldstein, &
Barlow, 2008). First, genetic contributions to the development
of anxiety and negative affect constitute a generalized
(heritable) biological vulnerability. Second,
evidence supports a generalized psychological vulnerability
to experience anxiety and related negative affective
states, characterized by a diminished sense of
control arising from early developmental experiences.
Although the unfortunate co-occurrence of generalized
biological and psychological vulnerabilities may
be sufficient to produce anxiety and related states, particularly
generalized anxiety disorder and depression,
a third vulnerability seems necessary to account for
the development of at least some specific anxiety disorders,
including panic disorder; that is, early learning
experiences in some instances seem to focus anxiety
on particular areas of concern. In panic disorder, the
experience of certain somatic sensations becomes associated
with a heightened sense of threat and danger.
This specific psychological vulnerability, when coordi



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

nated with the generalized biological and psychological
vulnerabilities mentioned earlier, seems to contribute
to the development of panic disorder. Fear conditioning,
avoidant responding, and information-processing
biases are believed to perpetuate such fear. It is the
perpetuating factors that are targeted in the cognitivebehavioral
treatment approach. What follows is a very
brief review of some contributory factors with practical
relevance for panic disorder.

Vulnerability Factors

Genetics and Temperament

The temperament most associated with anxiety disorders,
including panic disorder, is neuroticism (Eysenck,
1967; Gray, 1982), or proneness to experience
negative emotions in response to stressors. A closely
linked construct, “negative affectivity,” is the tendency
to experience a variety of negative emotions across a
variety of situations, even in the absence of objective
stressors (Watson & Clark, 1984). Structural analyses
confirm that negative affect is a higher-order factor that
distinguishes individuals with each anxiety disorder
(and depression) from controls with no mental disorder:
Lower-order factors discriminate among anxiety
disorders, with “fear of fear” being the factor that discriminates
panic disorder from other anxiety disorders
(Brown, Chorpita, & Barlow, 1998; Prenoveau et al.,
2010; Zinbarg & Barlow, 1996). The anxiety disorders
load differentially on negative affectivity, with more
pervasive anxiety disorders, such as generalized anxiety
disorder, loading more heavily, panic disorder loading
at an intermediate level, and social anxiety disorder
loading the least (Brown et al., 1998).1 However, these
findings derive from cross-sectional datasets.

Longitudinal prospective evidence for the role of
neuroticism in predicting the onset of panic disorder
is relatively limited. Specifically, neuroticism predicted
the onset of panic attacks in adolescents (Hayward,
Killen, Kraemer, & Taylor, 2000; Schmidt, Lerew, &
Jackson, 1997, 1999), and “emotional reactivity” at age
3 was a significant variable in the classification of panic
disorder in 18- to 21-year-old males (Craske, Poulton,
Tsao, & Plotkin, 2001). Ongoing studies, such as the
Northwestern/UCLA Youth Emotion Project, are comprehensively
evaluating the role of neuroticism in the
prediction of subsequent panic disorder.

Numerous multivariate genetic analyses of human
twin samples consistently attribute approximately 30–
50% of variance in neuroticism to additive genetic fac


tors (Eley, 2001; Lake, Eaves, Maes, Heath, & Martin,
2000). In addition, anxiety and depression appear to be
variable expressions of the heritable tendency toward
neuroticism (Kendler, Heath, Martin, & Eaves, 1987).
Symptoms of panic (i.e., breathlessness, heart pounding)
may be additionally explained by a unique source
of genetic variance that is differentiated from symptoms
of depression and anxiety (Kendler et al., 1987)
and neuroticism (Martin, Jardine, Andrews, & Heath,
1988).

Analyses of specific genetic markers remain preliminary
and inconsistent. For example, panic disorder
has been linked to a locus on chromosome 13 (Hamilton
et al., 2003; Schumacher et al., 2005) and chromosome
9 (Thorgeirsson et al., 2003), but the exact genes
remain unknown. Findings regarding markers for the
cholecystokinin-B receptor gene have been inconsistent
(cf. Hamilton et al., 2001; van Megen, Westenberg,
Den Boer, & Kahn, 1996). Also, association and linkage
studies implicate the adenosine receptor gene in
panic disorder (Deckert et al., 1998; Hamilton et al.,
2004). An allele of the neuropeptide S receptor gene
on chromosome 7 was linked in a male-specific manner
to panic disorder and not to schizophrenia or attention
deficit disorder (Okamura et al., 2011), whereas
the same gene was linked in a female-specific manner
to panic disorder compared to healthy controls (Domschke
et al., 2011). Thus, at this stage, the results are
rather piecemeal and sometimes inconsistent, and there
is no evidence at this point for a specific link between
genetic markers and temperament, on the one hand,
and panic disorder on the other. Rather, neurobiological
factors seem to comprise a nonspecific biological
vulnerability.

Anxiety Sensitivity

As described earlier, neuroticism is viewed as a higherorder
factor characteristic of all anxiety disorders, with
“fear of fear” being more unique to panic disorder. The
construct “fear of fear” overlaps with the construct
“anxiety sensitivity,” or the belief that anxiety and its
associated symptoms may cause deleterious physical,
social, and psychological consequences that extend
beyond any immediate physical discomfort during an
episode of anxiety or panic (Reiss, 1980). Anxiety sensitivity
is elevated across most anxiety disorders, but it
is particularly elevated in panic disorder (e.g., Taylor,
Koch, & McNally, 1992; Zinbarg & Barlow, 1996), especially
the Physical Concerns subscale of the Anxiety
Sensitivity Index (Zinbarg & Barlow, 1996; Zinbarg,


Panic Disorder and Agoraphobia

Barlow, & Brown, 1997). Therefore, beliefs that physical
symptoms of anxiety are harmful seem to be particularly
relevant to panic disorder and may comprise a
specific psychological vulnerability.

Anxiety sensitivity is presumed to confer a risk factor
for panic disorder because it primes fear reactivity
to bodily sensations. In support, anxiety sensitivity predicts
subjective distress and reported symptomatology
in response to procedures that induce strong physical
sensations, such as CO2 inhalation (Forsyth, Palav, &
Duff, 1999), balloon inflation (Messenger & Shean,
1998), and hyperventilation (Sturges, Goetsch, Ridley,
& Whittal, 1998) in nonclinical samples, even after researchers
control for the effects of trait anxiety (Rapee
& Medoro, 1994). In addition, several longitudinal
studies indicate that high scores on the Anxiety Sensitivity
Index predict the onset of panic attacks over
1- to 4-year intervals in adolescents (Hayward et al.,
2000), college students (Maller & Reiss, 1992), and
community samples with specific phobias or no anxiety
disorders (Ehlers, 1995). The predictive relationship
remains after researchers control for prior depression
(Hayward et al., 2000). In addition, Anxiety Sensitivity
Index scores predicted spontaneous panic attacks and
worry about panic (and anxiety more generally), during
an acute military stressor (i.e., 5 weeks of basic training),
even after researchers control for history of panic
attacks and trait anxiety (Schmidt et al., 1997, 1999).
Finally, panic attacks themselves elevate anxiety sensitivity
over a 5-week period in adults (Schmidt et al.,
1999), and over a 1-year period in adolescents, albeit
to a lesser extent (Weems, Hayward, Killen, & Taylor,
2002).

However, Bouton, Mineka, and Barlow (2001) have
noted that the relationship between anxiety sensitivity
and panic attacks in these studies is relatively small,
not exclusive to panic, and weaker than the relationship
between panic and neuroticism. Furthermore, these
studies have evaluated panic attacks and worry about
panic but not the prediction of diagnosed panic disorder.
Thus, the causal significance of anxiety sensitivity
for panic disorder remains to be fully understood.

History of Medical Illness and Abuse

Other studies highlight the role of medical illnesses
as contributing to a specific psychological vulnerability
for panic disorder. For example, using the Dunedin
Multidisciplinary Study database, we found that experience
with personal respiratory disturbance (and parental
poor health) as a youth predicted panic disorder

at age 18 or 21 (Craske et al., 2001). This finding is consistent
with reports of more respiratory disturbance in
the history of patients with panic disorder compared to
other patients with anxiety disorders (Verburg, Griez,
Meijer, & Pols, 1995). Furthermore, first-degree relatives
of patients with panic disorder had a significantly
higher prevalence of chronic obstructive respiratory
disease, and asthma in particular, than first-degree relatives
of patients with other anxiety disorders (van Beek,
Schruers, & Friez, 2005).

Childhood experiences of sexual and physical abuse
may also prime panic disorder. Retrospective reports of
such childhood abuse were associated with panic disorder
onset at ages 16–21 years in a longitudinal analysis
of New Zealanders from birth to age 21 (Goodwin, Fergusson,
& Horwood, 2005). This finding is consistent
with multiple cross-sectional studies in both clinical
and community samples (e.g., Bandelow et al., 2002;
Kendler et al., 2000; Kessler, Davis, & Kendler, 1997;
Moisan & Engels, 1995; Stein et al., 1996). The association
with childhood abuse is stronger for panic disorder
than for other anxiety disorders, such as social
phobia (Safren, Gershuny, Marzol, Otto, & Pollack,
2002; Stein et al., 1996) and obsessive–compulsive
disorder (Stein et al., 1996). In addition, some studies
report an association between panic disorder and
exposure to violence between other family members,
generally interparental violence (e.g., Bandelow et al.,
2002; Moisan & Engels, 1995), whereas another study
did not (Goodwin et al., 2005). Retrospective reporting
of childhood abuse and familial violence in all of these
studies, however, limits the findings.

Interoceptive Awareness

Patients with panic disorder, as well as nonclinical
panickers, appear to have heightened awareness of,
or ability to detect, bodily sensations of arousal (e.g.,
Ehlers & Breuer, 1992, 1996; Ehlers, Breuer, Dohn,
& Feigenbaum, 1995; Zoellner & Craske, 1999). Discrepant
findings (e.g., Antony et al., 1995; Rapee,
1994) exist but have been attributed to methodological
artifact (Ehlers & Breuer, 1996). Ability to perceive
heartbeat, in particular, appears to be a relatively stable
individual-difference variable given that it does not differ
between untreated and treated patients with panic
disorder (Ehlers & Breuer, 1992), or from before to
after successful treatment (Antony, Meadows, Brown,
& Barlow, 1994; Ehlers et al., 1995). Thus, interoceptive
accuracy may be a predisposing trait for panic disorder
that increases the probability of perceiving sensa



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

tions that in turn may trigger a panic attack. Whether
interoceptive awareness is learned, and represents another
specific psychological vulnerability, or is more
dispositional remains to be determined.

Separate from interoception is the issue of propensity
for intense autonomic activation. As noted earlier, some
evidence points to a unique genetic influence on the reported
experience of breathlessness, heart pounding,
and a sense of terror (Kendler et al., 1987). Conceivably,
cardiovascular reactivity presents a unique physiological
predisposition for panic disorder. In support of
this, cardiac symptoms and shortness of breath predict
later development of panic attacks and panic disorder
(Keyl & Eaton, 1990). Unfortunately, these data derive
from report of symptoms, which is not a good index of
actual autonomic state (Pennebaker & Roberts, 1992)
and may instead reflect interoception.

Initial Panic Attacks

From an evolutionary standpoint, fear is a natural and
adaptive response to threatening stimuli. However, the
fear experienced during the first unexpected panic attack
is often unjustified due to the lack of an identifiable
trigger or antecedent; hence, it represents a “false
alarm” (Barlow, 1988, 2002). The large majority of
initial panic attacks are recalled as occurring outside
of the home, while driving, walking, at work, or at
school (Craske et al., 1990), generally in public (Lelliott,
Marks, McNamee, & Tobena, 1989), and on a bus,
plane, subway, or in social-evaluative situations (Shulman,
Cox, Swinson, Kuch, & Reichman, 1994). Barlow
(1988) and Craske and Rowe (1997b) believe situations
that set the scene for initial panic attacks are ones in
which bodily sensations are perceived as posing the
most threat because of impairment of functioning (e.g.,
driving), entrapment (e.g., air travel, elevators), negative
social evaluation (e.g., job, formal social events),
or distance from safety (e.g., unfamiliar locales). Entrapment
concerns may be particularly salient for the
subsequent development of agoraphobia (Faravelli, Pallanti,
Biondi, Paterniti, & Scarpato, 1992).

Maintenance Factors

Acute “fear of fear” (or, more accurately, anxiety focused
on somatic sensations) that develops after initial
panic attacks in vulnerable individuals refers to
anxiety about certain bodily sensations associated with
panic attacks (e.g., racing heart, dizziness, paresthe


sias) (Barlow, 1988; Goldstein & Chambless, 1978),
and is attributed to two factors. The first is interoceptive
conditioning, or conditional fear of internal cues,
such as elevated heart rate, because of their association
with intense fear, pain, or distress (Razran, 1961). Specifically,
interoceptive conditioning refers to low-level
somatic sensations of arousal or anxiety becoming conditional
stimuli, so that early somatic components of
the anxiety response come to elicit significant bursts
of anxiety or panic (Bouton et al., 2001). An extensive
body of experimental literature attests to the robustness
of interoceptive conditioning (e.g., Dworkin & Dworkin,
1999), particularly with regard to early interoceptive
drug-onset cues becoming conditional stimuli for
larger drug effects (e.g., Sokolowska, Siegel, & Kim,
2002). In addition, interoceptive conditional responses
are not dependent on conscious awareness of triggering
cues (Razran, 1961); thus, they have been observed
in patients under anesthesia (e.g., Block, Ghoneim,
Fowles, Kumar, & Pathak, 1987). Within this model,
then, slight changes in relevant bodily functions that
are not consciously recognized may elicit conditional
anxiety or fear and panic due to previous pairings with
panic (Barlow, 1988; Bouton et al., 2001); the result
would be an unexpected panic attack. Further support
for a conditioning model comes from evidence that individuals
with panic disorder, as well as other anxiety
disorders, show elevated fear conditioning and weakened
fear extinction in laboratory paradigms (Lissek et
al., 2005), suggesting that they are more prone to developing
fear through negative associations, and once
acquired, their fear is less likely to diminish with time.
This pattern seems to be compounded for individuals
with panic disorder who additionally show impaired
safety learning (Lissek et al., 2009) and greater fear
generalization (Lissek et al., 2010) in laboratory paradigms.
In other words, once fear of specific bodily
sensations is acquired, individuals with panic disorder
may have difficulty perceiving other sensations as
being harmless and may be more likely to generalize
their fear to various bodily states.

The second factor, offered by Clark (1986) to explain
acute fear of panic-related body sensations, is catastrophic
misappraisals of bodily sensations (misinterpretation
of sensations as signs of imminent death, loss
of control, etc.). We have taken issue with the purely
cognitive model of panic disorder by stating that it
cannot account for panic attacks devoid of conscious
cognitive appraisal without turning to constructs such
as “automatic appraisals,” which prove to be untestable


Panic Disorder and Agoraphobia

(Bouton et al., 2001). Catastrophic misappraisals may
accompany panic attacks because they are a natural
part of the constellation of responses that go with panic,
or because they have been encouraged and reinforced
much like sick role behaviors during childhood. In addition,
such thoughts may become conditioned stimuli
that trigger anxiety and panic, as demonstrated via
panic induction through presentation of pairs of words
involving sensations and catastrophic outcomes (Clark
et al., 1988). In this case, catastrophic cognitions may
well be sufficient to elicit conditioned panic attacks, but
not necessary.

Whether cognitively or noncognitively based, excessive
anxiety over panic-related bodily sensations in
panic disorder is well supported. Persons with panic
disorder endorse strong beliefs that bodily sensations
associated with panic attacks cause physical or mental
harm (e.g., Chambless, Caputo, Bright, & Gallagher,
1984; McNally & Lorenz, 1987). They are more likely
to interpret bodily sensations in a catastrophic fashion
(Clark et al., 1988) and to allocate more attentional resources
to words that represent physical threat, such
as “disease” and “fatality” (e.g., Ehlers, Margraf, Davies,
& Roth, 1988; Hope, Rapee, Heimberg, & Dombeck,
1990); catastrophe words, such as “death” and
“insane” (e.g., Maidenberg, Chen, Craske, Bohn, &
Bystritsky, 1996; McNally, Riemann, Louro, Lukach,
& Kim, 1992); and heartbeat stimuli (Kroeze & van
den Hout, 2000; however, attentional bias is not always
found; e.g., DeCort, Hermans, Spruyt, Griez, & Schruers,
2008). Also, individuals with panic disorder show
enhanced brain potentials in response to panic-related
words (Pauli, Amrhein, Muhlberger, Dengler, & Wiedemann,
2005). In addition, they are more likely to
become anxious in procedures that elicit bodily sensations
similar to the ones experienced during panic
attacks, including benign cardiovascular, respiratory,
and audiovestibular exercises (Antony, Ledley, Liss,
& Swinson, 2006; Jacob, Furman, Clark, & Durrant,
1992), as well as more invasive procedures, such as
CO2 inhalations, compared to patients with other anxiety
disorders (e.g., Perna, Bertani, Arancio, Ronchi, &
Bellodi, 1995; Rapee, 1986; Rapee, Brown, Antony, &
Barlow, 1992) or healthy controls (e.g., Gorman et al.,
1994). The findings are not fully consistent, however,
because patients with panic disorder did not differ from
patients with social phobia in response to an epinephrine
challenge (Veltman, van Zijderveld, Tilders, &
van Dyck, 1996). Nonetheless, individuals with panic
disorder also fear signals that ostensibly reflect height


ened arousal and false physiological feedback (Craske
& Freed, 1995; Craske, Lang, et al., 2002; Ehlers, Margraf,
Roth, Taylor, & Birnbaumer, 1988).

Distress over bodily sensations is likely to generate
ongoing distress for a number of reasons. First, in the
immediate sense, autonomic arousal generated by fear
in turn intensifies the feared sensations, thus creating
a reciprocating cycle of fear and sensations that is sustained
until autonomic arousal abates or the individual
perceives safety. Second, because bodily sensations
that trigger panic attacks are not always immediately
obvious, they may generate the perception of unexpected
or “out of the blue” panic attacks (Barlow, 1988) that
causes even further distress (Craske, Glover, & DeCola,
1995). Third, the perceived uncontrollability, or inability
to escape or terminate bodily sensations, again,
is likely to generate heightened anxiety (e.g., Maier,
Laudenslager, & Ryan, 1985; Mineka, Cook, & Miller,
1984). Unpredictability and uncontrollability, then,
are seen as enhancing general levels of anxiety about
“When is it going to happen again?” and “What do I do
when it happens?”, thereby contributing to high levels
of chronic anxious apprehension (Barlow, 1988, 2002).
In turn, anxious apprehension increases the likelihood
of panic by directly increasing the availability of sensations
that have become conditioned cues for panic and/
or attentional vigilance for these bodily cues. Thus, a
maintaining cycle of panic and anxious apprehension
develops. Also, subtle avoidance behaviors are believed
to maintain negative beliefs about feared bodily sensations
(Clark & Ehlers, 1993). Examples include holding
onto objects or persons for fear of fainting, sitting
and remaining still for fear of a heart attack, and moving
slowly or searching for an escape route because
one fears acting foolish (Salkovskis, Clark, & Gelder,
1996). Such avoidance includes “experiential avoidance,”
or being unwilling to remain in contact with
particular private experiences, in this case bodily sensations
and catastrophic cognitions. Experiential avoidance
is believed to contribute to overall distress and
dysfunction in general (Hayes et al., 1996), and appears
to correlate with panic-related worries and disability in
individuals with panic disorder (Kampfe et al., 2012).
Further support for the role of experiential avoidance
comes from evidence for instructions to accept symptoms
of panic to result in less fear and avoidance in
patients with panic disorder (Campbell-Sills, Barlow,
Brown, & Hofmann, 2006; Eifert & Heffner, 2003),
including CO2 inhalation challenges (Levitt, Brown,
Orsillo, & Barlow, 2004). Finally, anxiety may develop


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

over specific contexts in which the occurrence of panic
would be particularly troubling (i.e., situations associated
with impairment, entrapment, negative social
evaluation, and distance from safety). These anxieties
may contribute to agoraphobia, which in turn maintains
distress by preventing disconfirmation of catastrophic
misappraisals and extinction of conditioned responding.
Clearly, this model targets panic disorder and agoraphobia,
and is not as relevant to agoraphobia in the
absence of panic attacks or panic-like symptoms.

treatMeNt variaBles

Setting

There are several different settings for conducting
cognitive-behavioral therapy for panic disorder and
agoraphobia. The first, the outpatient clinic–office setting,
is suited to psychoeducation, cognitive restructuring,
assignment, and feedback regarding homework assignments
and role-play rehearsals. In addition, certain
exposures can be conducted in the office setting, such
as interoceptive exposure to feared bodily sensations
we describe later. Outpatient settings have extended
from mental health settings to primary care suites (e.g.,
Craske, Roy-Byrne, et al., 2002; Craske et al., 2011;
Roy-Byrne, Craske, et al., 2005; Roy-Byrne et al., 2010;
Sharp, Power, Simpson, Swanson, & Anstee, 1997).
This extension is particularly important because of the
higher prevalence of panic disorder in primary care settings
(e.g., Shear & Schulberg, 1995; Tiemens, Ormel,
& Simon, 1996). However, whether a mental health or
a primary care office is being used, the built-in safety
signals of such an office may limit the generalizability
of learning that takes place in that setting. For example,
learning to be less afraid in the presence of the therapist,
or in an office located near a medical center, may
not necessarily generalize to conditions in which the
therapist is not present, or when the perceived safety of
a medical center is not close by. For this reason, homework
assignments to practice cognitive-behavioral
skills in a variety of different settings are particularly
important.

In the second setting, the natural environment,
cognitive restructuring and other anxiety management
skills are put into practice as the patient faces
feared situations. The latter is called in vivo exposure
and can be conducted with the aid of the therapist or
alone. Therapist-directed exposure is particularly use


ful for patients who lack a social network to support
in vivo exposure assignments, and more valuable than
self-directed exposure for patients with more severe
agoraphobia (Holden, O’Brien, Barlow, Stetson, & Infantino,
1983). Therapist-directed exposure is essential
to “guided mastery exposure,” in which the therapist
gives corrective feedback about the way the patient
faces feared situations to minimize unnecessary defensive
behaviors. For example, patients are taught to
drive in a relaxed position and to walk across a bridge
without holding the rail. On the one hand, guided mastery
exposure has been shown to be more effective than
“stimulus exposure” when patients attempt simply to
endure the situation alone until fear subsides, without
the benefit of ongoing therapist feedback (Williams &
Zane, 1989). On the other hand, self-directed exposure
is very valuable also, especially to the degree that it encourages
independence and generalization of the skills
learned in treatment to conditions in which the therapist
is not present. Thus, the most beneficial approach
in the natural environment is to proceed from therapistdirected
to self-directed exposure.

In telephone-guided treatment, an interesting variation
that combines the office and the natural environment,
therapists direct patients with agoraphobia by
phone to conduct in vivo exposure to feared situations
(NcNamee, O’Sullivan, Lelliot, & Marks, 1989;
Swinson, Fergus, Cox, & Wickwire, 1995) or provide
instruction in panic control skills (Cote, Gauthier, Laberge,
Cormier, & Plamondon, 1994). In addition, one
small study showed that cognitive-behavioral therapy
was as effective when delivered by videoconference as
in person (Bouchard et al., 2004).

Self-directed treatments, with minimal direct therapist
contact, take place in the natural environment
and are beneficial for highly motivated and educated
patients (e.g., Ghosh & Marks, 1987; Gould & Clum,
1995; Gould, Clum, & Shapiro, 1993; Lidren et al.,
1994; Schneider, Mataix-Cols, Marks, & Bachofen,
2005). On the other hand, self-directed treatments
are less effective for more severely affected patients
(Holden, O’Brien, Barlow, Stetson, & Infantino, 1983);
for those with more comorbidity (Hecker, Losee,
Roberson-Nay, & Maki, 2004), less motivation, and
less education; or for patients who are referred as opposed
to recruited through advertisement (Hecker,
Losee, Fritzler, & Fink, 1996). Self-directed treatments
have expanded beyond workbooks and manuals
to computerized and Internet versions (e.g., Carlbring,
Ekselius, & Andersson, 2003; Richards, Klein, & Aus



Panic Disorder and Agoraphobia

tin, 2006; Richards, Klein, & Carlbring, 2003). In general,
these treatments yield very positive results with
strong effect sizes (Andrews, Cuijpers, Craske, McEvoy,
& Titov, 2010), and at least two studies indicate
that they are as effective as therapist-led cognitivebehavioral
therapy for panic disorder (Carlbring et al.,
2005; Kiropoulos et al., 2008). However, attrition rates
may be higher with self-directed computer/Internet
programs in the absence of any therapist contact (e.g.,
Carlbring et al., 2003).

The third setting, the inpatient facility, is most appropriate
when conducting very intensive cognitivebehavioral
therapy (e.g., daily therapist contact) or
treating severely disabled persons who can no longer
function at home. In addition, certain medical or drug
complications may warrant inpatient treatment. The
greatest drawback to the inpatient setting is poor generalization
to the home environment. Transition sessions
and follow-up booster sessions in an outpatient clinic–
office or in the patient’s own home facilitate generalization.


Format

Cognitive-behavioral therapy for panic disorder and
agoraphobia may be conducted in individual or group
formats. Several clinical outcome studies have used
group treatments (e.g., Bohni, Spindler, Arendt, Hougaaard,
& Rosenberg, 2009; Craske, DeCola, Sachs,
& Pontillo, 2003; Craske et al., 2007; Evans, Holt, &
Oei, 1991; Feigenbaum, 1988; Hoffart, 1995; Telch et
al., 1993). The fact that their outcomes are generally
consistent with the summary statistics obtained from
individually formatted treatment suggests that group
treatment is as effective as individual therapy. In direct
comparisons, albeit few in number, a slight advantage
is shown for individual formats. Specifically, Neron,
Lacroix, and Chaput (1995) compared 12–14 weekly
sessions of individual or group cognitive-behavioral
therapy (N = 20), although the group condition received
two additional 1-hour individual sessions. The two conditions
were equally effective for measures of panic and
agoraphobia at posttreatment and 6-month follow-up.
However, the individual format was more successful in
terms of generalized anxiety and depressive symptoms
by the follow-up point. In addition, individual treatments
resulted in more clinically significant outcomes
than group formats in primary care (Sharp, Power, &
Swanson, 2004). Furthermore, 95% of individuals assigned
to the waiting-list condition in the latter study

stated a clear preference for individual treatment when
given the choice at the end of the waiting list.

Most studies of cognitive-behavioral therapy for
panic and agoraphobia involve 10–20 weekly treatment
sessions. Several studies show that briefer treatments
may be effective as well. Evans and colleagues
(1991) compared a 2-day group cognitive-behavioral
treatment to a waiting-list condition, although without
random assignment. The 2-day program comprised
lectures (3 hours); teaching skills, such as breathing,
relaxation, and cognitive challenge (3 hours); in vivo
exposure (9 hours); and group discussion plus a 2-hour
support group for significant others. Eighty-five percent
of treated patients were reported to be either symptomfree
or symptomatically improved, and these results
were maintained 1 year later. In contrast, the waitinglist
group did not demonstrate significant changes. A
pilot study similarly indicated effectiveness with intensive
cognitive-behavioral therapy over 2 days (Deacon
& Abramowitz, 2006). Other studies have evaluated the
effectiveness of cognitive-behavioral therapy when delivered
over fewer sessions. In a randomized study, patients
with panic disorder with agoraphobia who awaited
pharmacotherapy treatment were assigned to four
weekly sessions of either cognitive-behavioral therapy
or supportive nondirective therapy (Craske, Maidenberg,
& Bystritsky, 1995). Cognitive-behavioral therapy
was more effective than supportive therapy, particularly
with less severely affected patients, although the
results were not as positive as those typically seen with
more sessions. Also, we found that up to six sessions
(average of three sessions) of cognitive-behavioral
therapy combined with medication recommendations
yielded significantly greater improvements on an array
of measures, including quality of life, compared to
treatment as usual for individuals with panic disorder
in primary care settings (Roy-Byrne, Craske, et al.,
2005). Notably, however, the treatment effects substantially
increased as the number of cognitive-behavioral
therapy sessions (up to six) and follow-up booster phone
call sessions (up to six) increased (Craske et al., 2006).
In our subsequent primary care study, an average of
seven sessions of cognitive-behavioral therapy and/
or medication recommendations was superior to usual
care, and in this case, usual care often involved several
active treatment elements (Craske et al., 2011). Finally,
in a direct comparison, results were equally effective
whether cognitive-behavioral therapy was delivered
across the standard 12 sessions or across approximately
six sessions (Clark et al., 1999).


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

Interpersonal Context

Interpersonal context variables have been researched in
terms of the development, maintenance, and treatment
of agoraphobia. The reason for this research interest is
apparent from the following vignettes:

“My husband really doesn’t understand. He thinks it’s
all in my head. He gets angry at me for not being
able to cope. He says I’m weak and irresponsible. He
resents having to drive me around, and doing things
for the kids that I used to do. We argue a lot because
he comes home tired and frustrated from work only
to be frustrated more by the problems I’m having.
But I can’t do anything without him. I’m so afraid
that I’ll collapse into a helpless wreck without him,
or that I’ll be alone for the rest of my life. As cruel as
he can be, I feel safe around him because he always
has everything under control. He always knows what
to do.”

This vignette illustrates dependency on the significant
other for a sense of safety despite a nonsympathetic
response that may only serve to increase background
stress for the patient. The second vignette illustrates inadvertent
reinforcement of fear and avoidance through
attention from the significant other:

“My boyfriend really tries hard to help me. He’s always
cautious of my feelings and doesn’t push me to
do things that I can’t do. He phones me from work to
check on me. He stays with me and holds my hand
when I feel really scared. He never hesitates to leave
work to help me if I’m having a bad time. Only last
week we visited some of his friends, and we had to
leave. I feel guilty because we don’t do the things we
used to enjoy doing together. We don’t go to the movies
anymore. We used to love going to ball games,
but now it’s too much for me. I am so thankful for
him. I don’t know what I would do without him.”

Perhaps some forms of agoraphobia represent a conflict
between desire for autonomy and dependency in
interpersonal relationships (Fry, 1962; Goldstein &
Chambless, 1978). In other words, the “preagoraphobic”
is trapped in a domineering relationship without
the skills needed to activate change. However, the
concept of a distinct marital system that predisposes
toward agoraphobia lacks empirical evidence. That is
not to say that marital or interpersonal systems are un


important to agoraphobia. For example, interpersonal
discord/dissatisfaction may represent one of several
possible stressors that precipitate panic attacks. Also,
interpersonal relations may be negatively impacted by
the development of agoraphobia (Buglass, Clarke, Henderson,
& Presley, 1977) and in turn contribute to its
maintenance. Not unlike one of the earlier vignettes,
consider the woman who has developed agoraphobia
and now relies on her husband to do the shopping and
other errands. These new demands upon the husband
lead to resentment and marital discord. The marital distress
adds to background stress, making progress and
recovery even more difficult for the patient.

Aside from whether interpersonal dysregulation
contributes to the onset or maintenance of panic disorder
or agoraphobia, some studies suggest that poor
marital relations adversely impact exposure-based
treatments (Bland & Hallam, 1981; Dewey & Hunsley,
1989; Milton & Hafner, 1979). However, other studies
show no relationship between marital distress and
outcome from cognitive-behavioral therapy (Arrindell
& Emmelkamp, 1987; Emmelkamp, 1980; Himadi,
Cerny, Barlow, Cohen, & O’Brien, 1986). Another line
of research suggests that involving significant others in
every aspect of treatment may override potential negative
impacts of poor marital relations on phobic improvement
(Barlow et al., 1984; Cerny, Barlow, Craske,
& Himadi, 1987). Furthermore, involvement of significant
others resulted in better long-term outcomes from
cognitive-behavioral therapy for agoraphobia (Cerny et
al., 1987). Similarly, communications training with significant
others, compared to relaxation training, after
4 weeks of in vivo exposure therapy, resulted in significantly
greater reductions on measures of agoraphobia
by posttreatment (Arnow, Taylor, Agras, & Telch,
1985), an effect that was maintained over an 8-month
follow-up. Together, these studies suggest the value of
including significant others in the treatment for agoraphobia.
On the other hand, treatment focused specifically
on interpersonal relationships, via interpersonal
therapy, was not as effective as cognitive-behavioral
therapy for panic disorder and agoraphobia (Vos,
Huibers, Diels, & Arntz, 2012).

Yet another question is the degree to which treatment
for panic disorder and agoraphobia influences marital/
interpersonal relations. Some have noted that successful
treatment can have deleterious effects (Hafner,
1984; Hand & Lamontagne, 1976). Others note that it
has no effect or a positive effect on marital functioning
(Barlow, O’Brien, & Last, 1984; Himadi et al., 1986)


Panic Disorder and Agoraphobia

and interpersonal functioning in general (Hoffart,
1997). We (Barlow et al., 1983) suggested that when
negative effects do occur, it may be because exposure
therapy is conducted intensively, without the significant
other’s involvement, which causes major role changes
that the significant other perceives as being beyond his
or her control. This again speaks to the value of involving
significant others in the treatment process.

Therapist Variables

Only a few studies have evaluated therapist variables
in relation to cognitive-behavioral treatments for anxiety
disorders, let alone panic disorder or agoraphobia.
Williams and Chambless (1990) found that patients
with agoraphobia who rated their therapists as caring/
involved, and as modeling self-confidence, achieved
better outcomes on behavioral approach tests. However,
an important confound in this study was that patient
ratings of therapist qualities may have depended
on patient responses to treatment. Keijsers, Schaap,
Hoogduin, and Lammers (1995) reviewed findings on
therapist relationship factors and behavioral outcome.
They concluded that empathy, warmth, positive regard,
and genuineness assessed early in treatment predict
positive outcome; patients who view their therapists
as understanding and respectful improve the most;
and patient perceptions of therapist expertness, selfconfidence,
and directiveness relate positively to outcome,
although not consistently. In their own study of
junior therapists who provided cognitive-behavioral
treatment for panic disorder with or without agoraphobia,
Keijsers and colleagues found that more empathic
statements and questioning occurred in Session 1 than
in later sessions. In Session 3, therapists became more
active and offered more instructions and explanations.
In Session 10, therapists employed more interpretations
and confrontations than previously. Most importantly,
directive statements and explanations in Session 1 predicted
poorer outcome. Empathic listening in Session 1
related to better behavioral outcome, whereas empathic
listening in Session 3 related to poorer behavioral outcome.
Thus, they demonstrated the advantages of different
interactional styles at different points in therapy.

Most clinicians assume that therapist training and
experience improve the chances of successful outcome.
Some believe this to be the case particularly with respect
to the cognitive aspects of cognitive-behavioral
therapy (e.g., Michelson et al., 1990), and some indirect
evidence for this supposition exists. Specifically,

cognitive-behavioral therapy conducted by “novice”
therapists in a medical setting (Welkowitz et al., 1991)
was somewhat less effective in comparison to the same
therapy conducted by inexperienced but highly trained
therapists in a psychological setting (Barlow, Craske,
Czerny, & Klosko, 1989), or by experienced and highly
trained therapists in a community mental health setting
(Wade, Treat, & Stuart, 1998). Huppert and colleagues
(2001), who directly evaluated the role of therapist experience,
found that, in general, therapist experience
positively related to outcome, seemingly because these
therapists were more flexible in administering the treatment
and better able to adapt it to the individual being
treated. Obviously, there is a need for more evaluation
of the role of therapist experience and training in
cognitive-behavioral therapy.

In our primary care work, we developed a computer
guide to assist novice clinicians in implementing a
cognitive-behavioral program for panic disorder (plus
other anxiety disorders and depression) (Craske et al,
2009), called Calm Tools for Living. The clinician and
patient sit side by side as both view the program onscreen.
Throughout, the program prompts clinicians to
engage in specific tasks, such as helping patients to establish
a fear hierarchy, demonstrating breathing skills,
practicing cognitive skills, conducting interoceptive
exposure, or designing in vivo exposure assignments.
The program also provides learning tools for patients,
such as didactic information, interactive exercises,
video vignettes, and quizzes. The goal of the computerized
program is to enhance the integrity of cognitivebehavioral
therapy in the hands of novice and relatively
untrained clinicians.

Patient Variables

There has been interest in the effect of comorbidity
upon the outcomes of cognitive-behavioral therapy
for panic disorder and agoraphobia. Brown, Antony,
and Barlow (1995) found that comorbidity with other
anxiety disorders did not predict response to cognitivebehavioral
therapy overall, although social phobia
was unexpectedly associated with superior outcome
for panic disorder and agoraphobia. In contrast, Tsao,
Lewin, and Craske (1998) found a trend for comorbidity
that comprised mostly other anxiety disorders to be
associated with slightly lower rates of overall success.
In a subsequent study, however, we replicated the finding
by Brown and colleagues of no relationship between
baseline comorbidity comprising mostly other anxiety


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

disorders, and either immediate or 6-month outcome
for panic disorder and agoraphobia (Tsao, Mystkowski,
Zucker, & Craske, 2002).

Research on how comorbid depression affects the
course and outcome of panic disorder treatment has
yielded mixed results. Studies focused on cognitivebehavioral
therapy for all anxiety disorders and treatment
participation have found that comorbidity with
depression is associated with increased rates of refusal
to enter treatment (Issakidis & Andrews, 2004); however,
once patients have entered treatment, the comorbidity
has no effect on rates of attrition (Allen et al.,
2010; Brown et al., 1995). Preliminary research investigating
the effects of comorbidity on engagement with
treatment has revealed that comorbid depression has no
effect on compliance with cognitive-behavioral therapy
homework (McLean, Woody, Taylor, & Koch, 1998)
or compliance with cognitive-behavioral treatment as
a whole (Murphy, Michelson, Marchione, Marchione,
& Testa, 1998), though it does increase levels of distress
associated with treatment (Murphy et al., 1998).
Interestingly, comorbid depression has no effect on the
response to cognitive-behavioral therapy for panic disorder
at posttreatment or follow-up and in both referred
and primary care settings (Allen et al., 2010; McLean
et al., 1998; Roy-Byrne, Craske, et al., 2005). It seems
contradictory that comorbid depression would have
significant impact on the severity and persistence of
panic disorder (Baldwin, 1998) but would not affect the
outcomes of panic disorder treatment. This may be a
product of limitations to the current treatment literature.
For example, studies have recruited patients for
the treatment of panic disorder and have often excluded
patients who are very extremely depressed or suicidal.
Thus, the majority of patients are mildly to moderately
depressed. Many of these studies also exclude patients
with bipolar disorder, and therefore exclude an entire
group of individuals who experience major depressive
episodes. However, it may also be that the effects of
cognitive-behavioral therapy for panic disorder are sufficiently
potent to impact depressive symptoms either
directly or indirectly.

A relatively high co-occurrence exists between panic
disorder and agoraphobia, and avoidant, dependent, and
histrionic personality disorders (e.g., Reich et al., 1994).
Questions of diagnostic reliability and validity aside, comorbid
personality disorders are sometimes associated
with poorer response than usual to cognitive-behavioral
therapy for panic disorder or agoraphobia (e.g., Hoffart
& Hedley, 1997; Marchand, Goyer, Dupuis, & Main


guy, 1998). However, closer examination reveals that
although individuals with comorbid personality disorders
have greater severity of panic or agoraphobia pre-
and post–cognitive-behavioral therapy, the rate of decrease
in panic or agoraphobia symptoms usually is not
affected by the comorbid personality disorder. Thus,
Dreessen, Arntz, Luttels, and Sallaerts (1994) and van
den Hout, Brouwers, and Oomen (2006) found that comorbid
personality disorders did not affect response to
cognitive-behavioral therapy for panic or agoraphobia.
Moreover, Hofmann and colleagues (1988) found that
scores on questionnaire subscales reflecting Axis II personality
disorders did not predict panic disorder treatment
response to either cognitive-behavioral therapy
or to medication. In fact, some personality traits may
associate positively with outcome, as was reported by
Rathus, Sanderson, Miller, and Wetzler (1995) with respect
to compulsive personality features.

Substance-related disorders also commonly co-occur
with panic disorder and agoraphobia, but very few
treatment studies have addressed this important comorbidity.
In a series of single cases (N = 3), Lehman,
Brown, and Barlow (1998) demonstrated successful
control of panic attacks in individuals who were abusing
alcohol. Also, the addition of anxiety treatment to
a relapse prevention program for abstinent individuals
with a primary diagnosis of alcohol dependence and a
comorbid diagnosis of panic disorder or social phobia
decreased anxiety symptoms relative to a relapse prevention
program alone (Schade et al., 2005). However,
adding the anxiety treatment did not affect rates of alcohol
relapse in that study.

Another source of comorbidity is medical conditions,
such as cardiac arrhythmias or asthma, that may slow
improvement rates given the additional complications
involved in discriminating between anxiety and disease
symptomatology, increases in actual medical risk,
and the stress of physical diseases. We found that medically
ill patients with panic disorder, although more severely
affected than their nonmedically ill counterparts
at baseline, responded just as favorably to cognitivebehavioral
therapy with psychotropic medication recommendations
(Roy-Byrne, Stein, et al., 2005). Also,
cognitive-behavioral therapy for panic disorder has
been shown to alleviate self-reported physical health
symptoms (Schmidt et al., 2003). Similarly, we found
that cognitive-behavioral therapy and/or psychotropic
medication recommendations for anxiety disorders (including
panic disorder) significantly improve physical
health functioning (Niles et al., 2013).


Panic Disorder and Agoraphobia

Other patient variables include socioeconomic status
and general living conditions. We evaluated perceived
barriers to receiving mental health treatment in our primary
care study of panic disorder (Craske, Golinelli,
et al., 2005). Commonly reported barriers included inability
to find out where to go for help (43%), worry
about cost (40%), lack of coverage by one’s health
plan (35%), and inability to get an appointment soon
enough (35%). Also, in our multicenter trial, attrition
from cognitive-behavioral and/or medication treatment
for panic disorder with minimal agoraphobia was predicted
by lower education, which in turn was dependent
on lower income (Grilo et al., 1998). Similarly, levels
of education and motivation were associated with dropout
rates in another sample, although the effects were
small (Keijsers, Kampman, & Hoogduin, 2001). Low
education–income may reflect less discretionary time
to engage in activities such as weekly treatment. Consider
a woman who is the mother of two, a full-time
clerk, whose husband is on disability due to a back injury,
or the full-time student who works an extra 25 hours
a week to pay his way through school. Under these
conditions, treatment assignments of daily in vivo exposure
exercises are much less likely to be completed.
Frustration with lack of treatment progress is likely to
result. Therapeutic success requires either a change in
lifestyle that allows the cognitive-behavioral treatment
to become a priority or termination of therapy until a
later time, when life circumstances are less demanding.
In fact, these kinds of life circumstance issues
may explain the trend for African Americans to show
less treatment benefit, in terms of mobility, anxiety,
and panic attacks, than European Americans (Friedman
& Paradis, 1991; Williams & Chambless, 1994).
Although, in contrast to these two studies, Friedman,
Paradis, and Hatch (1994) found equivalent outcomes
across the two racial groups, and the results from another
study yielded outcomes from a female African
American sample that were judged to be comparable to
those of European Americans (Carter, Sbrocco, Gore,
Marin, & Lewis, 2003). The influence of ethnic and
cultural differences on treatment outcome and delivery
clearly needs more evaluation.

Finally, patients’ understanding of the nature of their
problem may be important to the success of cognitivebehavioral
treatments. Given the somatic nature of
panic disorder, many patients seek medical help first.
Beyond that, however, differences in the way the problem
is conceptualized could lead to the perception that
pharmacological or analytical treatment approaches

are more credible than cognitive-behavioral treatment
approaches. For example, individuals who strongly believe
their condition is due to “a neurochemical imbalance”
may be more likely to seek medication and to
refute psychological treatments. Similarly, individuals
who attribute their condition to “something about my
past—it must be unconscious influences” may resist
cognitive-behavioral interpretations. Also, Grilo and
colleagues (1998) found that patients with panic disorder
or agoraphobia who attributed their disorder to
specific stressors in their lives were more likely to drop
out of cognitive-behavioral or medication treatment,
perhaps because they saw the offered treatment as irrelevant.


Concurrent Pharmacological Treatment

Many more patients receive medications than cognitivebehavioral
therapy for panic disorder and agoraphobia,
partly because primary care physicians are usually
the first line of treatment. Thus, one-half or more of
patients with panic disorder who attend psychology
research clinics already are taking anxiolytic medications.
The obvious questions, therefore, are the extent
to which cognitive-behavioral therapy and medications
have a synergistic effect, and how medications impact
cognitive-behavioral therapy.

Results from large clinical trials, including our own
multisite trial (Barlow, Gorman, Shear, & Woods,
2000), suggest no advantage during or immediately
after treatment of combining cognitive-behavioral and
pharmacological approaches. Specifically, both individual
cognitive-behavioral and drug treatment, and
a combination treatment were immediately effective
following treatment. Furthermore, following medication
discontinuation, the combination of medication
and cognitive-behavioral therapy fared worse than
cognitive-behavioral therapy alone, suggesting the possibility
that state- (or context-) dependent learning in
the presence of medication may have attenuated the
new learning that occurs during cognitive-behavioral
therapy. In contrast, in the primary care setting, we
found that the addition of even just one component of
cognitive-behavioral therapy to medications for panic
disorder resulted in statistically and clinically significant
improvements at posttreatment and 12 months
later (Craske, Golinelli, et al., 2005).

More recently, our multisite collaborative team has
been investigating long-term strategies in the treatment
of panic disorder. We examined sequential combination


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

strategies to determine whether this approach is more
advantageous than simultaneously combining treatments.
In the initial phase, 256 patients with panic disorder
and all levels of agoraphobia completed 3 months
of initial treatment with cognitive-behavioral therapy
(Aaronson et al., 2008; White et al., 2010). Patients were
then triaged into two clinical trials. Responders were
randomized to 9 months of monthly booster sessions
(N = 79) or no booster sessions (N = 78), then followed
for an additional 12 months without treatment (White
et al., 2013). Booster sessions produced significantly
lower relapse rates (5.2%) and reduced work and social
impairment compared to the assessment-only condition
without booster sessions (18.4%) at 21-month follow-up.
Multivariate Cox proportional hazards models showed
that residual symptoms of agoraphobia at the end of
acute-phase treatment were independently predictive
of time to relapse during 21-month follow-up (hazard
rate = 1.15, p < .01). Thus, booster sessions aimed at
reinforcing acute treatment gains to prevent relapse and
offset disorder recurrence improved long-term outcome
for panic disorder with and without agoraphobia. Fiftyeight
of the original patients did not reach an optimal
level of functioning (high end-state functioning) and
entered a trial in which they received either continued
cognitive-behavioral therapy for 3 months or paroxetine
for 3 months. Patients doing well with one treatment or
the other continued with the respective treatment for an
additional 9 months (Payne et al., 2012). Results indicated
significantly lower panic disorder symptoms for
individuals in the paroxetine condition compared to
those in continued cognitive-behavioral therapy at 3
months. However, group differences had disappeared 9
months later. Results were maintained when excluding
individuals with comorbid major depression. These data
suggest a more rapid treatment response when switching
to paroxetine after not responding optimally to
cognitive-behavioral therapy; however, both treatments
ultimately achieved similar outcomes.

In another study with similar results, patients who
did not respond to cognitive-behavioral therapy also
benefited more from the addition of a serotonergic drug
(paroxetine) to continued cognitive-behavioral therapy
than from the addition of a drug placebo, with substantially
different effect sizes (Kampman, Keijsers, Hoogduin,
& Hendriks, 2002). Conversely, individuals who
are resistant to pharmacotherapy may respond positively
to cognitive-behavioral therapy, although these findings
were part of an open trial without randomization
(Heldt et al., 2006).

Findings from the combination of fast-acting anxiolytics,
specifically, the high-potency benzodiazepines,
and behavioral treatments for agoraphobia are contradictory
(e.g., Marks et al., 1993; Wardle et al., 1994).
Nevertheless, several studies have reliably demonstrated
the detrimental effects of chronic use of highpotency
benzodiazepines on short-term and long-term
outcome in cognitive-behavioral treatments for panic or
agoraphobia (e.g., Otto, Pollack, & Sabatino, 1996; van
Balkom, de Beurs, Koele, Lange, & van Dyck, 1996;
Wardle et al., 1994). Specifically, there is evidence for
more attrition, poorer outcome, and more relapse with
chronic use of high-potency benzodiazepines. In addition,
use of benzodiazepines as needed was associated
with poorer outcome than regular use or no use in one
small naturalistic study (Westra, Stewart, & Conrad,
2002).

Finally, the cost-effectiveness of cognitivebehavioral
and medication treatments alone rather than
in combination requires further evaluation; currently,
cognitive-behavioral therapy is considered to be more
cost-effective (e.g., disability costs, work days missed,
health care use) than pharmacotherapy (Heuzenroeder
et al., 2004).

Understanding the ways in which psychotropic
medications influence cognitive-behavioral therapy
may prove useful for developing methods that optimize
the combination of these two approaches to treatment.
First, medications, particularly fast-acting, potent
medications that cause a noticeable shift in state
and are used on an as-needed basis (e.g., benzodiazepines,
beta-blockers), may contribute to relapse because
therapeutic success is attributed to them rather
than to cognitive-behavioral therapy. Patients’ resultant
lack of perceived self-control may increase relapse
potential when medication is withdrawn or contribute
to maintenance of a medication regimen under the assumption
that it is necessary to functioning. In support,
attribution of therapeutic gains to alprazolam, and
lack of confidence in coping without alprazolam, even
when given in conjunction with behavioral therapy,
predicted relapse (Basoglu, Marks, Kilic, Brewin, &
Swinson, 1994). Second, medications may assume the
role of safety signals, or objects to which persons erroneously
attribute their safety from painful, aversive
outcomes. Safety signals may contribute to maintenance
of fear and avoidance in the long term (Hermans,
Craske, Mineka, & Lovibond, 2006) and may interfere
with corrections of misappraisals of bodily symptoms
(see below for further discussion of this issue). Third,


Panic Disorder and Agoraphobia

medications may reduce the motivation to engage in
practices of cognitive-behavioral skills, yet completion
of between-session assignments is a positive predictor
of outcome from cognitive-behavioral therapy (e.g.,
Glenn et al., in press). Finally, learning that takes place
under the influence of medications may not necessarily
generalize to the time when medications are removed,
thus contributing to relapse (Bouton & Swartzentruber,
1991). Some of these points are illustrated in the following
vignettes:

“I had been through a program of cognitive-behavioral
therapy, but it was really the Paxil that helped. Because
I was feeling so much better, I considered tapering
off the medication. At first I was very concerned
about the idea. I had heard horror stories
about what people go through when withdrawing.
However, I thought it would be OK as long as I tapered
slowly. So, I gradually weaned myself off. It
really wasn’t that bad. Well, I had been completely
off the medication for about a month when the problem
started all over again. I remember sitting in a
restaurant, feeling really good because I was thinking
about how much of a problem restaurants used to
be for me before, and how easy it seemed now. Then,
whammo. I became very dizzy and I immediately
thought, ‘Oh no, here it comes.’ I had a really bad
panic attack. All I could think of was why didn’t I
stay on the medication?”

“I started to lower my dose of Xanax. I was OK for
the first couple of days. . . . I felt really good. Then,
when I woke up on Friday morning, I felt strange.
My head felt really tight and I worried about having
the same old feelings all over again. The last thing I
want to do is to go through that again. So I took my
usual dose of Xanax and, within a few minutes, I
felt pretty good again. I need the medication. I can’t
manage without it right now.”

In what ways might such negative effects of medications
be offset? One possibility is that continuation
of exposure after medication is withdrawn may offset
relapse because it enhances attributions of personal
mastery and reduces the safety signal function of medications.
In addition, opportunities to practice exposure
and cognitive and behavioral strategies without the aid
of medication overcome state dependency and enhance
generalization of therapeutic gains once treatment is
over.

case stuDy

Julie, a 33-year-old European American mother of two,
lives with Larry, her husband of 8 years. For the past
3 years she has been chronically anxious and panic
stricken. She describes her panic attacks as unbearable
and increasing in frequency. The first time she felt panicky
was just over 3 years ago, when she was rushing
to be by her grandmother’s side in the last moments
before she died. Julie was driving alone on the freeway.
She remembers feeling as if everything were moving
in slow motion, as if the cars were standing still, and
things around her seemed unreal. She recalled feeling
short of breath and detached. However, it was so important
to reach her destination that she did not dwell
on how she felt until later. After the day was over, she
reflected on how lucky she was not to have had an accident.
A few weeks later, she experienced the same
feeling again when driving on the freeway. This time
it occurred without the pressure of getting to her dying
grandmother. It scared Julie because she was unable to
explain the feelings. She pulled to the side of the road
and called her husband, who came to meet her. She followed
him home, feeling anxious the entire way.

Now, Julie has these feelings in many situations.
She describes her panic attacks as feelings of unreality,
detachment, shortness of breath, a racing heart, and
a general fear of the unknown. It is the unreality that
scares her the most. Consequently, Julie is sensitive to
anything that produces “unreal” types of feelings, such
as the semiconsciousness that occurs just before falling
asleep, the period when daylight changes to night,
bright lights, concentrating on the same thing for long
periods of time, alcohol or drugs, and being anxious in
general. Even though she has a prescription for Klonopin
(a high-potency benzodiazepine), she rarely, if
ever, uses it because of her general fear of being under
the influence of a drug, or of feeling an altered state
of consciousness. She wants to be as alert as possible
at all times, but she keeps the Klonopin with her in
the event that she has no other way of managing her
panic. She does not leave home without the Klonopin.
Julie is very sensitive to her body in general; she becomes
scared of anything that feels a little different
than usual. Even coffee, which she used to enjoy, is
distressing to her now because of its agitating and racy
effects. She was never a big exerciser, but to think of
exerting herself now is also scary. Julie reports that
she is constantly waiting for the next panic attack to
occur. She avoids freeways, driving on familiar surface


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

streets only. She limits herself to a 10-mile radius from
home. She avoids crowds and large groups as well,
partly because of the feeling of too much stimulation
and partly because she is afraid to panic in front of
others. In general, she prefers to be with her husband
or her mother. However, she can do most things as long
as she is within her “safety” region.

Julie describes how she differs from the way she
used to be: how weak and scared she is now. The only
other incident that is similar to her current panic attacks
occurred in her early 20s, when she had a negative
reaction to smoking marijuana. Julie became very
scared of the feeling of losing control and feared that
she would never return to reality. She has not taken
drugs since then. Otherwise, there is no history of serious
medical conditions or any previous psychological
treatment. Julie had some separation anxiety and was
shy as a young child and throughout her teens. However,
her social anxiety improved throughout her 20s
to the point that until the onset of her panic attacks, she
was mostly very comfortable around people. Since the
onset of her panic attacks, Julie has become concerned
that others will notice that she appears anxious. However,
her social anxiety is limited to panic attacks and
does not reflect a broader social phobia.

In general, Julie’s appetite is good, but her sleep is
restless. At least once a week she wakes abruptly in
the middle of the night, feeling short of breath and
scared, and she has great difficulty going to sleep when
her husband travels. In addition to worrying about her
panic attacks, Julie worries about her husband and her
children, although these latter worries are secondary to
her worry about panicking and not excessive. She has
some difficulty concentrating but is generally able to
function at home and at work because of the familiarity
of her environment and the safety she feels in the
presence of her husband. Julie works part time as the
manager of a business that she and her husband own.
She sometimes becomes depressed about her panic and
the limitations on how far she can travel. Occasionally
she feels hopeless about the future, doubting whether
she will ever be able to escape the anxiety. Although
the feelings of hopelessness and the teariness never last
than more than a few days, Julie has generally had a
low-grade depressed mood since her life became restricted
by the panic attacks.

Julie’s mother and her uncle both had panic attacks
when they were younger. Julie is now worried that her
oldest child is showing signs of being overly anxious
because he is hesitant about trying new things or spending
time away from home.

assessMeNt

A functional behavioral analysis depends on several
different modes of assessment, which we describe next.

Interviews

An in-depth interview is the first step in establishing
diagnostic features and the profile of symptomatic and
behavioral responses. Several semistructured and fully
structured interviews exist. The Anxiety Disorders Interview
Schedule for DSM-IV (ADIS-IV; Di Nardo,
Brown, & Barlow, 1994) and for DSM-5 (ADIS-5;
Brown & Barlow, in press) primarily assesses anxiety
disorders, as well as mood and somatoform disorders.
Psychotic and drug conditions are screened by this instrument
also. The ADIS facilitates gathering the necessary
information to make a differential diagnosis
among anxiety disorders and offers a means to distinguish
between clinical and subclinical presentations of
a disorder. Data on the frequency, intensity, and duration
of panic attacks, as well as details on avoidance behavior,
are embedded within the ADIS; this information
is necessary for tailoring treatment to each individual’s
presentation. The value of structured interviews is their
contribution to a differential diagnosis and interrater
reliability. Interrater agreement ranges from satisfactory
to excellent for the various anxiety disorders using
the ADIS-IV (Brown, Di Nardo, Lehman, & Campbell,
2001). Similar analysis for the ADIS-5 are under way.

Similarly, the Schizophrenia and Affective Disorders
Schedule—Lifetime Version (modified for the study of
anxiety) produces reliable diagnoses for most of the anxiety
disorders (generalized anxiety disorder and simple
phobia are the exceptions) (Manuzza, Fyer, Liebowitz,
& Klein, 1990), as does the Structured Clinical Interview
for DSM (SCID), which covers all of the mental
disorders (First, Spitzer, Gibbon, & Williams, 1994),
and will be updated for DSM-5 diagnostic criteria.

Differential diagnosis is sometimes difficult because,
as described earlier, panic is a ubiquitous phenomenon
(Barlow, 1988) that occurs across a wide
variety of emotional disorders. It is not uncommon for
persons with specific phobias, social phobia, generalized
anxiety disorder, obsessive–compulsive disorder,
and posttraumatic stress disorder to report panic
attacks. For Julie, there was a differential diagnostic
question regarding social anxiety disorder, and panic
disorder and agoraphobia. Shown in Figure 1.1 are the
ADIS-IV questions that address this differentiation (Julie’s
answers are in italics).


Panic Disorder and Agoraphobia

Parts
of
ADIS-IV
Panic
Disorder
Section


Do
you
currently
have
times
when
you
feel
a
sudden
rush
of
intense
fear
or
discomfort?
Yes.


In
what
kinds
of
situations
do
you
have
those
feelings?
Driving, especially on freeways . . .
alone at home . . . at parties or in crowds of people.

Did
you
ever
have
those
feelings
come
“from
out
of
the
blue,”
for
no
apparent
reason,
or
in
situations
where
you
did
not
expect
them
to
occur?
Yes.


How
long
does
it
usually
take
for
the
rush
of
fear/discomfort
to
reach
its
peak
level?
It
varies,


sometimes a couple of seconds and at other times it seems to build more slowly.

How
long
does
the
fear/discomfort
usually
last
at
its
peak
level?
Depends on where I am at the
time. If it happens when I’m alone, sometimes it is over within a few minutes or even seconds.

.

If I’m in a crowd, then it seems to last until I leave

In
the
last
month,
how
much
have
you
been
worried
about,
or
how
fearful
have
you
been
about
having
another
panic
attack?


012345678


No
worry
Rarely
worried/mild
Occasionally
Frequently
worried/
Constantly
worried/
no
fear
fear
worried/moderate
severe
fear
extreme
fear
fear


Parts
of
ADIS-IV
Social
Phobia
Section


In
social
situations,
where
you
might
be
observed
or
evaluated
by
others,
or
when
meeting
new
people,
do
you
feel
fearful,
anxious,
or
nervous?
Yes.


Are
you
overly
concerned
that
you
might
do
and/or
say
something
that
might
embarrass
or
humiliate
yourself
in
front
of
others,
or
that
others
may
think
badly
of
you?
Yes.


What
are
you
concerned
will
happen
in
these
situations?
That others will notice that I am
anxious. My face turns white and my eyes look strange when I panic. I am worried that
I’ll flip out in front of them, and they won’t know what to do.

Are
you
anxious
about
these
situations
because
you
are
afraid
that
you
will
have
an
unexpected
panic
attack?
Yes (either a panic or that I’ll feel unreal).

Other
than
when
you
are
exposed
to
these
situations,
have
you
experienced
an
unexpected
rush
of
fear/anxiety?
Yes.


figUre 1.1. Julie’s responses to ADIS-IV questions.

As demonstrated in Figure 1.1, Julie experiences disorder (i.e., unexpected /nonsocial panic attacks and
panic attacks in social situations and is concerned about pervasive apprehension about future panic attacks), the
being negatively evaluated by others if her anxiety be-social distress is best subsumed under the domain of
comes visibly apparent. However, despite her history panic disorder and agoraphobia. If Julie reported that
of shyness, Julie’s current social discomfort is based she experiences panic attacks in social situations only,
primarily on the possibility of panicking. Because of or that she worries about panic attacks in social situathis,
and because she meets the other criteria for panic tions only, then a diagnosis of social anxiety disorder


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

would be more probable. A report of unexpected panic
attacks, as well as self-consciousness about things that
she might do or say in social situations regardless of the
occurrence of panic, would be consistent with a dual
diagnosis of panic disorder–agoraphobia and social
anxiety disorder. In general, an individual with panic
disorder may continue to feel anxious even when playing
a passive role in a social setting, whereas a patient
with social phobia is more likely to feel relaxed when
he or she is not the center of attention and does not anticipate
being evaluated or judged (Dattilio & Salas-
Auvert, 2000).

The same types of diagnostic questioning are useful
for distinguishing between panic disorder–agoraphobia
and claustrophobia. Other differential diagnostic issues
can arise with respect to somatoform disorders, real
medical conditions, and avoidant or dependent personality
disorders.

Following completion of a diagnostic assessment,
a dimensional assessment specifically designed for
panic disorder, such as the Panic Disorder Severity
Scale (PDSS; Shear et al., 1997), may be helpful. This
clinician-completed scale rates seven areas of responding
using a 0- to 4-point severity rating scale: panic
attack frequency; distress; anticipatory anxiety; agoraphobic
and interoceptive-related fears; avoidant behavior;
and work and social impairment. A cutoff score of
8 on the PDSS identifies patients with panic disorder
with high sensitivity and acceptable specificity (Shear
et al., 2001).

Medical Evaluation

A medical evaluation is generally recommended because
several medical conditions should be ruled out
before assigning the diagnosis of panic disorder. These
include thyroid conditions, caffeine or amphetamine
intoxication, drug withdrawal, or pheochromocytoma
(a rare adrenal gland tumor). Furthermore, certain
medical conditions can exacerbate panic disorder, although
panic disorder is likely to continue even when
the symptoms are under medical control. Mitral valve
prolapse, asthma, allergies, and hypoglycemia fall into
this latter category. According to the model described
earlier, these medical conditions exacerbate panic disorder
to the extent that they elicit the feared physical
sensations. For example, mitral valve prolapse sometimes
produces the sensation of a heart flutter, asthma
produces shortness of breath, and hypoglycemia produces
dizziness and weakness, all of which overlap

with symptoms of panic and may therefore become
conditional cues for panic.

Self‑Monitoring

Self-monitoring is a very important part of assessment
and treatment for panic disorder and agoraphobia. Retrospective
recall of past episodes of panic and anxiety,
especially when made under anxious conditions,
may inflate estimates of panic frequency and intensity
(Margraf et al., 1987; Rapee, Craske, & Barlow,
1990). Moreover, such inflation may contribute to apprehension
about future panic. In contrast, ongoing
self-monitoring generally yields more accurate, less
inflated estimates (for a comprehensive review of selfmonitoring
for panic and anxiety, see Craske & Tsao,
1999). Also, ongoing self-monitoring is believed to
contribute to an objective self-awareness. Objective
self-monitoring replaces negative, affect-laden selfstatements
such as “I feel horrible. This is the worst it
has ever been—my whole body is out of control” with
“My anxiety level is 6. My symptoms include tremulousness,
dizziness, unreal feelings, and shortness of
breath—and this episode lasted 10 minutes.” Objective
self-awareness usually reduces negative affect. Finally,
self-monitoring provides feedback for judging progress
and useful material for in-session discussions.

Panic attacks are recorded in the Panic Attack Record,
a version of which is shown in Figure 1.2. This
record, which is to be completed as soon as possible
after a panic attack occurs, is therefore carried onperson
(wallet size). Daily levels of anxiety, depression,
and worry about panic are monitored with the
Daily Mood Record shown in Figure 1.3. This record
is completed at the end of each day. Finally, activities
may be recorded by logging daily excursions in a diary,
or by checking off activities completed from an agoraphobia
checklist.

A common problem with self-monitoring is noncompliance.
Sometimes noncompliance is due to misunderstanding
or lack of perceived credibility in selfmonitoring.
Most often, however, noncompliance is due
to anticipation of more anxiety as a result of monitoring.
This is particularly true for individuals whose preferred
style of coping is to distract themselves as much
as possible because thoughts of panic might otherwise
become overwhelming: “Why should I make myself
worse by asking myself how bad I feel?” In Julie’s case,
the self-monitoring task was particularly difficult because
explicit reminders of her anxiety elicited strong


Panic Disorder and Agoraphobia

Date
2/16/06
Time
began
5:20
P.M.
Triggers
Home
alone
and
shortness
of
breath
Expected
x
Unexpected


Maximum
Fear
0——1——2——3——4——5——6——7——8——9——10
None
Mild
Moderate
Strong
Extreme


Check
all
symptoms
present
to
at
leasta
mild
degree:
Chest
pain
or
discomfort
Sweating
x
Heart
racing/palpitations/pounding
x
Nausea/upset
stomach


Short
of
breath
Shaking/trembling
Numbness/tingling
Feelings
of
choking


x
Dizzy/unsteady/lightheaded/faint


x
Chills/hot
flushes
Feelings
of
unreality
x
Fear
of
dying


Fear
of
losing
control/going
crazy
x


Thoughts:
I
am
going
crazy,I
will
lose
control
Behaviors:
Called
my
mother


figUre 1.2. Julie’s Panic Attack Record.

0——1——2——3——4——5——6——7——8——9——10
None
Mild
Moderate
Strong
Extreme


Average
Average
Average
worry
Date
anxiety
depression
about
panic


2/16
757
2/17
545
2/18
445
2/19
434
2/20
445
2/21
21
1
2/22
222


figUre 1.3. Julie’s Daily Mood Record.


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

concerns about losing touch with reality. Prompting,
reassurance that anxiety would subside with perseverance
at self-monitoring, and emphasis on objective versus
subjective self-monitoring were helpful for Julie.
In addition, therapist attention to the self-monitored
information and corrective feedback about the method
of self-monitoring at the start of each treatment session
reinforced Julie’s self-monitoring.

Standardized Inventories

Several standardized self-report inventories provide
useful information for treatment planning and are
sensitive markers of therapeutic change. The Anxiety
Sensitivity Index (Reiss, Peterson, Gursky, & McNally,
1986) and the multidimensional Anxiety Sensitivity
Index–3 (Taylor et al., 2007) have received wide acceptance
as a trait measure of threatening beliefs about
bodily sensations. Both display good psychometric
properties and tend to discriminate panic disorder and
agoraphobia from other anxiety disorders (e.g., Taylor
et al., 1992; Telch, Sherman, & Lucas, 1989), especially
the Physical Concerns subscale (Zinbarg et al.,
1997). More specific information about which particular
bodily sensations are feared most and what specific
misappraisals occur most often may be obtained from
the Body Sensations Questionnaire and the Agoraphobia
Cognitions Questionnaire, respectively (Chambless,
Caputo, Bright, & Gallagher, 1984). Both scales
have strong to excellent psychometric properties and
are sensitive to change following treatment (see Keller
& Craske, 2008). The Mobility Inventory (Chambless,
Caputo, Gracely, Jasin, & Williams, 1985) lists agoraphobic
situations, which are rated in terms of degree
of avoidance when alone and when accompanied. This
instrument is very useful for establishing in vivo exposure
hierarchies and, again, is well supported psychometrically.


In addition, we have developed two standardized
self-report inventories that are useful for panic disorder
and agoraphobia. The first, the Albany Panic and Phobia
Questionnaire (Rapee, Craske, & Barlow, 1995),
assesses fear and avoidance of activities that produce
feared bodily sensations (e.g., exercise, caffeine), as
well as more typical agoraphobia and social situations.
Factor analyses confirmed three distinct factors labeled
Agoraphobia, Social Phobia, and Interoceptive Fears.
The questionnaire has adequate psychometric properties
and is useful in profiling agoraphobic versus interoceptive
avoidance. The second, the Anxiety Control

Questionnaire, assesses perceived lack of control over
anxiety-related events and occurrences, such as internal
emotional reactions or externally threatening cues
(Rapee, Craske, Brown, & Barlow, 1996). This scale is
designed to assess locus of control, but in a more specific
and targeted manner relevant to anxiety and anxiety
disorders compared to more general locus-of-control
scales. A revised 15-item version yields three factors—
Emotion Control, Threat Control, and Stress Control—
with a higher-order dimension of perceived control
(Brown, White, Forsyth, & Barlow, 2004). Changes in
this scale from pre to posttreatment predicted reductions
in comorbidity at follow-up in one study (Craske
et al., 2007). A more detailed review of each questionnaire
listed herein and the complete assessment for
panic disorder and agoraphobia is provided by Keller
and Craske (2008).

Behavioral Tests

The behavioral test is a useful measure of degree of
avoidance of specific interoceptive cues and external
situations. Behavioral approach tests can be standardized
or individually tailored. The standardized behavioral
test for agoraphobic avoidance usually involves
walking or driving a particular route, such as a 1-mile
loop around the clinic setting. Standardized behavioral
tests for anxiety about physical sensations involve exercises
that induce panic-like symptoms, such as spinning
in a circle, running in place, hyperventilating, and
breathing through a straw (Barlow & Craske, 2006).
Anxiety levels are rated at regular intervals throughout
the behavioral tests, and actual distance or length
of time is measured. The disadvantage of standardized
behavioral tests is that the specific task may not be relevant
to all patients (e.g., a 1-mile walk or running in
place may be only mildly anxiety provoking to some
but highly distressing to others); hence, the value of individually
tailored tasks. In the case of agoraphobia,
this usually entails attempts at three to five individualized
situations that the patient has identified as ranging
from Somewhat difficult to Extremely difficult, such as
driving two exits on freeway, waiting in a bank line,
or shopping in a local supermarket for 15 minutes. For
anxiety about physical sensations, individually tailored
behavioral tests entail exercises designed specifically
to induce the sensations feared most by a given patient
(e.g., nose plugs to induce sensations of difficulty
breathing). As with standardized tests, ongoing levels
of anxiety and degree of approach behavior are mea



Panic Disorder and Agoraphobia

sured in relation to individually tailored behavioral
tests.

Individually tailored behavioral tests are more informative
for clinical practice, although they confound
between-subject comparisons for research purposes.
Behavioral tests are an important supplement to selfreport
of agoraphobic avoidance because patients
tend to underestimate what they can actually achieve
(Craske et al., 1988). In addition, behavioral tests often
reveal important information for treatment planning of
which the individual is not yet fully aware. For example,
the tendency to remain close to supports, such as railings
or walls, may not be apparent until one observes
the patient walking through a shopping mall. In Julie’s
case, the importance of change from daylight to night
was not apparent until she was asked to drive on a section
of road as a behavioral test. Her response was that
it was too late in the day to drive because dusk made
her feel as if things were unreal. Similarly, it was not
until Julie completed a behavioral test that we recognized
the importance of air-conditioning when she was
driving. Julie believed that the cool air blowing on her
face helped her to remain “in touch with reality.” Finally,
we noticed that her physical posture while driving
was a factor that contributed to anxiety: Julie’s shoulders
were hunched, and she leaned toward the steering
wheel and held it very tightly. All of these were targeted
in the treatment: Driving at dusk was included in her
hierarchy; air-conditioning was regarded as a safety signal
from which she should be weaned; and driving in
a more relaxed position was part of mastery exposure.

Psychophysiology

Ongoing physiological measures are not very practical
tools for clinicians, but they can provide important
information. In particular, the discrepancy described
earlier between reports of symptoms and actual physiological
arousal (i.e., report of heart rate acceleration in
absence of actual heart rate acceleration) may serve as
a therapeutic demonstration of the role of attention and
cognition in symptom production. Similarly, actual recordings
provide data to disconfirm misappraisals such
as “My heart feels like it’s going so fast that it will explode”
or “I’m sure my blood pressure is so high that I
could have a stroke at any minute.” Finally, resting levels
of physiological functioning, which are sometimes
dysregulated in anxious individuals, may be sensitive
measures of treatment outcome (e.g., Craske, Lang, et
al., 2005).

Functional Analysis

The various methods of assessment provide the material
for a full functional analysis for Julie. Specifically,
the topography of her panic attack is as follows: The
most common symptoms include a feeling of unreality,
shortness of breath, and racing heart; average frequency
of panic attacks is three per week; each panic
attack on average lasts from a few seconds to 5 minutes,
if Julie is not in a crowd, where the panicky feelings
last until she exits the crowd; in terms of apprehension,
Julie worries about panic 75% of the day; and most of
her panic attacks are expected, but she has some unexpected
ones as well. Julie has both situational and
internal antecedents to her panic attacks. The situational
antecedents include driving on freeways; crowds of
people; being alone, especially at night; restaurants;
dusk; reading and concentrating for long periods of
time; and aerobic activity. The internal antecedents include
heart rate fluctuations, lightheaded feelings, hunger
feelings, weakness due to lack of food, thoughts of
the “big one” happening, thoughts of not being able to
cope with this for much longer, and anger. Her misappraisals
about panic attack symptoms include beliefs
that she will never return to normality, that she will
go crazy or lose control, and that others will think she
is weird. Her behavioral reactions to panic attacks include
escape behaviors such as pulling off to the side
of the road, leaving restaurants and other crowded
places, calling her husband or mother, and checking
for her Klonopin. Her behavioral reactions to the anticipation
of panic attacks include avoidance of driving
long distances alone, driving on unfamiliar roads
and freeways or at dusk, crowded areas, exercise, quiet
time with nothing to do, and doing one thing for a long
period of time. In addition, she tries not to think about
anxiety or feelings of unreality. Her safety signals and
safety-seeking behaviors include having her Klonopin
on hand at all times, always knowing the location of
her husband, and having the air-conditioning on. The
consequences of her panic disorder with agoraphobia
affect her family: Julie’s husband is concerned and supportive,
but her mother thinks she should pull herself
together because “it’s all in her head.” In addition, Julie
works but has cut back the number of hours, and she
travels and socializes much less. Her general mood includes
some difficulty concentrating and sleeping, restlessness,
headaches, and muscular pains and aches. In
addition, she is occasionally tearful, sad, and hopeless,
and generally feels down.


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

coMPoNeNts of
coGNitive‑Behavioral theraPy

The components of the cognitive-behavioral treatment
described in this section are integrated into a sessionby-
session treatment program in the next section.

Education

The treatment begins with education about the nature
of panic disorder, the causes of panic and anxiety, and
the ways panic and anxiety are perpetuated by feedback
loops among physical, cognitive, and behavioral
response systems. In addition, specific descriptions of
the psychophysiology of the fight–flight response are
provided, as well as an explanation of the adaptive
value of the various physiological changes that occur
during panic and anxiety. The purpose of this education
is to correct the common myths and misconceptions
about panic symptoms (i.e., beliefs about going
crazy, dying, or losing control) that contribute to panic
and anxiety. The survival value of alarm reactions (i.e.,
panic attacks) is emphasized throughout.

Education also distinguishes between the state of
anxiety and the emotion of fear/panic, both conceptually
and in terms of its three response modes (subjective,
physiological, and behavioral). This distinction is
central to the model of panic disorder and to the remainder
of the treatment. Anxiety is viewed as a state
of preparation for future threat, whereas panic is the
fight–flight emotion elicited by imminent threat. Panic/
fear is characterized by perceptions of imminent threat,
sudden autonomic discharge, and fight–flight behavior.
In contrast, anxiety is characterized by perceptions of
future threat and chronic tension, cautiousness, avoidance,
and disruption of performance.

Self‑Monitoring

Self-monitoring is essential to the personal scientist
model of cognitive-behavioral therapy. Self-monitoring
is introduced as a way to enhance objective selfawareness
and increase accuracy in self-observation.
As noted earlier, patients are asked to keep at least two
types of records. The first, the Panic Attack Record, is
completed as soon after each panic attack as possible;
this record provides a description of cues, maximal distress,
symptoms, thoughts, and behaviors. The second,
the Daily Mood Record, is completed at the end of each
day to record overall or average levels of anxiety, de


pression, and whatever else is considered important to
record. Additionally, patients may keep a daily record
of activities or situations completed or avoided.

Breathing Retraining and
Capnometry‑Assisted Respiratory Training

Breathing retraining is a central component early on
in the development of panic control treatments because
many panic patients describe symptoms of hyperventilation
as being very similar to their panic attack symptoms.
It is noteworthy, however, that a hyperventilation
symptom report does not always accurately represent
hyperventilation physiology: Only 50% or fewer patients
show actual reductions in end-tidal CO2 values
during panic attacks (Hibbert & Pilsbury, 1989; Holt
& Andrews, 1989; Hornsveld, Garssen, Fiedelij Dop, &
van Spiegel, 1990).

In early conceptualizations, panic attacks were related
to stress-induced respiratory changes that provoke
fear either because they are perceived as threatening
or they augment fear already elicited by other phobic
stimuli (Clark, Salkovskis, & Chalkley, 1985). Several
studies illustrated a positive effect of breathing retraining,
involving slow abdominal breathing exercises (e.g.,
Kraft & Hoogduin, 1984). The value of breathing retraining
was subsequently questioned. For example,
several studies suggested that the addition of breathing
retraining alone did not improve on in vivo exposure
(e.g., de Beurs, van Balkom, Lange, Koele, & van Dyck,
1995). We found breathing retraining to be slightly less
effective than interoceptive exposure when each was
added to cognitive restructuring and in vivo exposure
(Craske, Rowe, Lewin, & Noriega-Dimitri, 1997), and
in another study, the inclusion of breathing retraining
resulted in poorer outcomes than cognitive-behavioral
therapy without breathing retraining, although the findings
were not robust (Schmidt et al., 2000). From their
review of efficacy and mechanisms of action, Garssen,
de Ruiter, and van Dyck (1992) concluded that breathing
retraining probably effects change not through
breathing per se but through distraction and/or a sense
of control. Thus, breathing retraining is no longer considered
a central component of cognitive-behavioral
therapy for panic disorder. Furthermore, to the extent
that it might become misused as a means for avoiding
physical symptoms, it may even be countertherapeutic.
That being said, there may be occasions when breathing
retraining is a useful tool, such as for the individual
showing obvious signs of irregular breathing (e.g.,


Panic Disorder and Agoraphobia

rapid, shallow breathing, frequent deep breaths), as
long as breathing retraining does not become a method
of avoidance or safety seeking.

In contrast to traditional breathing retraining,
capnometry-assisted respiratory training (CART) targets
respiratory dysregulation, in particular hypocapnia
(Meuret, Rosenfield, Seidel, Bhaskara, & Hofmann,
2010; Meuret, Wilhelm, Ritz, & Roth, 2008). CART
is a brief, 4-week training that uses immediate feedback
of end-tidal partial pressure CO2 (pCO2) to teach
patients how to raise their subnormal levels of pCO2
(hyperventilation) and thereby gain control over dysfunctional
respiratory patterns and associated panic
symptoms (e.g., shortness of breath, dizziness). The
device, a portable capnometer, offers breath-by-breath
feedback of expired CO2 and rate of breathing (both
measured via a nasal canula). Due to the novelty of
CART, randomized controlled trials are limited but
promising. In a first randomized-controlled study,
Meuret and colleagues (2008) tested the efficacy of 4
weeks of CART (N = 20) compared to a delayed waitlist
control group (WL, N = 17). CART, but not WL, led
to sustained increases in pCO2 levels and reduced panic
severity and frequency. Reductions in panic symptom
severity (PDSS; Shear et al., 1997) were comparable
to standard cognitive-behavioral therapy, and improvements
were maintained at 12-month follow-up. In a second
study, patients with panic disorder were randomly
assigned to receive either 4 weeks of CART (N = 21)
or cognitive therapy (N = 20). An initial 4 weeks of
skills training was followed by three sessions of in vivo
exposure and a fourth session at a 2-months follow-up.
Respective skills acquisition trainings led to significant
and comparable reductions in panic symptom severity
and panic-related cognitions, irrespective of modality.
However, only CART, not cognitive therapy, led to a
correction of hypocapnic levels of pCO2 (Meuret et
al., 2010; Seidel, Rosenfield, Bhaskara, Hofmann, &
Meuret, 2009). However, an evaluation of the degree
to which CART augments exposure therapy (relative to
exposure therapy alone) awaits testing.

Applied Relaxation

A form of relaxation known as applied relaxation has
shown good results as a treatment for panic attacks. Two
studies by Öst (Öst & Westling, 1995; Öst, Westling, &
Hellström, 1993) indicate that applied relaxation is as
effective as in vivo exposure and cognitive therapy. In
contrast, Barlow and colleagues (1989) found that ap


plied progressive muscle relaxation (PMR) is relatively
ineffective for panic attacks, although we excluded all
forms of interoceptive exposure from the hierarchy of
tasks to which PMR was applied, which was not necessarily
the case in the studies by Öst. Clark and colleagues
(1994) found cognitive therapy to be superior
to applied PMR when conducted with equal amounts
of in vivo exposure, whereas Beck, Stanley, Baldwin,
Deagle, and Averill (1994) found very few differences
between cognitive therapy and PMR when each was
administered without exposure procedures.

Cognitive Restructuring

Cognitive restructuring is a skills set in which patients
learn to recognize cognitive errors and generate alternative,
noncatastrophic explanations for the sensations
that are feared during panic attacks. Cognitive therapy
begins with a treatment rationale and discussion
of the role of thoughts in generating emotions. Next,
thoughts are recognized as hypotheses rather than as
fact, and are therefore open to being questioned and
challenged. Detailed self-monitoring of emotions and
associated cognitions is instituted to identify specific
beliefs, appraisals, and assumptions. Once identified,
relevant cognitions are categorized into types of typical
errors that occur during heightened emotion, such
as overestimations of risk of negative events or catastrophization
of meaning of events. The process of categorization,
or labeling of thoughts, is consistent with
a personal scientist model and facilitates an objective
perspective by which the validity of the thoughts can
be evaluated. Thus, in labeling the type of cognitive
distortion, the patient is encouraged to use an empirical
approach to examine the validity of his or her thoughts
by considering all of the available evidence. Therapists
use Socratic questioning to help patients make guided
discoveries and question their anxious thoughts. Next,
more evidence-based alternative hypotheses are generated.
In addition to surface-level appraisals (e.g., “That
person is frowning at me because I look foolish”), corelevel
beliefs or schemas (e.g., “I am not strong enough
to withstand further distress” or “I am unlikable”) are
questioned in the same way. Importantly, cognitive restructuring
is not intended as a direct means of minimizing
fear, anxiety, or unpleasant symptoms. Instead,
cognitive restructuring is intended to correct distorted
thinking; eventually fear and anxiety are expected to
subside, but their diminution is not the first goal of cognitive
therapy.


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

Cognitive therapy is often intermingled with behavioral
techniques (e.g., “behavioral experiments,” “hypothesis
testing,” “instructions” involving exposure)
that complicate direct testing of the efficacy of cognitive
therapy in its “pure” form (e.g., Hoffart, Sexton,
Hedley, & Martinsen, 2008; Hofmann et al., 2007; Öst
et al., 1993; Teachman, Marker, & Smith-Janik, 2008).
Nonetheless, there is some evidence that training in
cognitive procedures in full isolation from exposure and
behavioral procedures is efficacious in reducing aspects
of panic (Beck et al., 1994; Meuret et al., 2010; Salkovskis,
Clark, & Hackmann, 1991; van den Hout, Arntz,
& Hoekstra, 1994). Similarly, in a study by Bouchard
and colleagues (1996), cognitive restructuring was as
effective as exposure therapy in reducing panic symptoms.
However, the effects of cognitive therapy alone on
agoraphobia are unclear. One study found that cognitive
therapy was less effective than exposure therapy for
agoraphobia (Williams & Falbo, 1996). Another study
(Hoffart, 1995) found that cognitive therapy was as effective
as guided mastery exposure delivered intensively
over 6 weeks for individuals with moderate to severe
agoraphobia, although some elements of exposure (e.g.,
hyperventilation tests to elicit sensations) were included
in the cognitive therapy condition.

A few studies have evaluated the effects of cognitive
therapy combined with exposure in comparison
to exposure alone or in combination with other coping
skills. Most often, cognitive therapy combined with exposure
does not yield an additional benefit over in vivo
exposure alone (Öst, Thulin, & Ramnero, 2004; van
den Hout et al., 1994; see Murphy et al., 1998, for an
exception).

Exposure

Exposure is a critical phase of treatment and, once
begun, is a major focus of treatment sessions as well
as between-treatment session homework, since limited
exposure practice is of small benefit and may even be
detrimental. The exposure is designed to disconfirm
misappraisals and extinguish conditional emotional responses
to external situations and contexts, through in
vivo exposure, as well as to bodily sensations, through
interoceptive exposure. Growing evidence suggests that
exposure represents the most powerful component of
cognitive-behavioral therapy for panic disorder and
agoraphobia, including meta-analyses that fail to show
any additional benefit of either cognitive restructuring
or somatic coping skills beyond exposure therapy alone

(Norton & Price, 2007). A large trial reported a dose–
response relationship between exposure and improvement
in agoraphobia (Gloster et al., 2011).

in Vivo Exposure

In vivo exposure refers to repeated and systematic, reallife
exposure, in this case, to agoraphobic situations. A
long history of research has established the efficacy of
in vivo exposure for agoraphobia.

Most often, in vivo exposure is conducted in a graduated
manner, proceeding from the least to the most
anxiety-provoking situations on an avoidance hierarchy.
However, there is some evidence to suggest that
intensive or ungraduated exposure may be effective.
In a study by Feigenbaum (1988), treatment sessions
were conducted in a massed format over the course of
6–10 consecutive days. One group received ungraded
exposure (N = 25), beginning with the most feared
items from avoidance hierarchies. Another group received
graded exposure (N = 23), beginning with the
least feared hierarchy items. Approximately one-third
of this severely agoraphobic sample was housebound at
initial assessment. At posttreatment and 8 months later,
the conditions proved to be equally effective (although,
intriguingly, the graded group reported the treatment
to be more distressing). However, ungraded exposure
was clearly superior at the 5-year follow-up assessment:
76% of the intensive group versus 35% of the graded
group reported themselves to be completely free of
symptoms. When 104 subjects were added to the intensive
exposure format, the same results were obtained.
Of 129 subjects, 78% were reportedly completely
symptom-free 5 years later. This dramatic set of results
suggests that an intensive approach, which is likely to
produce higher levels of arousal than a graduated approach,
can be very beneficial (at least when conducted
in a massed format). Unfortunately, the validity of the
outcome measures in this study is somewhat questionable,
and replication by independent investigators has
yet to be reported.

The amount of time devoted to in vivo exposure is
very dependent on the patient’s agoraphobia profile.
Obviously, more time is needed for patients with more
severe agoraphobia.

Interoceptive Exposure

In interoceptive exposure, the goal is deliberately to induce
feared physical sensations a sufficient number of


Panic Disorder and Agoraphobia

times, and long enough each time, so that misappraisals
about the sensations are disconfirmed and conditional
anxiety responses are extinguished. A standard
list of exercises, such as hyperventilating and spinning,
is used to establish a hierarchy of interoceptive exposures.
With a graduated approach, exposure begins
with the less distressing physical exercises and continues
with the more distressing exercises. It is essential
that the patient endure the sensations beyond the point
at which they are first noticed, for at least 30 seconds
to 1 minute, because early termination of the task may
eliminate the opportunity to learn that the sensations
are not harmful and that the anxiety can be tolerated.
The exercise is followed by a discussion of what the
patient learned about the physical sensations. These interoceptive
exercises are practiced daily outside of the
therapy session to consolidate the process of learning.
Interoceptive exposure extends to naturalistic activities
that induce somatic sensations (e.g., caffeine consumption,
exercise).

A series of studies reported on the effects of interoceptive
exposure independent of other therapeutic
strategies. Early on, Bonn, Harrison, and Rees (1971)
and Haslam (1974) observed successful reduction in
reactivity with repeated infusions of sodium lactate
(a drug that produces panic-type bodily sensations).
However, panic was not monitored in these investigations.
Griez and van den Hout (1986) compared six
sessions of graduated CO2 inhalations to a treatment
regimen of propranolol (a beta-blocker chosen because
it suppresses symptoms induced by CO2 inhalations),
both conducted over the course of 2 weeks. CO2 inhalation
treatment resulted in a mean reduction from 12
to four panic attacks, which was superior to the results
from propranolol. In addition, inhalation treatment resulted
in significantly greater reductions in reported
fear of sensations. A 6-month follow-up assessment
suggested maintenance of treatment gains, although
panic frequency was not reported. Beck and Shipherd
(1997) similarly found a positive effect from repeated
CO2 inhalations, although it had little effect on agoraphobia
(Beck, Shipherd, & Zebb, 1997). Broocks and
colleagues (1998) tested the effects of exercise (with
once-weekly supportive contact from a therapist) in
comparison to clomipramine or drug placebo over 10
weeks. The exercise group was trained to run 4 miles,
three times per week. Despite high attrition from exercise
(31%), exercise was more effective than the drug
placebo condition. However, clomipramine was superior
to exercise.

In the first comparison to other cognitive and behavioral
treatments, Barlow and colleagues (1989)
compared applied PMR, interoceptive exposure plus
breathing retraining and cognitive restructuring, their
combination with applied PMR, and a waiting-list control,
in a sample with panic disorder with limited agoraphobia.
The two conditions involving interoceptive
exposure, breathing retraining and cognitive restructuring,
were significantly superior to applied PMR and
wait-list conditions. The results were maintained 24
months following treatment completion for the group
receiving interoceptive exposure, breathing retraining,
and cognitive restructuring without PMR, whereas the
combined group tended to deteriorate over follow-up
(Craske, Brown, & Barlow, 1991). As already mentioned,
we compared interoceptive exposure, cognitive
therapy, and in vivo exposure to breathing retraining,
cognitive therapy, and in vivo exposure for individuals
with varying levels of agoraphobia. The condition that
included interoceptive exposure was slightly superior
to breathing retraining at posttreatment and 6 months
later (Craske et al., 1997). Similarly, Ito, Noshirvani,
Basoglu, and Marks (1996) found a trend for those who
added interoceptive exposure to their self-directed in
vivo exposure and breathing retraining to be more likely
to achieve at least a 50% improvement in phobic fear
and avoidance. However, the combination of breathing
education, breathing retraining, and repeated interoceptive
exposure to hyperventilation did not increase
the effectiveness of in vivo exposure for agoraphobia
(de Beurs, Lang, van Dyck, & Koele, 1995).

Interoceptive exposure is now a standard component
of cognitive-behavioral therapy for panic disorder (e.g.,
Barlow et al., 2000; Craske, Lang, Aikins, & Mystkowski,
2005), although different groups give different
emphases to interoceptive exposure, with some emphasizing
it as a means for extinguishing fear responses
(Barlow & Craske, 2006) and others, as a vehicle for
disconfirming misappraisals (Clark, 1996).

Optimizing Learning during Exposure

Our understanding of the mechanisms of exposure
therapy has evolved over time. One of the most influential
theories is emotional processing theory, which
emphasized habituation of fear responding within an
exposure trial as a necessary precursor to habituation
across treatment sessions, that in turn leads to longterm
corrective learning (Foa & Kozak, 1986; Foa &
McNally, 1996). Most recently, we have emphasized


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

optimizing inhibitory learning and its retrieval in ways
that are not necessarily dependent on reductions in fear
throughout trials of exposure (Craske et al., 2008); we
discuss this approach below.

Emotional processing theory emphasizes mechanisms
of habituation as precursors to cognitive correction.
Specifically, emotional processing theory purports
that the effects of exposure therapy derive from activation
of a “fear structure” and integration of information
that is incompatible with it, resulting in the development
of a non-fear structure that replaces or competes with
the original one. Incompatible information derives first
from within-session habituation, or reduction in fear responding
with prolonged exposure to the fear stimulus.
Within-session habituation is seen as a prerequisite for
the second piece of incompatible information, which
derives from between-session habituation over repeated
occasions of exposure. Between-session habituation is
purported to form the basis for long-term learning and
to be mediated by changes in “meaning,” or lowered
probability of harm (i.e., risk) and lessened negativity
(i.e., valence) of the stimulus. Emotional processing
theory guides clinicians to focus on the initial elevation
of fear followed by within- and between-session reductions
in fear as signs of treatment success. Although
enticing in its face validity, support for the theory has
been inconsistent at best (Craske et al., 2008; Craske,
Liao, Brown, & Vervliet, 2012). Rather, the evidence
suggests that the amount by which fear habituates from
the beginning to the end of an exposure practice is not
a good predictor of overall outcomes, and that evidence
for between-session habituation is mixed (Craske et al.,
2008, 2012).

A return to the science of fear learning and extinction
may help to explain the effects of exposure therapy and
thereby optimize its implementation. It is now thought
that inhibitory learning is central to extinction (Bouton,
1993). Inhibitory pathways are also recognized in
the neurobiology of fear extinction (see Sotres-Bayon,
Cain, & LeDoux, 2006). Within a Pavlovian conditioning
approach, inhibitory learning means that the
original conditioned stimulus–unconditioned stimulus
(CS-US) association learned during fear conditioning
is not erased during extinction, but rather is left intact
as a new, secondary learning about the CS-US develops
(Bouton, 1993). The degree to which inhibitory associations
shape fear responding at retest (the index of
strength and stability of new “learning”) is independent
of fear levels expressed throughout extinction and instead
is dependent on factors such as context and time.

Based on the inhibitory retrieval model of extinction,
outcomes may be enhanced by strategies that do
not rely on fear reduction within a trial of exposure
(Craske et al., 2008, 2012). Indeed, fear reduction may
become a safety behavior for persons with panic disorder
(since fear reduction eradicates the very thing that
is feared), such that a more appropriate goal may be
to maintain high levels of fear and anxiety in order to
disconfirm the expectancy of negative consequences.
One translational possibility is “deepened extinction”
(Rescorla, 2006), in which multiple fear conditional
stimuli are first extinguished separately before being
combined during extinction, and in animal studies, decrease
spontaneous recovery and reinstatement of fear.
Indeed, this is what is essentially done when interoceptive
exposure is conducted in feared agoraphobic situations
(Barlow & Craske, 1994) and recent experimental
data supports the beneficial effects of deepened extinction
in human conditioning studies (Culver, Vervliet, &
Craske, in press).

In addition, the effects of exposure therapy may be
enhanced by the prevention or removal of “safety signals”
or “safety behaviors.” Common safety signals and
behaviors for clients with panic disorder are the presence
of another person, therapists, medications, or food
or drink. In the experimental literature, safety signals
alleviate distress in the short term, but when they are
no longer present, the fear returns (Lovibond, Davis,
& O’Flaherty, 2000), an effect that may derive in part
from interference with the development of inhibitory
associations. In phobic samples, the availability and
use of safety signals and behaviors has been shown
to be detrimental to exposure therapy (Sloan & Telch,
2002), whereas instructions to refrain from using safety
behaviors improved outcomes (Salkovskis, 1991).
Similarly, the use of safety signals was associated with
poorer outcomes for panic (Helbig-Lang & Petermann,
2010). However, recent data have presented contradictory
findings (Rachman, Shafran, Radomsky, & Zysk,
2011).

Further options include stimulus variability throughout
exposure, since variability has been shown to
enhance the storage capacity of newly learned information.
Two studies with clinical analogues have
demonstrated positive benefits in terms of spontaneous
recovery (Lang & Craske, 2000; Rowe & Craske,
1998), while a third showed trends only (Kircanski et
al., 2011). In the treatment for panic disorder with agoraphobia,
this implies conducting exposure for varying
durations, at varying levels of intensity, rather than


Panic Disorder and Agoraphobia

continuing exposure in one situation until fear declines
before moving to the next situation. Notably, such variability
typically elicits higher levels of anxiety during
exposure, but without detrimental effects and sometimes
with beneficial effects in the long term.

Based on evidence for fear extinction to be weakened
by antagonists of the glutamate receptors in the
amygdala, Walker and Davis (2002) tested and demonstrated
that drug agonists of the same receptors,
and in particular, D-cycloserine, enhance extinction
in animal studies. In a meta-analysis of the efficacy of
D-cycloserine for anxiety disorders, Norberg, Krystal,
and Tolin (2008) reported effect sizes of d = 0.60 at
posttreatment and 0.47 at follow-up in clinical anxiety
samples. D-Cycloserine in combination with interoceptive
exposure for panic clients has resulted in a greater
reduction in symptom severity, and a greater likelihood
of achieving a change in clinical status at posttreatment
and 1-month follow-up compared to exposure plus placebo
(Otto et al., 2010). Notably, D-cycloserine has
been shown to have positive effects without influencing
the level of fear during exposure per se.

A number of options for enhancing retrieval of the
extinction memory have been tested. One option during
extinction training is to include retrieval cues to be used
in other contexts once extinction is over. This has been
shown to be effective in animal studies and human conditioning
studies (see Craske et al., 2012, for a review).
In clinical analogue samples, the effects of a retrieval
cue upon context renewal were very weak in one study
(Culver et al., 2012), although instructions to reinstate
what was learned mentally during exposure had more
robust effects in reducing context renewal in another
study (Mystkowski, Craske, Echiverri, & Labus, 2006).
In the treatment of panic disorder, this approach simply
suggests that clients carry with them cues (e.g., wristband)
to remind them what they learned during exposure
therapy (as long as the cues do not become safety
signals), or are prompted to remind themselves of what
they learned in exposure therapy each time they experience
previously feared sensations or situations.

Another option is to provide multiple contexts in
which extinction takes place. This approach has been
shown to offset context renewal in rodent samples,
and in a clinical analogue study of exposure therapy
(Vansteenwegen et al., 2007) although the results are
not always consistent (Neumann, Lipp & Cory, 2007).
In the treatment of panic disorder and agoraphobia, this
would mean asking clients to conduct their interoceptive
and in vivo exposures in multiple different contexts,

such as when alone, in unfamiliar places, or at varying
times of day or varying days of the week.

A recent (re-)discovery is that retrieving already
stored memories induces a process of reconsolidation
(Nader, Schafe, & Le Doux, 2000), since the memory
is written into long-term memory again, requiring de
novo neurochemical processes. Thus, it may be possible
to change memories during the reconsolidation time
frame upon retrieval. Propranolol, a beta-blocker, has
been shown to block the reconsolidation of memories,
and Debiec and Le Doux (2004) found that infusions
of propranaolol blocked the reconsolidation of a previously
formed CS-US memory, and led to erasure of the
fear response and resistance to reinstatement effects.
This suggests that propranolol upon retrieval may be a
useful clinical tool, and indeed, two fear conditioning
studies in healthy humans (Kindt, Soeter, & Vervliet,
2009; Soeter & Kindt, 2010) have replicated the effects.
However, the effects have not been tested in the
context of exposure therapy for panic disorder.

Role of Acceptance during Exposure

Cognitive and somatic coping skills are central to
cognitive-behavioral therapy and are taught to facilitate
and improve exposure therapy. Newer approaches
that explore acceptance and cognitive defusion (e.g.,
acceptance and commitment therapy; Hayes, Strosahl,
& Wilson, 1999) have been gaining interest, especially
given evidence that experiential avoidance is a correlate
of anxious psychopathology and acceptance increases
willingness to experience and lessens emotional distress
over induced anxiety symptoms in individuals with
panic disorder (e.g., Campbell-Sills et al., 2006; Eifert
& Heffner, 2003), including CO2 inhalation challenges
(Levitt et al., 2004). Interestingly, the acceptance approach
is entirely consistent with our formulation of interoceptive
exposure, in which patients are encouraged
to experience the feared physical sensations without
any attempt to lessen them or to think differently about
them in the moment of exposure. We recently extended
this model of acceptance during interoceptive exposure
to acceptance during in vivo exposure in an open trial
of 11 patients with panic disorder (Meuret, Twohig,
Rosenfield, Hayes, & Craske, 2012). In general, the
exposures were an opportunity for patients to behave
with their panic-related thoughts, feelings, and bodily
sensations; in other words, patients were encouraged to
realize that they can drive for and reach life goals, even
in the presence of unpleasant inner experiences. To that


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

end, it was explicitly stated that the level of anxiety or
fear was not the determining factor. Rather, it was explained
that “willingness can do surprising things to
one’s inner experiences. If one is willing to experience
anxiety it may or may not show up. Thus, we are not
going to judge the success of these exposures on how
high the anxiety gets, but instead in how open you are
to what might show up.” To plan effectively for interoceptive
(i.e., eliciting panic sensations such as a racing
heart or shortness of breath) and in vivo exposures (i.e.,
seeking places and situations that one previously avoided
because of the fear of panic sensations), a hierarchy
of least to most anxiety-provoking items was created.
Movement up the hierarchy was not based on reductions
in anxiety at the preceding step but high willingness
to experience panic-related inner experiences.
During the exposures, patients were encouraged to
maintain an open, nonjudgmental stance toward whatever
thoughts, feelings, and bodily sensations arose in
a given moment, experiencing them for what they were,
and moving toward them while anxious. Treatment was
associated with clinically significant improvements in
panic symptom severity, willingness to allow inner experiences
to occur, and reductions in avoidant behavior.
In another study of a mixed anxiety disorder sample,
we found very few differences in outcome between acceptance
and commitment therapy (Hayes et al., 1999)
and cognitive-behavioral therapy, although the treatments
were matched on amount of time spent on exposure
therapy, albeit framed differently within for each
condition (Arch et al., 2012). Thus, the data to date suggest
that both a cognitive therapy coping approach and
an acceptance-based exposure approach are effective.

overall efficacy
of coGNitive‑Behavioral theraPy

An extensive body of research has evaluated the efficacy
of cognitive-behavioral therapy for panic disorder
and agoraphobia. Cognitive-behavioral therapy, involving
most or all of the components just listed, yields
panic-free rates in the range of 70–80% and high endstate
rates (i.e., within normative ranges of functioning)
in the range of 50–70% for panic disorder with minimal
agoraphobia (e.g., Barlow et al., 1989; Clark et al.,
1994). Although agoraphobic avoidance is sometimes
associated with less positive response (e.g., Dow et al.,
2007), the overall within-group effect size for change
in panic disorder and agoraphobia from pre- to post


treatment is very large (e.g., effect size = 1.53; Norton
& Price, 2007). Moreover, the between-group effect
size is substantial in comparison to wait-list conditions
(e.g., effect size = 0.64; Haby, Donnelly, Corry, & Vos,
2006). However, more research is needed comparing
cognitive-behavioral therapy to alternative active treatment
conditions.

The effectiveness extends to clients who experience
nocturnal panic attacks (Craske, Lang, et al., 2005).
Furthermore, cognitive-behavioral therapy results in
improvements in rates of comorbid anxiety and mood
disorders (e.g., Craske et al., 2007; Tsao, Mystkowksi,
Zucker, & Craske, 2005), although one study suggested
that the benefits for comorbid conditions may lessen
over time, when assessed 2 years later (Brown et al.,
1995). Finally, applications of cognitive-behavioral
therapy lower relapse rates upon discontinuation of
high-potency benzodiazepines (e.g., Spiegel, Bruce,
Gregg, & Nuzzarello, 1994). The effects of cognitivebehavioral
therapy are sustained over time, as metaanalyses
show little change (i.e., maintenance of treatment
effects) from posttreatment to follow-up (effect
size = 0.12; Norton & Price, 2007). From their review
of meta-analyses for cognitive behavioral therapy
across all disorders, Butler, Chapman, Forman, and
Beck (2006) concluded that evidence for maintenance
of treatment gains was particularly strong for panic
disorder, where the rate of relapse was almost half the
rate of relapse following pharmacotherapy. Continuing
improvement after acute treatment is facilitated by involvement
of significant others in every aspect of treatment
for agoraphobia (e.g., Cerny et al., 1987). Also,
booster sessions enhance long-term outcomes (Craske
et al., 2006).

Efficacy data from research settings are now being
complemented by effectiveness data from real-world,
primary care settings. In a randomized controlled
trial in primary care settings with novice therapists,
cognitive-behavioral therapy combined with expert
recommendations for medication regimens was more
effective than treatment as usual (Roy-Byrne, Craske,
et al., 2005). The effects appeared primarily to be due
to cognitive-behavioral therapy rather than mediation
(Craske, Golinelli, et al., 2005). In the more recent
CALM study (Craske et al., 2011), the effectiveness of
cognitive-behavioral therapy for panic disorder in primary
care settings was demonstrated in the hands of
nonexperienced therapists with the aid of a computerized
guide, combined with expert recommendations for
medication, relative to treatment as usual.


Panic Disorder and Agoraphobia

Even though cognitive-behavioral therapy for panic
disorder and agoraphobia is efficacious and effective,
there is room for improvement. One study estimated
that 30% of clients continue to function poorly at
follow-up and only 48% reached high end-state status
(Brown & Barlow, 1995). In a landmark study (Barlow
et al., 2000), only 32% of clients with panic disorder
assigned to cognitive-behavioral therapy alone demonstrated
strong treatment response 12 months after acute
treatment. Finally, of those who do start treatment,
the mean dropout rate is 19%, with a range of 0–54%
(Haby et al., 2006).

treatMeNt DescriPtioN: Protocol

What follows is a description of a 12-session cognitivebehavioral
therapy for panic disorder and agoraphobia
tailored to Julie’s presentation. Of course, the degree to
which the various components of treatment are emphasized
vary by the functional assessment conducted for
each patient.

Overview

The basic aim of the treatment protocol is to influence
directly the catastrophic misappraisals and avoidance
of bodily sensations and agoraphobic situations. This is
done first through the provision of accurate information
as to the nature of the fight–flight response. By provision
of such information, patients are taught that they experience
sensations that are normal and harmless. Second,
treatment aims to teach a set of skills for developing
evidence-based appraisals regarding bodily sensations
and agoraphobic situations. At the same time, specific
information concerning the effects of hyperventilation
and its role in panic attacks is provided, with practice
of breathing retraining if deemed appropriate. Then,
the crux of the treatment involves repeated exposure to
feared internal cues and agoraphobic situations.

Session 1

The goals of Session 1 are to describe fear and anxiety;
to help patients understand the cyclical influences
among behavioral, physiological, and cognitive
responses; to understand that panic attack symptoms
are not harmful; and to begin self-monitoring, if it was
not already begun with the initial assessment. Therapy
begins with identifying anxiety patterns and the situa


tions in which anxiety and panic attacks are likely to
occur. Many patients have difficulty identifying specific
antecedents, reporting that panic can occur at almost
any time. Therapists help patients to identify internal
triggers, specifically, negative verbal cognitions, catastrophic
imagery, and physical sensations. The following
interchange took place for Julie:

tHeraPist: In what situations are you most likely to
panic?

Julie: Crowded restaurants and when I’m driving on
the freeway. But sometimes I am driving along, feeling
OK, when all of a sudden it hits. And other times
I can be sitting at home feeling quite relaxed and it
just hits. That’s when I really get scared because I
can’t explain it.

tHeraPist: So, when you are driving on the freeway,
what is the very first thing you notice that tells you
you’re about to panic?

Julie: Well, the other cars on the road look as if they
are moving really slowly . . . it’s as if I am in a dream.
tHeraPist: And what is the first thing you notice when
you’re at home?
Julie: An unreal feeling, like I’m floating.

tHeraPist: So, what does that tell you? What is the
common factor that started these two panic attacks?

Julie: The feeling as if things are unreal? Wow, I always
thought the physical feelings were the panic attack,
but maybe they start the panic attack.

Next, the three-response system model for describing
and understanding anxiety and panic is introduced.
This model contributes to an objective selfawareness—
to becoming a personal scientist—and
provides the groundwork for an alternative conceptual
framework for explaining panic and anxiety that replaces
the patient’s own misassumptions. Patients are
asked to describe cognitive, physiological, and behavioral
aspects to their responding: to identify the things
that they feel, think, and do when they are anxious and
panicky. As described earlier, differences between the
response profiles of anxiety and panic are highlighted.
After grasping the notion of three responses that are
partially independent, interactions among the response
systems are described. The patient is asked to describe
the three-response system components in a recent panic
attack and to identify ways in which they interacted to
produce heightened distress. For example,


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

tHeraPist: How would you describe the three parts to
the panic attack you had at home last week?

Julie: Well, physically, my head felt really light, and
my hands were clammy. I thought that I would either
pass out or that I would somehow dissolve into nothingness.
My behavior was to lie down and phone my
husband.

tHeraPist: Ok that’s a great description of your
thoughts, physical feelings, and behaviors. Now let’s
look at the sequence of events. What was the very
first thing you noticed?

Julie: When I stood up, my head started to feel really
weird, as if it was spinning inside.

tHeraPist: What was your very next reaction to that
feeling?

Julie: I held onto the chair. I thought something was
wrong. I thought it could get worse and that I’d collapse.


tHeraPist: So it began with a physical sensation, and
then you had some very specific thoughts about
those sensations. What happened next?

Julie: I felt very anxious.

tHeraPist: And what happened next?

Julie: Well, the dizziness seemed to be getting worse
and worse. I became really concerned that it was different
from any other experience I had ever had. I
was convinced that this was “it.”

tHeraPist: So, as you became more anxious, the
physical feelings and the thoughts that something
bad was going to happen intensified. What did you
do next?

Julie: I called my husband and lay on the bed until he
came home. It was horrible.

tHeraPist: Can you see how one thing fed off another,
creating a cycle? That it began with a sensation, then
some anxious thoughts, then feeling anxious, then
more sensations and more thoughts, and more fear,
and so on?

Next, the reasons why panic attacks first began are
addressed briefly. Patients are informed that it is not
necessary to understand the reasons why they began
to panic to benefit from the treatment because factors
involved in onset are not necessarily the same as the
factors involved in the maintenance of a problem. Nev


ertheless, the initial panic attack is described as a manifestation
of anxiety/stress. The stressors surrounding
the time of the first panic attack are explored with the
patient, particularly in terms of how stressors may have
increased levels of physical arousal and primed certain
danger-laden cognitive schemas.

Also, the therapist briefly describes the physiology
underlying anxiety and panic, and the myths about
what the physical sensations might mean. The main
concepts covered in this educational phase are (1) the
survival value or protective function of anxiety and
panic; (2) the physiological basis to the various sensations
experienced during panic and anxiety, and the
survival function of the underlying physiology; and (3)
the role of specific learned and cognitively mediated
fears of certain bodily sensations. The model of panic
we described earlier in this chapter is explained. In particular,
the concepts of misappraisals and interoceptive
conditioning are explained as accounting for panic attacks
that seem to occur from out of the blue—that are
triggered by very subtle internal cues or physical sensations
that may occur at any time. Not only does this
information reduce anxiety by decreasing uncertainty
about panic attacks but it also enhances the credibility
of the subsequent treatment procedures. This information
is detailed in a handout given to the patient to
read over the next week (for the handout, see Barlow &
Craske, 2006).

This information was very important for Julie because
the inability to explain her panic attacks was a
major source of distress. Here are some of the questions
she asked in her attempt to understand more fully:

Julie: So, if I understand you correctly, you’re saying
that my panic attacks are the same as the fear I experienced
the time we found a burglar in our house. It
doesn’t feel the same at all.

tHeraPist: Yes, those two emotional states—an unexpected
panic attack and fear when confronted with a
burglar—are essentially the same. However, in the
case of the burglar, where were you focusing your
attention—on the burglar or on the way you were
feeling?

Julie: The burglar, of course, although I did notice my
heart was going a mile a minute.

tHeraPist: And when you have a panic attack, where

are you focusing your attention—on the people

around you or on the way you are feeling?


Panic Disorder and Agoraphobia

Julie: Well, mostly on the way I’m feeling, although it
depends on where I am at the time.

tHeraPist: Being most concerned about what’s going
on inside can lead to a very different type of experience
than being concerned about the burglar, even
though basically the same physiological response is
occurring. For example, remember our description
of the way fear of sensations can intensify the sensations.


Julie: I get that. But what about the feelings of unreality?
How can they be protective or how can feeling
unreal help me deal with a dangerous situation?

tHeraPist: OK, remember that it’s the physiological
events that are protective—not the sensations. The
sensations are just the end result of those events.
Now, feelings of unreality can be caused by changes
in your blood flow to your brain (although not dangerously
so), or from overbreathing, or from concentrating
too intensely on what’s going on inside you.
So the unreality sensation may not be protective, but
the changes in blood flow and overbreathing are.

Julie: I understand how I can create a panic attack by
being afraid of my physical feelings, like my heart
racing or feeling unreal. But sometimes it happens
so quickly that I don’t have time to think.

tHeraPist: Yes, these reactions can occur very
quickly, at times automatically. But remember, we
are tuned to react instantaneously to things that we
believe to be dangerous. Imagine yourself walking
through a dark alley, and you have reason to believe
that somewhere in the darkness lurks a killer. Under
those conditions, you would be extremely attentive
to any sign, any sound, or any sight of another person.
If you were walking through the same alley and
were sure there were no killers, you might not hear
or detect the same signals you picked up on in the
first case. Now let’s translate this to panic; the killer
in the dark alley is the panic attack, and the signs,
sounds, and smells are the physical sensations you
think signal the possibility of a panic attack. Given
the acute degree of sensitivity to physical symptoms
that signal a panic attack, it is likely that you are noticing
normal “noises” in your body that you would
otherwise not notice, and on occasion, immediately
become fearful because of those “noises.” In other
words, the sensations are often noticeable because
you attend to them.

Next, the method of self-monitoring was described
and demonstrated with in-session practice of completing
a Panic Attack Record. Julie was concerned that
self-monitoring would only elevate her distress, by
reminding of the very thing she was afraid of (panic
and unreality). The therapist clarified the difference between
objective and subjective self-monitoring, and explained
that distress would subside as Julie persevered
with self-monitoring.

The homework for this session was to self-monitor
panic attacks, daily anxiety, and mood, and to read the
handout. In fact, we encourage patients to reread the
handout several times, and to actively engage in the
material by circling or marking the most personally
relevant sections or areas in need of clarification, because
effort enhances long-term retention of the material
learned. Of course, for some patients, reading the
material draws their attention to things they fear (just
as with self-monitoring). In this case, therapists can
discuss the role of avoidance, and how, with repeated
readings, distress levels will most likely subside.

At the end of the session, Julie suddenly became
highly anxious. She felt unable to tolerate either the
treatment procedures or her anticipation of them. She
became very agitated in the office and reported feelings
of unreality. She opened the office door to find her
husband, who was waiting outside. The therapist helped
Julie understand how the cycle of panic had emerged
just at that moment: (1) The trigger was the treatment
description—having to face eventually feared sensations
and situations; (2) this was anxiety producing
because Julie believed that she could not cope with
the treatment demands, that the treatment would cause
her so much anxiety that she would “flip out” and lose
touch with reality permanently, or that she would never
improve because she could not tolerate the treatment;

(3) the current anxiety in the office elicited sensations
of unreality and a racing heart; (4) Julie began to worry
that she might panic and lose touch with reality permanently
within the next few minutes; (5) the more anxious
Julie felt, and the stronger her attempts to escape
and find safety, the stronger the physical sensations
became; and (6) she felt some relief upon finding her
husband because his presence reassured her that she
would be safe. Julie was reassured that treatment would
progress at a pace with which she was comfortable, but
at the same time she was helped to understand that her
acute distress about the feeling of unreality would be
the precise target of this type of treatment, therefore

CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

attesting to the relevance of this treatment for her. She
was also calmed by preliminary cognitive restructuring
of the probability of permanently losing touch with
reality. After a lengthy discussion, Julie became more
receptive to treatment. A team approach to treatment
planning and progress was agreed upon, so that Julie
did not feel that she would be forced to do things she
did not think she could do.

Session 2

The goals of this session are to begin the development
of a hierarchy of agoraphobic situations and coping
skills of breathing retraining and cognitive restructuring.
The individualized hierarchy comprises situations
that range from mild to moderate anxiety, all the way
up to extreme anxiety. These situations become the
basis of graduated in vivo exposure. Although in vivo
exposure exercises are not scheduled to take place until
Session 4, the hierarchy is introduced now, so that cognitive
restructuring skills can be practiced in relation to
each situation on the hierarchy before in vivo exposure
begins. Moreover, the hierarchy will be refined as a result
of the cognitive restructuring practice because the
latter highlights specific features of agoraphobic situations
that are most anxiety provoking.

Julie was asked to develop a hierarchy over the following
week. She expressed some doubt that she would
ever be able to accomplish any, let alone all, of the
items on her hierarchy. The therapist helped Julie by
asking her to think of any situation in her lifetime that
used to be difficult but became easier with practice.
Julie remembered how anxious she used to be when she
first started working with customers at her husband’s
office—and how that discomfort subsided over time.
This was used to help Julie realize that the same might
happen with the situations listed on her hierarchy. Julie’s
final hierarchy comprised the following situations:
driving home from work alone; sitting in a crowded
movie theater; spending 2 hours alone at home during
the day; being alone at home as day turned to night;
driving on surface streets to her brother’s house (10
miles) alone; driving two exits on Freeway 444, with
her husband following in the car behind; driving two
exits on Freeway 444, alone; driving four exits on Freeway
444; and driving on the freeway to her brother’s
house alone. Then, Julie was to repeat all of these tasks
without taking Klonopin, and without knowing the location
of her husband.

Breathing retraining also is begun in this session.
Patients are asked to hyperventilate voluntarily by
standing and breathing fast and deep, as if blowing up
a balloon, for 1½ minutes. With prompting and encouragement
from the therapist, patients can often complete
the full 1½ minutes, after which time they are asked
to sit, close their eyes, and breathe very slowly, pausing
at the end of each breath, until the symptoms have
abated. The experience is then discussed in terms of the
degree to which it produced symptoms similar to those
that occur naturally during anxiety or panic. Approximately
50–60% of patients report that the symptoms of
hyperventilation are very similar to their panic attack
symptoms. Often, however, similarity of the symptoms
is confused with similarity of the anxiety. Because the
exercise is conducted in a safe environment and the
symptoms have an obvious cause, most patients rate
the experience as less anxiety provoking than if the
same symptoms had occurred naturally. This distinction
is important to make because it demonstrates the
significance of perceived safety for the degree of anxiety
experienced. Julie rated the hyperventilation exercise
as very anxiety provoking (8 on a 0- to 10-point
scale), and rated the symptoms as being quite similar to
her panic symptoms (6 on a 0- to 10-point scale). She
terminated the task after approximately 40 seconds,
in anticipation of experiencing a full-blown panic attack.
The therapist and Julie discussed this experience
in terms of the three response systems, and the role of
misappraisals and interoceptive conditioning described
during the previous session.

Then, Julie was briefly educated about the physiological
basis to hyperventilation (see Barlow & Craske,
2006). As before, the goal of the didactic presentation
was to allay misinterpretations of the dangers of overbreathing,
and to provide a factual information base on
which to draw when actively challenging misinterpretations.
The educational content is tailored to the patient’s
own educational level and covered only to the
degree that it is relevant to the patient.

In the next step, the therapist teaches breathing retraining,
which begins by teaching patients to rely more
on the diaphragm (abdomen) than on chest muscles. In
addition, patients are instructed to concentrate on their
breathing by counting on their inhalations and thinking
the word “relax” on exhalations. (Slow breathing
is introduced in Session 3.) Therapists model the suggested
breathing patterns, then provide corrective feedback
to patients while they practice in the office setting.


Panic Disorder and Agoraphobia

(Note that CART uses a different method of breathing
retraining that is based on raising levels of CO2 in the
blood through biofeedback.)

Initial reactions to the breathing exercise may be
negative for patients who are afraid of respiratory sensations
because the exercise directs their attention to
breathing. It also can be difficult for patients who are
chronic overbreathers, and patients for whom any interruption
of habitual breathing patterns initially increases
respiratory symptomatology. In both cases, continued
practice is advisable, with reassurance that sensations
such as shortness of breath are not harmful. The goal is
to use breathing skills training to encourage continued
approach toward anxiety and anxiety-producing situations.
On occasion, patients mistakenly view breathing
retraining as a way of relieving themselves of terrifying
symptoms, thus falling into the trap of fearing dire consequences
should they not succeed in correcting their
breathing. This is what happened for Julie:

Julie: So, all I have to do is to slow down my breathing,
then everything will be OK?

tHeraPist: Certainly, slowing down your breathing
will help to decrease the physical symptoms that you
feel, but I am not sure what you mean when you ask
whether everything will be OK.

Julie: That proper breathing will prevent me from losing
touch with reality—that I won’t disappear.

tHeraPist: Breathing retraining will help you to regulate
your breathing, which may lessen your physical
symptoms, including the sense of unreality. Your
question, though, is the reason for our next treatment
skill of changing your thinking, so you can learn that
the sense of unreality is not a sign of actual loss of
touch with reality and disappearance.

The homework is to practice diaphragmatic breathing
for at least 10 minutes, two times a day in relaxing
environments.

Therapists introduce in this session cognitive restructuring,
by explaining that everyone has errors in
thinking when anxious, thus helping the patient to expect
his or her thinking to be distorted. Patients are informed
that these distortions have an adaptive function:
Chances of survival are greater if we perceive danger
as probable and worthy of attention rather than minimize
it. Therefore, anxiety leads us to judge threatening
events as being more likely and more threatening

than they really are. However, the cognitive distortions
are unnecessary because there is no real threat in the
case of panic disorder.

Then, patients are taught to treat their thoughts as
hypotheses or guesses rather than as facts. The notions
of automatic thinking and discrete predictions are also
explained, to emphasize the need to become an astute
observer of one’s own habitual self-statements in each
situation. This leads to a “downward arrow technique”
to identify specific predictions made at any given moment,
as shown with Julie.

tHeraPist: What is it that scared you about feeling detached
in the movie theater last night?

Julie: It is just such a horrible feeling.

tHeraPist: What makes it so horrible?

Julie: I can’t tolerate it.

tHeraPist: What makes you think you cannot tolerate
it? What is the feeling of detachment going to do to
you that makes you think it is horrible and intolerable?


Julie: It might become so intense that it overwhelms
me.

tHeraPist: And if it overwhelms you, what would
happen?

Julie: I could become so distressed that I lose touch
with reality.

tHeraPist: What would it mean if you lost touch with
reality?

Julie: That I would be in a different mind state forever—
I would never come back to reality. That I would
be so crazy that I would have to be carted out of the
movie theater to a mental hospital and locked away
forever.

Overly general self-statements, such as “I feel
terrible—something bad could happen,” are insufficient,
nontherapeutic, and may serve to intensify anxiety
by virtue of their global and nondirective nature.
Instead, detail in thought content, such as “I am afraid
that if I get too anxious while driving, then I’ll lose control
of the wheel and drive off the side of the road and
die,” permits subsequent cognitive restructuring.

Analysis of anxious thought content yields two broad
factors that are labeled as “risk” and “valence.” These
two main types of cognitive errors are described to pa



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

tients. Risk translates to overestimation, or jumping to
conclusions by viewing negative events as being probable
events, when in fact they are unlikely to occur.
The patient is asked to identify overestimations from
the anxiety and panic incidents over the past couple of
weeks: “Can you think of events that you felt sure were
going to happen when you panicked, only to find out
in the end that they did not happen at all?” Usually,
patients can identify such events easily, but with protestations.
For example,

Julie: Well, several times I thought that I really was
going to lose it this time . . . that I would flip out and
never return to reality. It never actually happened,
but it could still happen.

tHeraPist: Why do you think “it” could still happen?

Julie: Part of me feels like I’ve always managed to escape
it just in time, by either removing myself from
the situation or by having my husband help me, or by
holding on long enough for the feeling to pass. But
what if I can’t hold on the next time?

tHeraPist: Knowing what we know about our
thoughts when we are anxious, can you classify any
of the ideas you just expressed, of “just holding on”
or “just escaping in time,” as overestimations?

Julie: I suppose you’re saying that I can hold on or I
can always escape in time.

tHeraPist: More that you feel the need to hold on and
the need to escape because you are overestimating
the likelihood of flipping out and never returning to
reality.

Julie: But it really feels like I will.

tHeraPist: The confusion between what you think
will happen and what actually happens is the very
problem that we are addressing in this session.

The reasons why overestimations persist despite
repeated disconfirmation are explored. Typically, patients
misattribute the absence of danger to external
safety signals or safety behaviors (e.g., “I only made it
because I managed to find help in time,” “If I had not
taken Xanax last week when I panicked in the store, I’m
sure I would have passed out,” or “I wouldn’t have made
it if I hadn’t pulled off the road in time”), or to “luck,”
instead of realizing the inaccuracy of the original prediction.
Similarly, patients may assume that the only
reason they are still alive, sane, and safe is because the
“big one” has not happened. In this case, patients err by

assuming that intensity of panic attacks increases the
risk of catastrophic outcomes.

The method for countering overestimation errors
is to question the evidence for probability judgments.
The general format is to treat thoughts as hypotheses
or guesses rather than as facts, and to examine the evidence
and generate alternative, more realistic predictions.
This is best done by the therapist using a Socratic
style, so that patients learn the skill of examining the
content of their statements and arrive at alternative
statements or predictions after they have considered all
of the evidence. Questioning of the logic (e.g., “How
does a racing heart lead to heart attack?”), or the bases
from which judgments are made (e.g., misinformation
from others, unusual sensations) is useful in this regard.
Continuing with the previous example from Julie,
the questioning took the following course:

tHeraPist: One of the specific thoughts you have identified
is that you will flip out and never return to reality.
What specifically leads you to think that that is
likely to happen?

Julie: Well, I guess it really feels like that.

tHeraPist: Describe the feelings?

Julie: Well, I feel spacey and unreal, like things around
me are different and that I’m not connected.

tHeraPist: And why do you think those feelings mean
that you have actually lost touch with reality?
Julie: I don’t know—it feels as if I have.

tHeraPist: So, let’s examine that assumption. What is
your behavior like when you feel unreal? For example,
do you respond if someone asks you a question
during those episodes?

Julie: Well, I respond to you even though I feel that
way sometimes in here.

tHeraPist: OK, and can you walk or write or drive
when you feel that way?
Julie: Yes, but it feels different.

tHeraPist: But you do perform those functions despite
feeling detached. So, what does that tell you?
Julie: Well, maybe I haven’t lost complete touch with
reality. But what if I do?

tHeraPist: How many times have you felt detached?

Julie: Hundreds and hundreds of times.

tHeraPist: And how many times have you lost touch
with reality permanently?


Panic Disorder and Agoraphobia

Julie: Never. But what if the feelings don’t go away?
Maybe I’ll lose it then?

tHeraPist: So what else tells you that this is a possibility?


Julie: Well, what about my second cousin? He lost it
when he was about 25, and now he’s just a mess. He
can hardly function at all, and he is constantly in
and out of psychiatric hospitals. They have him on a
bunch of heavy-duty drugs. I’ll never forget the time
I saw him totally out of it. He was talking to himself
in jibberish.

tHeraPist: So, do you make a connection between
him and yourself?

Julie: Yes.

tHeraPist: What are the similarities between the two
of you?

Julie: There are none really. It’s just that he is what I
think I will become.

tHeraPist: Did he ever feel the way you feel now?

Julie: I don’t know.

tHeraPist: And if another one of your cousins had
severe back problems, would you be concerned that
you would end up with severe back problems?

Julie: No.

tHeraPist: Why not?

Julie: Because it never crosses my mind. It is not

something that I worry about.

tHeraPist: So, it sounds like you think you will end
up like your cousin because you are afraid of ending

up like him.

Julie: I suppose so.

tHeraPist: So, let’s look at all of the evidence and
consider some alternatives. You have felt unreal hundreds
of times, and you’ve never lost touch with reality
because you’ve continued to function in the midst
of those feelings, and they have never lasted. You
are afraid of becoming like your cousin, but there
are no data to show that you and he have the same
problem. In fact, the data suggest otherwise because
you function and he does not. So what is the realistic
probability that you will lose touch with reality
permanently? Use a scale of 0 to 100, where 0 = No
chance at all and 100 = Definitely will happen.

Julie: Well, maybe it is lower than I thought. Maybe
20%.

tHeraPist: So that would mean that you have actually
lost touch with reality in a permanent way once
every five times you have felt unreal.

Julie: When it’s put like that, I guess not. Maybe it’s a
very small possibility.
tHeraPist: Yes, so what is an alternative explanation?


Julie: Perhaps the feelings of unreality are caused by
feeling anxious or overbreathing, and having those
feelings does not mean that I am actually losing
touch with reality, and that I am not like my cousin
at all.

For homework, in addition to continuation of selfmonitoring
and practice of diaphragmatic breathing,
Julie was asked to identify her anxious thoughts in relation
to every item on her agoraphobia hierarchy, and
to use the in-session steps of examining the evidence
and generating alternative evidence based interpretations
for errors of overestimating the risk. She was to
do the same for every panic attack that occurred over
the next week.

Session 3

The goals of this session are to develop breathing retraining
and to continue active cognitive restructuring.
The therapist reviews the patient’s week of diaphragmatic
breathing practice. Julie was disappointed with
her attempts to practice.

Julie: I just didn’t seem to be able to do it the right
way. Sometimes I would start off OK and then the
more I tried, the more it felt like I was running out of
air, and I’d have to take a big gulp between breaths.
At other times, I felt dizzy and the unreal feelings
would start, at which point I would stop and do “busy
work” to keep my mind occupied.

tHeraPist: It sounds like quite a few things were going
on. First of all, remember that this is a skill, just like
learning to ride a bike, and you cannot expect it to
be easy from the get-go. Second, it sounds like you
experienced some uncomfortable physical symptoms
that worried you. You said it felt like you were
running out of air. Based on what we talked about
last week, what do you think might have caused that
feeling?

Julie: Well, maybe I wasn’t getting enough air into my


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

lungs because it’s really hard for me to use my diaphragm
muscle. I felt like I was suffocating myself.

tHeraPist: Possibly it’s just a matter of learning to use
the diaphragm muscle, but were you really suffocating
or was it an interpretation that you might be suffocating?


Julie: I don’t know. I’ve had the feeling of suffocating
before, especially when I’m trapped in a crowded
room.

tHeraPist: So, how do you know you were suffocating?


Julie: I don’t know. It just felt that way.

tHeraPist: So, let’s put the evidence together. You’ve
had the feelings before and never suffocated. As we
discussed last time, anxiety can sometimes create a
sensation of shortness of breath even though you are
getting plenty of air. Can you think of an alternative
explanation?

Julie: Well, maybe I wasn’t suffocating. Maybe it just
felt like that.

Julie’s complaints represent typical concerns that
should be addressed. The next step is to slow the rate of
breathing until the patient can comfortably span a full
inhalation and exhalation cycle of 6 seconds. Again, the
therapist models slowed breathing, then provides corrective
feedback on practice in the session. The patient
is instructed to continue to practice slow breathing in
“safe” or relaxing environments, and is discouraged
from applying slow breathing when anxious or panicking,
until fully skilled in its application.

Also, cognitive restructuring is continued by addressing
the second cognitive error, which involves
viewing an event as “dangerous,” “insufferable,” or
“catastrophic.” Typical examples of catastrophic errors
are “If I faint, people will think that I’m weak, and that
would be unbearable” or “Panic attacks are the worst
thing I can imagine,” and “The whole evening is ruined
if I start to feel anxious.” “Decatastrophizing” means to
face the worst, to realize that the occurrences are not as
“catastrophic” as stated, and to think about actual ways
to cope with negative events rather than how “bad”
they are. A key principle underlying decatastrophizing
is that events can be endured even though they are uncomfortable.
Recognition of the time-limited nature of
discomfort contributes to the development of a sense
of being able to cope. The critical distinction here is
that although patients might prefer that these events not

occur, they can tolerate the discomfort, if necessary.
Thus, for the person who states that negative judgments
from others are unbearable, it is important to discuss
what he or she would do to cope should someone else
make a direct negative judgment. Similarly, for the person
who states that the physical symptoms of panic are
intolerably embarrassing, the following type of questioning
is helpful:

Julie: I am really worried that I might lose control and
do something crazy, like yell and scream.

tHeraPist: Let’s face the worst and find out what is so
bad about it. What would be so horrible about yelling
and screaming?

Julie: I could never live it down.

tHeraPist: Well, let’s think it through. What are the
various things you could do in the situation? You
have just yelled and screamed—now what?

Julie: Well, I guess the yelling and screaming would
eventually stop.

tHeraPist: That’s right—at the very least you would
eventually exhaust yourself. What else?

Julie: Well, maybe I would explain to the people
around me that I was having a really bad day but that
I would be OK. In other words, reassure them.

tHeraPist: Good. What else?

Julie: Maybe I would just get away—find someplace
to calm down and reassure myself that the worst is
over.

tHeraPist: Good.

Julie: But what if the police came and took me away,
locked me up in a mental ward?

tHeraPist: Again, let’s face the worst. What if the police
did come when you were yelling and screaming,
and what if the police did take you away? As scary
as that may sound to you, let’s consider what actually
would happen.

Julie: I have this image of myself not being able to tell
them what is really going on—that I am so out of it
I don’t have the ability to let them know I am just
anxious.

tHeraPist: If you were so distraught that you could
not clearly communicate, how long would that last?

Julie: You’re right. I would eventually exhaust myself
and then I could speak more clearly. But what if they
didn’t believe me?


Panic Disorder and Agoraphobia

tHeraPist: What if they did not believe you at first?
How long would it take before they would realize
that you were not crazy?

Julie: I guess that after a while they would see that I
was OK, and maybe I could call a friend or my doctor
to explain what was going on.

The homework for this session, in addition to continued
self-monitoring, is to practice slow and diaphragmatic
breathing in relaxing environments, and to identify
errors of catastrophizing in relation to each item
on the agoraphobia hierarchy, followed by practice of
decatastrophizing and generation of ways to cope. In
addition, Julie was to use the skill of decatastrophizing
for panic attacks that occurred over the following week.

Session 4

The main goal of this session is to use breathing retraining
skills as a coping tool, to review cognitive restructuring
skills, and to begin in vivo exposure to the
first item on the agoraphobia hierarchy.

Now that patients have practiced slow and diaphragmatic
breathing sufficiently in relaxing environments,
they are ready to use these methods in distracting environments
and in anxious situations. Patients are encouraged
to use breathing skills as a coping technique
as they face fear, anxiety, and anxiety-provoking situations.
Some patients use breathing skills as a safety
signal or a safety behavior; in other words, they believe
that they will be at risk for some mental, physical, or
social calamity if they do not breathe correctly. This
issue came up with Julie:

Julie: When I panicked during the week, I tried to use
the breathing. It didn’t work. It made me feel worse.

tHeraPist: It sounds as if you might have attempted to
use the breathing exercise as a desperate attempt to
control the feelings you were experiencing.

Julie: Yes, that’s right.
tHeraPist: What did you think would have happened
if you had not been able to control the feelings?
Julie: I was really worried that I might not be able to
handle the feelings.
tHeraPist: And if you weren’t able to handle the feelings,
what would happen?
Julie: It just feels like I will lose it, permanently.

tHeraPist: So this is one of those thoughts that we
were talking about last time. What does your evidence
tell you about the likelihood of losing touch
with reality permanently?

Julie: So you mean even if I don’t control my breathing,
then I will be OK?

tHeraPist: Well, you had not lost touch with reality

permanently before you learned the breathing exer


cise, so what does that tell you?

Julie: OK, I get it.
tHeraPist: The breathing exercise is best thought of as

a tool to help you face whatever is provoking anxiety.

So, as you face situations and your anxiety increases,

use the breathing exercise to help you to face rather

than run away from anxiety.

Patients who consistently use the breathing skills as
a safety behavior might be discouraged from using the
breathing skills because they learn that what they are
most worried about either does not happen or it can be
managed without using the breathing skills.

In terms of the cognitive restructuring, therapists
give corrective feedback to patients on the methods
of questioning the evidence to generate realistic probabilities,
facing the worst, and generating ways to cope
with each item on the agoraphobia hierarchy and any
panic attacks that occurred over the past week. Particular
“corrective” feedback is given when patients lack
specificity in their cognitive restructuring (e.g., patients
who record that they are most worried about panicking
should be encouraged to detail what it is about panicking
that worries them) or rely on blanket reassurance
(e.g., patients who record that “Everything will be
OK” as their evidence and/or ways of coping should be
encouraged to list the evidence and/or generate actual
coping steps).

Next, attention is given to how to practice the first
item on the agoraphobia hierarchy. If appropriate, reasons
why previous attempts at in vivo exposure may
have failed are reviewed. Typical reasons for patients’
past failures at in vivo exposure include attempts that
are too haphazard and/or brief, or spaced too far apart,
and attempts conducted without a sense of mastery, or
while maintaining beliefs that catastrophe is very possible.
Julie had tried to face agoraphobic situations in
the past, but each time she had escaped, feeling overwhelmed
by panic and terrified of losing touch with
reality permanently. The therapist helped Julie realize


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

how to approach the agoraphobic situations differently
to benefit from the exposure. Julie’s typical safety signals
were the presence of her husband, or at least knowing
his whereabouts, and Klonopin (which she carried
but rarely used). The therapist discussed the importance
of eventual weaning from those safety signals.

As mentioned earlier, the goal of exposure therapy
is not immediate reduction in fear and anxiety; rather,
the goal is for the patient to learn something new as
a result of exposure. Clarification of what patients are
most worried about as they face their feared situations
and the conditions that best help them to learn that what
worries them most never or rarely happens, and/or that
they can cope with the situation and tolerate anxiety,
is essential for effective exposure. If a patient is most
worried that fear and anxiety will remain elevated for
the duration of the practice, then corrective learning
involves toleration of sustained anxiety. For Julie, the
first situation on her hierarchy was to drive home from
work, alone. She stated that what most worried her in
that situation was that she would panic and lose touch
with reality, and as a result, lose control of the car and
die in an accident. She also stated that to drive at dusk
was the condition under which she was most convinced
of these eventualities. Thus, the task that the therapist
considered most effective in teaching Julie that she
would not lose touch with reality, or that she could cope
with the sensations of unreality and panic, was to drive
home from work at dusk.

Delineate the exposure task as concretely as possible,
so that patients clearly understand exactly what
the practice entails (e.g., “Walk around inside of mall
for 10 minutes by myself”). Importantly, the practice
should not be ended because of anxiety (e.g., “Continue
driving on the freeway until I feel anxious”) because
the exposure practice would then reinforce avoidance
of anxiety.

Julie was reminded to use her coping skills should
she panic as she practiced the task; that is, in moments
of fear, patients are encouraged to use their breathing
and thinking skills to complete the assigned task; the
coping skills are not intended as means to reduce fear
and anxiety, but to tolerate it. Acceptance and nonjudgmental
observation of physical sensations and thoughts
can be another strategy to use in the midst of exposure
therapy.

Patients are encouraged to maintain a regular schedule
of repeated in vivo exposure practices at least three
times per week, and to conduct these practices regardless
of internal (e.g., having a “bad day,” feeling ill) or

external (e.g., inclement weather, busy schedules) factors
that may prompt postponement of practices. Julie
expressed some concerns about being able to practice at
least three times over the following week:

Julie: I don’t know if I can practice three times because
more days than not I feel pretty worn down;
maybe I can practice on just Monday and Tuesday
because they are the days I typically feel better.

tHeraPist: What is it you are worried about happening
if you practice on a day when you already feel
worn down?

Julie: I feel more fragile on those days.

tHeraPist: And if you feel more fragile, what might
happen?

Julie: I just don’t think I could do it. It would be too
hard. I might really freak out and lose touch with
reality for ever.

tHeraPist: OK, so let’s think about that thought. What
does your experience tell you? How many times have
you permanently lost touch with reality, including
days when you were worn down?

Julie: Well, never.

tHeraPist: So, what does that tell you?

Julie: OK, but it still feels difficult to drive on those
days.

tHeraPist: How about you start with Monday or Tuesday,
but quickly move to the other days of the week
when you are feeling worn down, so that you get a
really good opportunity to learn whether you permanently
lose touch with reality or not?

Julie’s homework for this session involves continued
self-monitoring, continued use of cognitive restructuring
and breathing retraining in the event of elevated
anxiety or panic, and practicing the first item on the
agoraphobia hierarchy at least three times, with at least
one of those times being without her husband Larry.

Session 5

The goals of this session are to review the practice of
in vivo exposure, to design another exposure task to be
practiced over the next week, and to begin interoceptive
exposure. Note that in vivo and interoceptive exposure
can be done simultaneously or sequentially. For Julie,
in vivo exposure was begun in Session 4, whereas in



Panic Disorder and Agoraphobia

teroceptive exposure was begun in this session, but they
could easily have been done in the opposite order.

It is essential to review the week’s practice of in vivo
exposure. An objective evaluation of performance is
considered necessary to offset subjective and damaging
self-evaluations. As demonstrated in experimental
literature on learning and conditioning, appraisals of
aversive events after they have occurred can influence
anxiety about future encounters with the same types
of aversive events. Any practice that is terminated prematurely
is to be reviewed carefully for contributing
factors that can then be incorporated into subsequent
trials of in vivo exposure. Recognition of the precipitant
to escape is very important because the urge to escape
is usually based on the prediction that continued
endurance would result in some kind of danger. For
example, patients may predict that the sensations will
become intense and lead to an out-of-control reaction.
This prediction can be discussed in terms of jumping
to conclusions and blowing things out of proportion.
At the same time, escape itself need not be viewed
catastrophically (i.e., as embarrassing, or as a sign of
failure). In addition, therapists reinforce the use of
breathing and cognitive skills (or acceptance skills) to
help patients remain in the situation until the specified
duration or task has been completed, despite uncomfortable
sensations.

Again, it is important for patients to recognize that
the goal is repeatedly to face situations despite anxiety,
not to achieve a total absence of anxiety. Toleration of
fear rather than immediate fear reduction is the goal
for each exposure practice; this approach leads to an
eventual fear reduction over time. Anxiety that does
not decline over repeated days of in vivo exposure may
result from too much emphasis on immediate fear and
anxiety reduction; that is, trying too hard or wishing
too much for anxiety to decline typically maintains
anxiety.

Julie had success with her first in vivo exposure practice;
she managed to drive home from work at dusk,
alone, four different times. She noted that the first time
was easier than she had expected; the second was harder,
and the one time she pulled off to the side of the
road. The therapist helped Julie identify the thoughts
and sensations that led her to “escape” from the situation:
the sensations of unreality and fears of losing
touch with reality. Julie had waited for a few minutes,
then continued driving home—an action that was
highly reinforced by the therapist. The third and fourth
times were easier.

Julie’s husband, Larry, attended Session 5, so that he
could learn how to help Julie overcome her panic and
agoraphobia. He was supportive and eager to help in
any way possible, expressing frustration at having had
no idea how to help in the past.

There are general principles for involvement of significant
others in treatment. First, a treatment conceptualization
is provided to the significant other to reduce
his or her frustration and/or negative attributions about
the patient’s emotional functioning (e.g., “Oh, she’s just
making it up. There’s nothing really wrong with her”
or “He has been like this since before we were married,
and he’ll never change”). The way in which the
agoraphobic problem has disrupted daily routines and
distribution of home responsibilities is explored and
discussed also. Examples might include social activities,
leisure activities, and household chores. The therapist
explains that family activities may be structured
around the agoraphobic fear and avoidance to help the
patient function without intense anxiety. At the same
time, reassignment of the patient’s tasks to the significant
other may actually reinforce the agoraphobic pattern
of behavior. Consequently, the importance of complying
with in vivo exposure homework instructions,
even though the patient may experience some distress
initially, is emphasized.

The significant other is encouraged to become an active
participant by providing his or her perception of
the patient’s behavior and fearfulness, and the impact
on the home environment. Sometimes the significant
other provides information of which the patient is not
fully aware, or did not report, particularly in relation to
how the patient’s behavior affects his or her own daily
functioning. Larry, for example, described how he felt
restricted at home in the evenings; whereas, before, he
occasionally played basketball with his friends at the
local gym, he now stays at home because he feels guilty
if he leaves Julie alone.

The next step is to describe the role of the significant
other regarding in vivo exposure tasks. The significant
other is viewed as a coach, and the couple is
encouraged to approach the tasks as a problem-solving
team. This includes deciding exactly where and when
to practice in vivo exposure. In preparation for practices,
the patient identifies his or her misappraisals
about the task and generates cognitive alternatives. The
significant other is encouraged to help the patient question
his or her own “anxious” thoughts. Role plays of
this type of questioning of the patient by the significant
other may be conducted in the session, so that the


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

therapist can provide corrective feedback to each partner.
Throughout in vivo exposure, the significant other
reminds the patient to apply coping skills, whether it
be cognitive challenges, breathing skills, or acceptance
skills. Because the significant other is usually a safety
signal, tasks are less anxiety provoking. However, the
patient must be weaned from the safety signal eventually.
Therefore, initial attempts at facing agoraphobic
situations are conducted with the significant other, and
later trials are conducted alone. Weaning from the significant
other may be graduated, as in the case of Julie

(1) driving first with Larry in the car, (2) with him in a
car behind, (3) meeting him at a destination point, and
(4) driving alone.
Very important to the success of this collaboration is
style of communication. On the one hand, the significant
other is discouraged from magnifying the experience
of panic and encouraged to help the patient apply
coping statements when anxious. On the other hand,
the significant other is encouraged to be patient given
the fact that progress for the patient may be erratic. The
patient and the significant other are instructed to use a
0- to 10-point rating scale to communicate with each
other about the patient’s current level of anxiety or distress,
as a way of diminishing the awkwardness associated
with discussion of anxiety, especially in public
situations. The patient is warned about the potential
motivation to avoid discussing his or her feelings with
the significant other, due to embarrassment or an attempt
to avoid the anxiety for fear that such discussion
and concentration on anxiety may intensify his or her
distress level. Avoidance of feelings is discouraged because
distraction is viewed as less beneficial in the long
term than objectively facing whatever is distressing and
learning that predicted catastrophes do not occur. The
patient is reassured that the initial discomfort and embarrassment
will most likely diminish as the partners
become more familiar with discussing anxiety levels
and their management. Furthermore, the patient’s
concerns about the significant other being insensitive
or too pushy are addressed. For example, a significant
other may presume to know the patient’s level of anxiety
and anxious thoughts without confirmation from
the patient, or the significant other may become angry
at the patient for avoiding or escaping from situations,
or being fearful. All of these issues are described as relatively
common and understandable patterns of communication
that are nevertheless in need of correction.
In-session role playing of more adaptive communication
styles during episodes of heightened anxiety is a

useful learning technique. On occasion, more specific
communications training may be beneficial, especially
if the partners frequently argue in their attempts to generate
items or methods for conducting in vivo exposure.

The next in vivo exposure task for Julie was to sit in
a crowded movie theater, gradually moving away from
the aisle, toward the middle of the row, because that
was the condition in which she was most concerned
that she would lose control and draw attention to herself.
Julie and Larry rehearsed their approach to the in
vivo exposure task in session, while the therapist provided
corrective feedback using the principles of communication
and coping described earlier. They were
instructed to practice this task at least three times over
the next week. On at least one occasion, Julie was to
practice the task alone.

Next, interoceptive exposure was introduced. As with
in vivo exposure, through repeated exposures to feared
sensations, patients learn that they are not harmed by
the sensations, and they achieve increased confidence
in their ability to tolerate symptoms of anxiety. The procedure
begins with assessment of the patient’s response
to a series of standardized exercises. The therapist models
each exercise first. Then, after the patient has completed
the exercise, the therapist records the sensations,
anxiety level (0 to 10), sensation intensity (0 to 10), and
similarity to naturally occurring panic sensations (0 to
10). The exercises include shaking the head from side
to side for 30 seconds; placing the head between the
legs for 30 seconds and lifting the head to an upright
position quickly; running in place or using steps for l
minute; holding one’s breath for as long as possible;
complete body muscle tension for 1 minute or holding
a push-up position for as long as possible; spinning
in a swivel chair for 1 minute; hyperventilating for 1
minute; breathing through a narrow straw (with closed
nasal passages) or breathing as slowly as possible for 2
minutes; and staring at a spot on the wall or at one’s mirror
image for 90 seconds. If none of these exercises produce
sensations at least moderately similar to those that
occur naturally, other, individually tailored exercises
are generated. For example, tightness around the chest
may be induced by a deep breath before hyperventilating;
heat may be induced by wearing heavy clothing in
a heated room; choking sensations may be induced by a
tongue depressor, a high-collared sweater, or a necktie;
and startle may be induced by an abrupt, loud noise in
the midst of relaxation. For Julie, the sensations produces
by hyperventilating, spinning, and staring at a spot on
the wall were most anxiety provoking.


Panic Disorder and Agoraphobia

Patients who report little or no fear because they feel
safe in the presence of the therapist are asked to attempt
each exercise alone, either at home or with the
therapist out of the office. At the same time, discussing
the influence of perceived safety as a moderating factor
in the amount of fear experienced reinforces the value
of cognitive restructuring. For a minority of patients,
the known cause and course of the sensations override
the fear response; that is, because the sensations are
predictably related to a clear cause (the interoceptive
exercise), and because the sensations can be relatively
easily controlled by simply terminating the interoceptive
exercise, fear is minimal. Under these conditions,
discussion can productively center on the misassumptions
that render naturally occurring sensations more
frightening than the ones produced by the interoceptive
exercises. Typically, these misassumptions are that
naturally occurring sensations are unpredictable; that
unpredictable sensations are more harmful; and that if
naturally occurring sensations are not controlled, then
they pose a potential threat. The majority of patients
fear at least several of the interoceptive exercises despite
knowing the cause of the sensations and their controllability.


Interoceptive exercises rated as producing at least
somewhat similar sensations to naturally occurring
panic (at least 3 on the 0- to 10-point scale) are selected
for repeated exposure. A graduated approach is used
for interoceptive exposure, beginning with the lowest
item on the hierarchy established in Session 4. For
each trial of exposure, the patient is asked to begin the
induction, to indicate when the sensations are first experienced
(e.g., by raising a hand), and to continue the
induction for at least 30 seconds longer to permit corrective
learning. After terminating the induction, anxiety
is rated, and the patient is given time to apply cognitive
and breathing coping skills. Finally, the therapist
reviews the induction experience and the application
of management strategies with the patient. During this
review, the therapist emphasizes the importance of experiencing
the sensations fully during the induction, of
concentrating objectively on the sensations versus distracting
from them, and the importance of identifying
specific cognitions and challenging them by considering
all of the evidence. In addition, the therapist asks
key questions to help the patient realize his or her safety
(e.g., “What would have happened if you had continued
spinning for another 60 seconds?”), and to generalize
to naturally occurring experiences (e.g., “How is this
different from when you feel dizzy at work?”). In other

words, cognitive restructuring extends the cognitive reprocessing
already taking place implicitly as a result of
repeated interoceptive exposure.

Specific, previously unrecognized cognitions sometimes
become apparent during repeated exposure. For
example, when Julie began to conduct repeated exposures
to hyperventilation and spinning, she became
more aware of her implicit assumption that sensations
of spaciness or lightheadedness would lead her to lose
control of her limbs. This related to her concern about
causing an accident when driving. During repeated hyperventilation
exercises, and with prompting of “what
ifs” from the therapist, Julie discovered her fear of not
being able to move her arms or legs. The therapist then
behaviorally challenged this assumption by having
Julie overbreathe for longer periods of time, followed
immediately by walking, picking up objects, and so on.

Homework practice is very important because safety
signals present in the clinic setting or that derive from
the therapist per se may, again, prevent generalizability
to the natural setting. Patients are instructed to practice
the interoceptive items conducted in session on a daily
basis, three times each day. Julie was to practice hyperventilation
over the following week. She expressed
some concern at doing the exercises alone, so the
therapist helped Julie to use her cognitive restructuring
skills in relation to being alone. In addition, more
graduation of homework was suggested, so that Julie
would practice hyperventilating when her husband was
at home the first couple of days, then when he was not
at home the rest of the time.

Sessions 6 and 7

The primary goal of these sessions is to review the past
week of in vivo exposure practices, design new exposures,
review between-session practices of interoceptive
exposure, conduct repeated interoceptive exposure
in session, and assign those as homework for the next
week.

The in vivo exposure is reviewed, as in the previous
session. In this case, Julie and Larry had done well with
the movie theater practice. Julie even practiced going to
the movies on her own. On that occasion she reported
higher anxiety than when she was with Larry for fear
of having to get up and leave the theater and worries
about bothering others in the audience. The therapist
helped Julie to identify what worry led her to think
about leaving in the first place; in other words, what did
she think might happen if she could not leave? When


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

Julie indicated that she had thoughts of losing control
and causing a scene, she was then prompted to apply
her cognitive restructuring skills of evidence-based
analyses and decatastrophizing. She was ready to move
to the next items on her hierarchy: to spend 2 hours
alone at home during the day and to stay alone at home
as day turned to night. As with every in vivo exposure
task, Julie identified what she most feared happening in
those situations, and the best practice conditions under
which to learn that either those eventualities would not
happen and/or she could cope with the worst.

The past week of interoceptive exposure practice
is reviewed in session with a mind toward avoidance:
either overt failure to practice or covert avoidance by
minimizing the intensity or duration of the sensations
induced, or by limiting practice to the presence of a
safety signal (e.g., a significant other) or times when
background anxiety is minimal. Reasons for avoidance
may include continued misinterpretation of the dangers
of bodily sensations (i.e., “I don’t want to hyperventilate
because I’m afraid that I won’t be able to stop
overbreathing and no one will be there to help me”) or
the belief that anxiety will not reduce with repetition
of the task.

For the first week, Julie practiced interoceptive exposure
exercises about half of the days between sessions.
The therapist used a “downward arrow” method
to explore Julie’s reasons for not practicing every day.

Julie: I tried hyperventilating on my own. However, I

wasn’t very successful because I felt too scared and

I stopped it as soon as I noticed the strange feelings.

tHeraPist: What did you think would happen if the
sensations became more intense?

Julie: I thought the feelings would get worse and worse

and worse, and just overwhelm me. I didn’t want to

have that feeling of panic again.

tHeraPist: If you did become overwhelmed, then

what would happen to you?
Julie: Then I’d feel really terrible.

tHeraPist: And if you felt really terrible?

Julie: Well, nothing. I’d just feel terrible.

tHeraPist: The word “terrible” carries a lot of mean


ing. Let’s see if we can pin down your anxious

thoughts that make the feelings so terrible.

Julie: I just can’t tolerate the feeling.

tHeraPist: What tells you that you cannot tolerate it?
How do you know you can’t tolerate it?

And the discussion continued, so that Julie realized
what was most important for her to learn by the
repeated hyperventilation: She could tolerate the sensations
and anxiety. However, after the subsequent week
of repeated practice, Julie remained cautious for fear
that the exercises would cause her to revert to her state
of several weeks earlier; that is, she was concerned that
the inductions would leave her in a persistent symptomatic
state. Furthermore, she was particularly reluctant
to practice interoceptive exposure at the end of the day,
when she was more likely to feel unreal, or on a day
when an important social event was scheduled. Again,
these avoidance patterns were related to fears that the
symptoms would become too intense or result in some
type of mental or social catastrophe. These types of
avoidance patterns are addressed in the following vignette:


tHeraPist: When did you practice deliberately spinning
and hyperventilating?

Julie: Usually in the mornings. One day I left it until
the end of the day, and that turned out to be a bad
idea. I felt terrible.

tHeraPist: Let’s think about that a bit more. What
made it terrible when you practiced at the end of the
day?

Julie: Well, I was already feeling pretty unreal—I usually
do around that time of the day. So I was much
more anxious about the symptoms.

tHeraPist: Being more anxious implies that you
thought the symptoms were more harmful. Is that
what happened on the day that you practiced interoceptive
exposure when you were already feeling unreal?


Julie: Yes, I felt that because I was already feeling unreal,
I was on the edge, and that I might push myself
over the edge if I tried to increase the feelings of unreality.


tHeraPist: What do you mean by “push myself over
the edge”?
Julie: That I would make the feelings so intense that I
really would lose it—go crazy.

tHeraPist: So there is one of those hypotheses: to feel
more intense unreality means to be closer to going
crazy. Let’s examine the evidence. Is it necessarily
the case that more intense unreality means you are
closer to craziness?


Panic Disorder and Agoraphobia

In sessions, the therapist continued practice of interoceptive
exposure with the next item on Julie’s hierarchy,
which was to stare at a spot on the wall and to
spin around.

The homework from this session is to continue selfmonitoring,
in vivo exposure to an item from the agoraphobia
hierarchy at least three times, and daily practice
of interoceptive exposure.

Sessions 8 and 9

The primary goals of these sessions are to continue in
vivo exposure, as described in the prior sessions, and to
extend interoceptive exposure to natural activities. Julie
had practiced staying at home for 2 hours alone during
the day and as daylight turned to dusk, with good
results. In particular, despite experiencing a couple of
panic attacks during these in vivo exposure practices,
she continued with the assigned practice. This was
critical for Julie because it allowed her to learn that she
could survive the feeling of panic; it was the first time
she had remained in a situation despite panicking.

In reviewing the week’s practice of interoceptive
exposure, it became apparent that Julie was separating
the practices from real-life experiences of bodily sensations
in a way that would limit generalization. This was
addressed as follows:

Julie: After spinning and hyperventilating several
times, I really do feel much less anxious. I was terrified
at the start, but now I am only mildly anxious, if
at all. But this is different than what happens to me
when I’m on the freeway or at home.

tHeraPist: How is it different?

Julie: I don’t know when the feelings of dizziness and
unreality are going to hit.

tHeraPist: From our previous discussions, let’s think
of potential reasons why you might feel dizzy or unreal
at a particular time?

Julie: I know. I have to keep remembering that it could
be my breathing, or just feeling anxious, or tired, or
a bunch of different things.

tHeraPist: OK. And why is it so important to know
when those feelings will occur?
Julie: Because I don’t want them to be there at all.

tHeraPist: And why not . . . what are you afraid of?

Julie: I guess it’s the same old thing . . . that I’ll lose
it somehow?

tHeraPist: So let’s go back to the cognitive restructuring
that you have been doing. What specifically are
you afraid of? How likely is it to happen? What are
the alternatives?

Julie: I understand.
tHeraPist: So, now you see that whether the sensa


tions of dizziness or unreality are produced by anxi


ety, overbreathing, diet, or the exercises we do here,

they’re all the same—they are just uncomfortable

physical sensations. The only reason they perturb

you more when you are driving or at home is be


cause of the meaning you still give to them in those

situations.

“Naturalistic” interoceptive exposure refers to exposure
to daily tasks or activities that have been avoided
or endured with dread because of the associated sensations.
Typical examples include aerobic exercise or
vigorous physical activity, running up flights of stairs,
eating foods that create a sensation of fullness or are associated
with sensations of choking, saunas or steamy
showers, driving with the windows rolled up and the
heater on, caffeine consumption, and so on. (Of course,
these exercises may be modified in the event of actual
medical complications, such as asthma or high blood
pressure.) From a list of typically feared activities and
generation of items specific to the individual’s own experience,
a hierarchy is established. Each item is ranked
in terms of anxiety ratings (0–10). Julie’s hierarchy was
as follows: looking out through venetian blinds (anxiety
= 3); watching One Flew over the Cuckoo’s Nest
(anxiety = 4); playing tennis (anxiety = 4); scanning
labels on a supermarket shelf (anxiety = 5); concentrating
on needlework for an hour (anxiety = 6); driving
with windows closed and heater on (anxiety = 7); a
nightclub with strobe lights (anxiety = 8); and rides at
Disneyland (anxiety = 10).

Like the symptom exercises, the activity exercises
are designed to be systematically graduated and repetitive.
Patients may apply the breathing and cognitive
skills while the activity is ongoing. This is in contrast
to the symptom induction exercises, in which coping
skills are used only after completion of the symptom
exercise, because the activities often are considerably
longer than the symptom induction exercises. Nevertheless,
patients are encouraged to focus on the sensations
and experience them fully throughout the activity,
and not use the coping skills to prevent or remove the
sensations.


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

Patients are instructed to identify maladaptive cognitions
and rehearse cognitive restructuring before beginning
each activity. In-session rehearsal of the cognitive
preparation allows therapists to provide corrective
feedback. Julie did this with her therapist for her first
two naturalistic activities, which were to look at venetian
blinds and to watch One Flew over the Cuckoo’s
Nest. Julie realized that she was most worried about
sensations of unreality and fears of going crazy, although,
as a result of her various exposure exercises
up to this point, she quickly was able to recognize that
such sensations were harmless and that she could tolerate
them, and that such fears were unrealistic based on
the evidence.

As with all exposures, it is important to identify
and remove (gradually, if necessary) safety signals or
protective behaviors, such as portable phones, lucky
charms, walking slowly, standing slowly, and staying
in close proximity to medical facilities. These safety
signals and behaviors reinforce catastrophic misappraisals
about bodily sensations. Julie’s safety behaviors
were identified as checking the time on the clock
(as a reassurance that she was in touch with reality) and
pinching herself (again, to feel reality). She was asked
to practice the two naturalistic interoceptive exposures
at least three times each before the next treatment session,
without the safety behaviors.

Sessions 10 and 11

The primary goals of these sessions are to review the
in vivo and naturalistic exposure exercises over the past
week, and to combine exposure to feared and avoided
agoraphobic situations with deliberate induction of
feared sensations into those situations. As with earlier
interoceptive exposure homework assignments, it is
important to evaluate and correct tendencies to avoid
naturalistic interoceptive exposure tasks, mainly by
considering the underlying misassumptions that lead to
avoidance. Remember also that a form of avoidance is
to rely on safety signals or safety behaviors, so careful
questioning of the way in which the naturalistic exposure
was conducted, and under what conditions, may
help to identify inadvertent reliance on these unnecessary
precautions. Julie reported that she was successful
in looking at the venetian blinds, even though she experienced
sensations of unreality. She had more difficulty
watching One Flew over the Cuckoo’s Nest because it
tapped directly into her worst fears of losing touch with
reality permanently; she tried but terminated the film

early. The second time, she watched it with Larry, who
prompted Julie to remember her cognitive and breathing
skills, and she was able to watch the entire film. She
watched the film one more time on her own. Two new
naturalistic exposure items were selected for the coming
week, with special attention to weaning or removing
safety signals and safety behaviors, and rehearsal of
cognitive restructuring in session. For Julie, these were
playing tennis (something she had avoided for years)
and scanning items on supermarket shelves.

The notion of deliberately inducing feared bodily
symptoms within the context of feared agoraphobic situations
derives from the evidence that compound relationships
between external and internal cues can be the
most potent anxiogenic agent (i.e., deepened extinction,
as reviewed in earlier sections); that is, neither just the
situation nor just the bodily sensation triggers distress.
It is the combination of the bodily sensation and the
situation that is most distressing. Thus, effective exposure
targets both types of cues. Otherwise, patients run
the risk of later return of fear. For example, repeated
practice walking through a shopping mall without feeling
dizzy does not adequately prepare patients for occasions
on which they feel dizzy walking through a shopping
mall, and without such preparation, patients may
be likely to panic and escape should they feel dizzy in
this or similar situations in the future. Wearing heavy
clothing in a restaurant helps patients to learn to be less
afraid of not only the restaurant but also of feeling hot
in a restaurant. Other examples include drinking coffee
before any of the agoraphobic tasks, turning off the
air-conditioning or turning on the heater while driving,
breathing very slowly in a crowded area, and so on.

Patients choose an item from their hierarchy of agoraphobia
situations, either one already completed or a
new item, and also choose which symptom to induce
and ways of inducing that symptom in that situation.
Julie’s task was to drink coffee as she went to a movie.
She expressed the following concerns:

Julie: Do you really think I am ready to drink coffee
and go to the movie?

tHeraPist: What worries you about the combination
of coffee and the movie theater?

Julie: Well, I’ve practiced in the movie theaters a lot,

so that feels pretty good, but the coffee is going to

make me feel very anxious.

tHeraPist: And if you feel very anxious in the movie
theater, then what?


Panic Disorder and Agoraphobia

Julie: Then, I don’t know what. Maybe I will get those
old feelings again, like I have to get out.

tHeraPist: Based on everything you have learned,
how can you manage those feelings?

Julie: Well, I guess my number one rule is never to
leave a situation because I am feeling anxious. I will
stick it out, no matter what.

tHeraPist: That sounds great. It means you are accepting
the anxiety and taking the opportunity to
learn that you can tolerate it. What else?

Julie: I can ask myself what is the worst that can happen.
I know I am not going to die or go crazy. I will
probably feel my heart rate going pretty fast because
of the coffee.

tHeraPist: And if your heart rate goes fast, what does
that mean?
Julie: I guess it just means that my heart rate will go
fast.

tHeraPist: This will be a really good way for you to
learn that you can tolerate the anxiety and the symptoms
of a racing heart.

The homework for this session is to continue selfmonitoring,
to practice in vivo exposure combined with
interoceptive exposure, and to continue naturalistic interoceptive
exposure.

Session 12

The last treatment session reviews the principles and
skills learned and provides the patient with a template
of coping techniques for potentially high-risk situations
in the future. Julie finished the program after 12 sessions,
by which time she had not panicked in 8 weeks,
rarely experienced dizziness or feelings of unreality,
and was driving further distances. There were some
situations still in need of exposure practices (e.g., driving
very long distances away from home and on the
freeway at dusk). However, Julie and Larry agreed to
continue in vivo exposure practices over the next few
months to consolidate her learning and to continue her
improvement.

coNclusioN

As noted earlier in this chapter, cognitive-behavioral
treatments for panic disorder and agoraphobia are

highly effective and represent one of the success stories
of psychotherapy. Between 80 and 100% of patients
undergoing these treatments will be panic free at the
end of treatment and maintain these gains for up to 2
years. These results reflect substantially more durability
than medication treatments. Furthermore, between
50 and 80% of these patients reach a point of “high end
state,” which means their symptoms and functioning
are within normative realms, and many of the remainder
have only residual symptomatology. Nevertheless,
major difficulties remain.

First, these treatments are not foolproof. As many
as 50% of patients retain substantial symptomatology
despite improvement from baseline, and this is particularly
likely for those with more severe agoraphobia.
Further research must determine how treatments can
be improved or better individualized to alleviate continued
suffering. For example, one of us (D. H. B.) saw
a patient several years ago who had completed an initial
course of treatment but required continued periodic
visits for over 4 years. This patient was essentially improved
for approximately 9 months but found himself
relapsing during a particularly stressful time at work.
A few booster sessions restored his functioning, but he
was back in the office 6 months later with reemerging
symptomatology. This pattern essentially continued for
4 years and was characterized by symptom-free periods
followed by (seemingly) stress-related relapses.
Furthermore, the reemerging panic disorder would
sometimes last from 3 to 6 months before disappearing
again, perhaps with the help of a booster session.

Although this case was somewhat unusual in our experience,
there was no easy explanation for this pattern
of relapses and remissions. The patient, who has a graduate
degree, understood and accepted the treatment
model and fully implemented the treatment program.
There was also no question that he fully comprehended
the nature of anxiety and panic, and the intricacies of
the therapeutic strategies. While in the office, he could
recite chapter and verse on the nature of these emotional
states, as well as the detailed process of his own reaction
while in these states. Nevertheless, away from the
office, the patient found himself repeatedly hoping that
he would not “go over the brink” during a panic attack,
despite verbalizing very clearly the irrationality of this
concept while in the office. In addition, he continued
to attempt to reduce minor physiological symptoms associated
with anxiety and panic, despite a full rational
understanding of the nature of these symptoms (including
the fact that they are the same symptoms he experi



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

enced during a state of excitement, which he enjoyed).
His limited tolerance of these physical sensations was
also puzzling in view of his tremendous capacity to endure
pain.

Any number of factors might account for what
seemed to be “overvalued ideation” or very strongly
held irrational ideas during periods of anxiety, including
the fact that the patient has several relatives who
have repeatedly been hospitalized for emotional disorders
(seemingly mood disorders or schizoaffective
disorder). Nevertheless, the fact remains that we do
not know why this patient did not respond as quickly
as most people. Eventually he made a full recovery,
received several promotions at work, and considered
treatment to be the turning point in his life. But it took
5 years.

Other patients, as noted earlier, seem uninterested
in engaging in treatment, preferring to conceptualize
their problems as chemical imbalances. Still others
have difficulty grasping some of the cognitive strategies,
and further attempts are necessary to make these
treatments more “user-friendly.”

It also may seem that this structured, protocol-driven
treatment is applied in a very standard fashion across
individuals. Nothing could be further from the truth.
The clinical art involved in this, and in all treatments
described in this book, requires a careful adaptation of
these treatment strategies to the individual case. Many
of Julie’s symptoms revolved around feelings of unreality
(derealization and depersonalization). Emphasizing
rational explanations for the production of such feelings,
as well as adapting cognitive and exposure exercises
to maximize these sensations, is an important part
of this treatment program. Although standard interoceptive
provocation exercises seemed sufficient to produce
relevant symptomatology in Julie’s case, we have
had to develop new procedures to deal with people with
more idiosyncratic symptoms and fears, particularly
those involving feelings of unreality or dissociation.
Other innovations in both cognitive and behavioral
procedures will be required by individual therapists as
they apply these procedures.

Although these new treatments seem highly successful
when applied by trained therapists, treatment is not
readily available to individuals with these disorders. In
fact, these treatments, although brief and structured,
are far more difficult to deliver than, for example, pharmacological
treatments (which are also often misapplied).
Furthermore, few people are currently skilled
in the application of these treatments. What seems to

be needed for these and other successful psychosocial
treatments is a new method of disseminating them, so
that they reach the maximum number of patients. Modification
of these treatment protocols into more userfriendly
formats, as well as brief periods of training for
qualified therapists to a point of certification, would be
important steps in successfully delivering these treatments.
This may be difficult to accomplish.

note

1. Specific phobias were not assessed, but by being most circumscribed,
they would be hypothesized to load the least
on negative affectivity.
referenCes

Aaronson, C. J., Shear, M. K., Goetz, R. R., Allen, L. B., Barlow,
D. H., White, K. S., et al. (2008). Predictors and time
course of response among panic disorder patients treated
with cognitive-behavioral therapy. Journal of Clinical
Psychiatry, 69, 418–424.

Allen, L. B., White, K. S., Barlow, D. H., Shear, M. K., Gorman,
J. M., & Woods, S. W. (2010). Cognitive-behavior
therapy (CBT) for panic disorder: Relationship of anxiety
and depression comorbidity with treatment outcome. Journal
of Psychopathology and Behavioral Assessment, 32,
185–192.

Alneas, R., & Torgersen, S. (1990). DSM-III personality
disorders among patients with major depression, anxiety
disorders, and mixed conditions. Journal of Nervous and
Mental Disease, 178, 693–698.

American Psychiatric Association. (1980). Diagnostic and
statistical manual of mental disorders (3rd ed.). Washington,
DC: Author.

American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and
statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.). Arlington,
VA: Author.

Amering, M., Katschnig, H., Berger, P., Windhaber, J.,
Baischer, W., & Dantendorfer, K. (1997). Embarrassment
about the first panic attack predicts agoraphobia in
disorder patients. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 35,
517–521.

Andrews, G., Cuijpers, P., Craske, M. G., McEvoy, P., &
Titov, N. (2010). Computer therapy for the anxiety and
depressive disorders is effective, acceptable and practical
health care: A meta-analysis. PLoS ONE, 5, e13196.

Antony, M. M., Brown, T. A., Craske, M. G., Barlow, D. H.,
Mitchell, W. B., & Meadows, E. A. (1995). Accuracy of
heartbeat perception in panic disorder, social phobia, and
nonanxious subjects. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 9,
355–371.


Panic Disorder and Agoraphobia

Antony, M. M., Ledley, D. R., Liss, A., & Swinson, R. P.
(2006). Responses to symptom induction exercises in
panic disorder. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 44,
85–98.

Antony, M. M., Meadows, E. A., Brown, T. A., & Barlow, D.

H. (1994). Cardiac awareness before and after cognitivebehavioral
treatment for panic disorder. Journal of Anxiety
Disorders, 8, 341–350.
Arch, J. J., Eifert, G. H., Davies, C., Plumb, J. C., Rose, R. D.,
& Craske, M. G. (2012). Randomized trial of cognitive behavioral
therapy versus acceptance and commitment therapy
for the treatment of mixed anxiety disorders. Journal
of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 80, 750–765.

Arnow, B. A., Taylor, C. B., Agras, W. S., & Telch, M. J.
(1985). Enhancing agoraphobia treatment outcome by
changing couple communication patterns. Behavior Therapy,
16, 452–467.

Arrindell, W., & Emmelkamp, P. (1987). Psychological states
and traits in female agoraphobics: A controlled study.
Journal of Psychopathology and Behavioral Assessment,
9, 237–253.

Baldwin, D. S. (1998). Depression and panic: Comorbidity.
European Psychiatry, 13, 65s–70s.

Bandelow, B., Spath, C., Tichaner, G. A., Brooks, A., Hajak,
G., & Ruther, E. (2002). Early traumatic life events, parental
attitudes, family history, and birth risk factors in
patients with panic disorder. Comprehensive Psychiatry,
43, 269–278.

Barlow, D. H. (1988). Anxiety and its disorders: The nature
and treatment of anxiety and panic. New York: Guilford
Press.

Barlow, D. H. (2002). Anxiety and its disorders: The nature
and treatment of anxiety and panic (2nd ed.). New York:
Guilford Press.

Barlow, D. H., Brown, T. A., & Craske, M. G. (1994). Definitions
of panic attacks and panic disorder in the DSM-IV:
Implications for research. Journal of Abnormal Psychology,
103, 553–564.

Barlow, D. H., Cohen, A., Waddell, M., Vermilyea, J., Klosko,
J., Blanchard, E., et al. (1984). Panic and generalized anxiety
disorders: Nature and treatment. Behavior Therapy,
15, 431–449.

Barlow, D. H., & Craske, M. G. (1994). Mastery of your anxiety
and panic (2nd ed.) San Antonio, TX: Harcourt Brace.

Barlow, D. H., & Craske, M. G. (2006). Mastery of your anxiety
and panic: Patient workbook (4th ed.). New York: Oxford
University Press.

Barlow, D. H., Craske, M. G., Cerny, J. A., & Klosko, J. S.
(1989). Behavioral treatment of panic disorder. Behavior
Therapy, 20, 261–282.

Barlow, D. H., Gorman, J. M., Shear, M. K., & Woods, S.

W. (2000). Cognitive-behavioral therapy, imipramine, or
their combination for panic disorder: A randomized controlled
trial. Journal of the American Medical Association,
283(19), 2529–2536.
Barlow, D. H., O’Brien, G. T., & Last, C. G. (1984). Couples
treatment of agoraphobia. Behavior Therapy, 15(1),
41–58.

Barlow, D. H., O’Brien, G. T., Last, C. G., & Holden, A. E.
(1983). Couples treatment of agoraphobia. In K. D. Craig
& R. J. McMahon (Eds.), Advances in clinical behavior
therapy (pp. 99–127). New York: Brunner/Mazel.

Barlow, D. H., Vermilyea, J., Blanchard, E., Vermilyea, B.,
Di Nardo, P., & Cerny, J. (1985). Phenomenon of panic.
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 94, 320–328.

Barsky, A. J., Cleary, P. D., Sarnie, M. K., & Ruskin, J. N.
(1994). Panic disorder, palpitations, and the awareness of
cardiac activity. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease,
182, 63–71.

Basoglu, M., Marks, I. M., Kilic, C., Brewin, C. R., & Swinson,
R. P. (1994). Alprazolam and exposure for panic disorder
with agoraphobia: Attribution of improvement to
medication predicts subsequent relapse. British Journal of
Psychiatry, 164, 652–659.

Beck, J. G., & Shipherd, J. C. (1997). Repeated exposure to
interoceptive cues: Does habituation of fear occur in panic
disorder patients?: A preliminary report. Behaviour Research
and Therapy, 35, 551–557.

Beck, J. G., Shipherd, J. C., & Zebb, B. J. (1997). How does
interoceptive exposure for panic disorder work?: An uncontrolled
case study. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 11,
541–556.

Beck, J. G., Stanley, M. A., Baldwin, L. E., Deagle, E. A., &
Averill, P. M. (1994). Comparison of cognitive therapy and
relaxation training for panic disorder. Journal of Consulting
and Clinical Psychology, 62, 818–826.

Beesdo, K., Knappe, S., & Pine, D. S. (2007). Anxiety and
anxiety disorders in children and adolescents: developmental
issues and implications for DSM-V. Psychiatric
Clinics of North America, 32, 483–524.

Biederman, J., Faraone, S. V., Marrs, A., & Moore, P. (1997).
Panic disorder and agoraphobia in consecutively referred
children and adolescents. Journal of the American Academy
of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 36(12), 214–223.

Bittner, A., Egger, H. L., Erkanli, A., Costello, J., Foley, D. L.,
& Angold, A. (2007). What do childhood anxiety disorders
predict? Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry,
48, 1174–1183.

Black, D. W., Monahan, P., Wesner, R., Gabel, J., & Bowers,

W. (1996). The effect of fluvoxamine, cognitive therapy,
and placebo on abnormal personality traits in 44 patients
with panic disorder. Journal of Personality Disorders, 10,
185–194.
Bland, K., & Hallam, R. (1981). Relationship between response
to graded exposure and marital satisfaction in agoraphobics.
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 19, 335–338.

Block, R. I., Ghoneim, M. M., Fowles, D. C., Kumar, V., &
Pathak, D. (1987). Effects of a subanesthetic concentration
of nitrous oxide on establishment, elicitation and semantic
and phonemic generalization of classically conditioned


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

skin conductance responses. Pharmacological and Biochemical
Behavior, 28, 7–14.

Bohni, M. K., Spindler, H., Arendt, M., Hougaard, E., &
Rosenberg, N. K. (2009). A randomized study of massed
three-week cognitive behavioural therapy schedule for
panic disorder. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 120(3),
187–195.

Bonn, J. A., Harrison, J., & Rees, W. (1971). Lactate-induced
anxiety: Therapeutic application. British Journal of Psychiatry,
119, 468–470.

Bouchard, S., Gauthier, J., Laberge, B., French, D., Pelletier,
M., & Godbout, D. (1996). Exposure versus cognitive restructuring
in the treatment of panic disorder with agoraphobia.
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 34, 213–224.

Bouchard, S., Paquin, B., Payeur, R., Allard, M., Rivard, V.,
Gournier, T., et al. (2004). Delivering cognitive-behavior
therapy for panic disorder with agoraphobia in videoconference
[Special issue: Telemedicine in Canada]. Telemedicine
Journal and E-Health, 10(1), 13–24.

Bouton, M. E. (1993). Context, time and memory retrieval in
the interference paradigms of Pavlovian learning. Psychological
Bulletin, 114, 90–99.

Bouton, M. E., Mineka, S., & Barlow, D. H. (2001). A modern
learning-theory perspective on the etiology of panic disorder.
Psychological Review, 108(1), 4–32.

Bouton, M. E., & Swartzentruber, D. (1991). Sources of relapse
after extinction in Pavlovian conditioning and instrumental
conditioning. Behavioral Neuroscience, 104,
44–55.

Broocks, A., Bandelow, B., Pekrun, G., George, A., Meyer, T.,
Bartmann, U., et al. (1998). Comparison of aerobic exercise,
clomipramine, and placebo in the treatment of panic
disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 155, 603–609.

Brown, T. A., Antony, M. M., & Barlow, D. H. (1995). Diagnostic
comorbidity in panic disorder: Effect on treatment
outcome and course of comorbid diagnoses following
treatment. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,
63, 408–418.

Brown, T. A., & Barlow, D. H. (1995). Long-term outcome in
cognitive-behavioral treatment of panic disorder: Clinical
predictors and alternative strategies for assessment. Journal
of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 63, 754–765.

Brown, T. A., & Barlow, D. H. (in press). Anxiety Disorders
Interview Schedule–5. New York: Oxford University
Press.

Brown, T. A., Campbell, L. A., Lehman, C. L., Grisham, J.
R., & Mancill, R. B. (2001). Current and lifetime comorbidity
of the DSM-IV anxiety and mood disorders in a
large clinical sample. Journal of Abnormal Psychology,
110(4), 585–599.

Brown, T. A., Chorpita, B. F., & Barlow, D. H. (1998). Structural
relationships among dimensions of the DSM-IV
anxiety and mood disorders and dimensions of negative
affect, positive affect, and autonomic arousal. Journal of
Abnormal Psychology, 107(2), 179–192.

Brown, T. A., Di Nardo, P. A., Lehman, C. L., & Campbell,

L. A. (2001). Reliability of DSM-IV anxiety and mood
disorders: Implications for the classification of emotional
disorders. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 110(1), 49–
58.
Brown, T. A., White, K. S., Forsyth, J. P., & Barlow, D. H.
(2004). The structure of perceived emotional control: Psychometric
properties of a revised Anxiety Control Questionnaire.
Behavior Therapy, 35(1), 75–99.

Buglass, P., Clarke, J., Henderson, A., & Presley, A. (1977).
A study of agoraphobic housewives. Psychological Medicine,
7, 73–86.

Butler, A. C., Chapman, J. E., Forman, E. M., & Beck, A.

T. (2006). The empirical status of cognitive-behavioral
therapy: A review of meta-analyses. Clinical Psychology
Review, 26, 17–31.
Campbell-Sills, L., Barlow, D. H., Brown, T. A., & Hofmann,

S. G. (2006). Acceptability and suppression of negative
emotion in anxiety and mood disorders. Emotion, 6(4),
587–595.
Carlbring, P., Ekselius, L., & Andersson, G. (2003). Treatment
of panic disorder via the Internet: A randomized trial
of CBT vs. applied relaxation. Journal of Behavior Therapy
and Experimental Psychiatry, 34, 129–140.

Carlbring, P., Nilsson-Ihrfelt, E., Waara, J., Kollenstam, C.,
Buhrman, M, Klado, V., et al. (2005). Treatment of panic
disorder: live therapy vs. self-help via the internet. Behaviour
Research and Therapy, 43, 1321–1333.

Carter, M. M., Sbrocco, T., Gore, K. L., Marin, N. W., &
Lewis, E. L. (2003). Cognitive-behavioral group therapy
versus a wait-list control in the treatment of African American
women with panic disorder. Cognitive Therapy and
Research, 27(5), 505–518.

Cerny, J. A., Barlow, D. H., Craske, M. G., & Himadi, W.

G. (1987). Couples treatment of agoraphobia: A two-year
follow-up. Behavior Therapy, 18, 401–415.
Chambless, D. L. (1990). Spacing of exposure sessions in
treatment of agoraphobia and simple phobia. Behavior
Therapy, 21, 217–229.

Chambless, D. L., Caputo, G., Bright, P., & Gallagher, R.
(1984). Assessment of fear in agoraphobics: The Body
Sensations Questionnaire and the Agoraphobic Cognitions
Questionnaire. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,
52, 1090–1097.

Chambless, D. L., Caputo, G., Gracely, S., Jasin, E., & Williams,
C. (1985). The Mobility Inventory for Agoraphobia.
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 23, 35–44.

Chambless, D. L., & Renneberg, B. (1988, September). Personality
disorders of agoraphobics. Paper presented at
World Congress of Behavior Therapy, Edinburgh, Scotland.


Clark, D. M. (1996). Panic disorder: From theory to therapy.
In P. M. Salkovskis (Ed.), From frontiers of cognitive
therapy: The state of art and beyond (pp. 318–344). New
York: Guilford Press.


Panic Disorder and Agoraphobia

Clark, D. M. (1986). A cognitive approach to panic. Behaviour
Research and Therapy, 24, 461–470.

Clark, D. M., & Ehlers, A. (1993). An overview of the cognitive
theory and treatment of panic disorder. Applied and
Preventive Psychology, 2, 131–139.

Clark, D. M., Salkovskis, P., & Chalkley, A. (1985). Respiratory
control as a treatment for panic attacks. Journal of Behavior
Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry, 16, 23–30.

Clark, D. M., Salkovskis, P., Gelder, M., Koehler, C., Martin,
M., Anastasiades, P., et al. (1988). Tests of a cognitive
theory of panic. In I. Hand & H. Wittchen (Eds.), Panic
and phobias II (pp. 71–90). Berlin: Springer-Verlag.

Clark, D. M., Salkovskis, P. M., Hackmann, A., Middleton,
H., Anastasiades, P., & Gelder, M. (1994). A comparison
of cognitive therapy, applied relaxation and imipramine
in the treatment of panic disorder. British Journal of Psychiatry,
164, 759–769.

Clark, D. M., Salkovskis, P. M., Hackmann, A., Wells, A.,
Ludgate, J., & Gelder, M. (1999). Brief cognitive therapy
for panic disorder: A randomized controlled trial. Journal
of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 67, 583–589.

Cote, G., Gauthier, J. G., Laberge, B., Cormier, H. J., & Plamondon,
J. (1994). Reduced therapist contact in the cognitive
behavioral treatment of panic disorder. Behavior
Therapy, 25, 123–145.

Cox, B. J., Endler, N. S., & Swinson, R. P. (1995). An examination
of levels of agoraphobic severity in panic disorder.
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 33, 57–62.

Craske, M. G., & Barlow, D. H. (1988). A review of the relationship
between panic and avoidance. Clinical Psychology
Review, 8, 667–685.

Craske, M. G., & Barlow, D. H. (1989). Nocturnal panic.
Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 177(3), 160–167.

Craske, M. G., & Barlow, D. H. (2006). Mastery of your anxiety
and panic: Therapist guide (3rd ed.). New York: Oxford
University Press.

Craske, M. G., Brown, T. A., & Barlow, D. H. (1991). Behavioral
treatment of panic disorder: A two-year follow-up.
Behavior Therapy, 22, 289–304.

Craske, M. G., DeCola, J. P., Sachs, A. D., & Pontillo, D. C.
(2003). Panic control treatment of agoraphobia. Journal of
Anxiety Disorders, 17(3), 321–333.

Craske, M. G., Farchione, T., Allen, L., Barrios, V., Stoyanova,
M., & Rose, D. (2007). Cognitive behavioral therapy
for panic disorder and comorbidity: More of the same or
less of more. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 45(6),
1095–1109.

Craske, M. G., & Freed, S. (1995). Expectations about arousal
and nocturnal panic. Journal of Abnormal Psychology,
104, 567–575.

Craske, M. G., Glover, D., & DeCola, J. (1995). Predicted
versus unpredicted panic attacks: Acute versus general
distress. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 104, 214–223.

Craske, M. G., Golinelli, D., Stein, M. B., Roy-Byrne, P., Bystritsky,
A., & Sherbourne, C. (2005). Does the addition of

cognitive behavioral therapy improve panic disorder treatment
outcome relative to medication alone in the primarycare
setting? Psychological Medicine, 35(11), 1645–1654.

Craske, M. G., Kircanski, K., Epstein, A., Wittchen, H.-U.,
Pine, D.S., Lewis-Fernandez, R., et al. (2010). Panic disorder:
A review of DSM-IV panic disorder and proposals for
DSM-V. Depression and Anxiety, 27, 93–112.

Craske, M. G., Kircanski, K., Zelikowsky, M., Mystkowski,
J., Chowdhury, N., & Baker, A. (2008). Optimizing inhibitory
learning during exposure therapy. Behaviour Research
and Therapy, 46, 5–27.

Craske, M. G., Lang, A. J., Aikins, D., & Mystkowski, J. L.
(2005). Cognitive behavioral therapy for nocturnal panic.
Behavior Therapy, 36, 43–54.

Craske, M. G., Lang, A. J., Rowe, M., DeCola, J. P., Simmons,
J., Mann, C., et al. (2002). Presleep attributions
about arousal during sleep: Nocturnal panic. Journal of
Abnormal Psychology, 111, 53–62.

Craske, M. G., Liao, B., Brown, L., & Vervliet, B. (2012).
Role of inhibition in exposure therapy. Journal of Experimental
Psychopathology, 3(3), 322–345.

Craske, M. G., Maidenberg, E., & Bystritsky, A. (1995). Brief
cognitive-behavioral versus non directive therapy for
panic disorder. Journal of Behavior Therapy and Experimental
Psychiatry, 26, 113–120.

Craske, M. G., Miller, P. P., Rotunda, R., & Barlow, D. H.
(1990). A descriptive report of features of initial unexpected
panic attacks in minimal and extensive avoiders.
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 28, 395–400.

Craske, M. G., Poulton, R., Tsao, J. C. I., & Plotkin, D. (2001).
Paths to panic–agoraphobia: An exploratory analysis from
age 3 to 21 in an unselected birth cohort. American Journal
of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 40, 556–563.

Craske, M. G., Rapee, R. M., & Barlow, D. H. (1988). The
significance of panic–expectancy for individual patterns
of avoidance. Behavior Therapy, 19, 577–592.

Craske, M. G., Rose, R. D., Lang, A., Welch, S., Campbell-
Sills, L., Sullivan, G., et al. (2009). Computer-assisted
delivery of cognitive-behavioral therapy for anxiety disorders
in primary care settings. Depression and Anxiety,
26, 235–242.

Craske, M. G., & Rowe, M. K. (1997a). A comparison of behavioral
and cognitive treatments of phobias. In G. C. L.
Davey (Ed.), Phobias—a handbook of theory, research
and treatment (pp. 247–280). West Sussex, UK: Wiley.

Craske, M. G., & Rowe, M. K. (1997b). Nocturnal panic.
Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 4, 153–174.

Craske, M. G., Rowe, M., Lewin, M., & Noriega-Dimitri, R.
(1997). Interoceptive exposure versus breathing retraining
within cognitive-behavioural therapy for panic disorder
with agoraphobia. British Journal of Clinical Psychology,
36, 85–99.

Craske, M. G., Roy-Byrne, P., Stein, M. B., Donald-
Sherbourne, C., Bystritsky, A., Katon, W., et al. (2002).
Treating panic disorder in primary care: A collaborative


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

care intervention. General Hospital Psychiatry, 24(3),
148–155.

Craske, M. G., Roy-Byrne, P., Stein, M. B., Sullivan, G.,
Hazlett-Stevens, H., Bystritsky, A., et al. (2006). CBT intensity
and outcome for panic disorder in a primary care
setting. Behavior Therapy, 37, 112–119.

Craske, M. G., Stein, M. B., Sullivan, G., Sherbourne, C.,
Bystritsky, A., Rose, D., et al. (2011). Disorder specific impact
of CALM treatment for anxiety disorders in primary
care. Archives of General Psychiatry, 68, 378–388.

Craske, M. G., & Tsao, J. C. I. (1999). Self-monitoring with
panic and anxiety disorders. Psychological Assessment,
11, 466–479.

Culver, N., Stoyanova, M. S., & Craske, M. G. (2012). Emotional
variability and sustained arousal during exposure.
Journal of Behavior Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry,
43, 787–793.

Culver, N., Vervliet, B., & Craske, M. G. (in press). Compound
extinction: Using the Rescorla-Wagner model to
maximize the effects of exposure therapy for anxiety disorders.
Clinical Psychological Science.

Dattilio, F. M., & Salas-Auvert, J. A. (2000). Panic disorder:
Assessment and treatment through a wide-angle lens.
Phoenix, AZ: Zeig, Tucker.

Deacon, B., & Abramowitz, J. (2006). A pilot study of twoday
cognitive-behavioral therapy for panic disorder. Behaviour
Research and Therapy, 44, 807–817.

de Beurs, E., Lange, A., van Dyck, R., & Koele, P. (1995). Respiratory
training prior to exposure in vivo in the treatment
of panic disorder with agoraphobia: Efficacy and predictors
of outcome. Australian and New Zealand Journal of
Psychiatry, 29, 104–113.

de Beurs, E., van Balkom, A. J., Lange, A., Koele, P., & van
Dyck, R. (1995). Treatment of panic disorder with agoraphobia:
Comparison of fluvoxamine, placebo, and psychological
panic management combined with exposure and of
exposure in vivo alone. American Journal of Psychiatry,
152, 683–691.

Debiec, J., & Le Doux, J. E. (2004). Disruption of reconsolidation
but not consolidation of auditory fear conditioning
by noradrenergic blockade in the amygdala. Neuroscience,
129(2), 267–272.

Deckert, J., Nothen, M. M., Franke, P., Delmo, C., Fritze, J.,
Knapp, M., et al. (1998). Systematic mutation screening
and association study of the A1 and A2a adenosine receptor
genes in panic disorder suggest a contribution of the
A2a gene to the development of disease. Molecular Psychiatry,
3, 81–85.

De Cort, K., Hermans, D., Spruyt, A., Griez, E., & Schruers,

K. (2008). A specific attentional bias in panic disorder?
Depression and Anxiety, 25(11), 951–955.
de Jong, M. G., & Bouman, T. K. (1995). Panic disorder: A
baseline period: Predictability of agoraphobic avoidance
behavior. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 9, 185–199.

Dewey, D., & Hunsley, J. (1990). The effects of marital adjustment
and spouse involvement on the behavioral treatment
of agoraphobia: A meta-analytic review. Anxiety Research,
2(2), 69–83.

Di Nardo, P., Brown, T. A., & Barlow, D. H. (1994). Anxiety
Disorders Interview Schedule—Fourth Edition (ADIS-
IV). New York: Oxford University Press.

Domschke, K., Agineszka, G., Winter, B., Hermann, M. J.,
Warrings B., Muhlberger, A., et al. (2011). ADORA2A
gene variation, caffeine, and emotional processing: A
multi-level interaction on startle reflex. Neuropsychopharmacology,
37, 759–769.

Dow, M., Kenardy, J., Johnston, D., Newman, M., Taylor, C.,
& Thomson, A. (2007). Prognostic indices with brief and
standard CBT for panic disorder: I. Predictors of outcome.
Psychological Medicine, 27, 1493–1502.

Dreessen, L., Arntz, A., Luttels, C., & Sallaerts, S. (1994).
Personality disorders do not influence the results of cognitive
behavior therapies for anxiety disorders. Comprehensive
Psychiatry, 35(4), 265–274.

Dworkin, B. R., & Dworkin, S. (1999). Heterotopic and
homotopic classical conditioning of the baroreflex. Integrative
Physiological and Behavioral Science, 34(3),
158–176.

Ehlers, A. (1995). A 1–year prospective study of panic attacks:
Clinical course and factors associated with maintenance.
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 104, 164–172.

Ehlers, A., & Breuer, P. (1992). Increased cardiac awareness
in panic disorder. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 101,
371–382.

Ehlers, A., & Breuer, P. (1996). How good are patients with
panic disorder at perceiving their heartbeats? Biological
Psychology, 42, 165–182.

Ehlers, A., Breuer, P., Dohn, D., & Fiegenbaum, W. (1995).
Heartbeat perception and panic disorder: Possible explanations
for discrepant findings. Behaviour Research and
Therapy, 33, 69–76.

Ehlers, A., & Margraf, J. (1989). The psychophysiological
model of panic attacks. In P. M. G. Emmelkamp (Ed.),
Anxiety disorders: Annual series of European research in
behavior therapy (Vol. 4, pp. 1–29). Amsterdam: Swets.

Ehlers, A., Margraf, J., Davies, S., & Roth, W. T. (1988). Selective
processing of threat cues in subjects with panic attacks.
Cognition and Emotion, 2, 201–219.

Ehlers, A., Margraf, J., Roth, W. T., Taylor, C. B., &
Birnbaumer, N. (1988). Anxiety induced by false heart
rate feedback in patients with panic disorder. Behaviour
Research and Therapy, 26(1), 1–11.

Eifert, G. H., & Heffner, M. (2003). The effects of acceptance
versus control contexts on avoidance of panic-related
symptoms. Journal of Behavior Therapy and Experimental
Psychiatry, 34(3–4), 293–312.

Eley, T. C. (2001). Contributions of behavioral genetics research:
Quantifying genetic, shared environmental and


Panic Disorder and Agoraphobia

nonshared environmental influences. In M. W. Vasey & M.

R. Dadds (Eds.), The developmental psychopathology of
anxiety (pp. 45–59). New York: Oxford University Press.
Emmelkamp, P. (1980). Agoraphobic’s interpersonal problems.
Archives of General Psychiatry, 37, 1303–1306.
Emmelkamp, P. M., & Wittchen, H.-U. (2009). Specific
phobias. In G. Andrews (Ed.), Stress-induced and fear
circuitry disorders: Advancing the research agenda for
DSM-V (pp. 77–104). Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric
Association.

Evans, L., Holt, C., & Oei, T. P. S. (1991). Long term followup
of agoraphobics treated by brief intensive group cognitive
behaviour therapy. Australian and New Zealand Journal
of Psychiatry, 25, 343–349.

Eysenck, H. J. (1967). The biological basis of personality.
Springfield, IL: Thomas.
Faravelli, C., Pallanti, S., Biondi, F., Paterniti, S., & Scarpato,

M. A. (1992). Onset of panic disorder. American Journal
of Psychiatry, 149, 827–828.
Feigenbaum, W. (1988). Long-term efficacy of ungraded versus
graded massed exposure in agoraphobics. In I. Hand &

H. Wittchen (Eds.), Panic and phobias: Treatments and
variables affecting course and outcome (pp. 83–88). Berlin:
Springer-Verlag.
First, M. B., Spitzer, R. L., Gibbon, M., & Williams, J. B. W.
(1994). Structured Clinical Interview for Axis I DSM-IV
Disorders. New York: Biometric Research Department,
New York State Psychiatric Institute.

Foa, E. B., & Kozak, M. J. (1986). Emotional processing of
fear: exposure to corrective information. Psychological
Bulletin, 99, 20–35.

Foa, E. B., & McNally, R. J. (1996). Mechanisms of change in
exposure therapy. In R. M. Rapee (Ed.), Current controversies
in the anxiety disorders (pp. 329–343). New York:
Guilford Press.

Forsyth, J. P., Palav, A., & Duff, K. (1999). The absence of
relation between anxiety sensitivity and fear conditioning
using 20% versus 13% CO2-enriched air as unconditioned
stimuli. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 37(2), 143–153.

Friedman, S., & Paradis, C. (1991). African-American patients
with panic disorder and agoraphobia. Journal of
Anxiety Disorders, 5, 35–41.

Friedman, S., Paradis, C. M., & Hatch, M. (1994). Characteristics
of African-American and white patients with panic
disorder and agoraphobia. Hospital and Community Psychiatry,
45, 798–803.

Fry, W. (1962). The marital context of an anxiety syndrome.
Family Process, 1, 245–252.

Garssen, B., de Ruiter, C., & van Dyck, R. (1992). Breathing
retraining: A rational placebo? Clinical Psychology
Review, 12, 141–153.

Ghosh, A., & Marks, I. M. (1987). Self-treatment of agoraphobia
by exposure. Behavior Therapy, 18, 3–16.
Glenn, D., Golinelli, D., Rose, R., Roy-Byrne, P., Stein, M.,

Sullivan, G., et al. (in press). Who gets the most out of
cognitive behavioral therapy for anxiety disorders: The
role of treatment dose and patient engagement. Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology.

Gloster, A. T., Wittchen, H.-U., Einsle, F., Lang, T., Helbig-
Lang, S., Fydrich, T., et al. (2011). Psychological treatment
for panic disorder with agoraphobia: A randomized controlled
trial to examine the role of therapist-guided exposure
in situ in CBT. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 79, 406–420.

Goisman, R. M., Goldenberg, I., Vasile, R. G., & Keller, M. B.
(1995). Comorbidity of anxiety disorders in a multicenter
anxiety study. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 36, 303–311.

Goisman, R. M., Warshaw, M. G., Peterson, L. G., Rogers,

M. P., Cuneo, P., Hunt, M. F., et al. (1994). Panic, agoraphobia,
and panic disorder with agoraphobia: Data from
a multicenter anxiety disorders study. Journal of Nervous
and Mental Disease, 182, 72–79.
Goldstein, A. J., & Chambless, D. L. (1978). A reanalysis of
agoraphobia. Behavior Therapy, 9, 47–59.

Goodwin, R. D., Fergusson, D. M., & Horwood, L. J. (2005).
Childhood abuse and familial violence and the risk of
panic attacks and panic disorder in young adulthood. Psychological
Medicine, 35, 881–890.

Gorman, J. M., Papp, L. A., Coplan, J. D., Martinez, J. M.,
Lennon, S., Goetz, R. R., et al. (1994). Anxiogenic effects
of CO2 and hyperventilation in patients with panic disorder.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 151(4), 547–553.

Gould, R. A., & Clum, G. A. (1995). Self-help plus minimal
therapist contact in the treatment of panic disorder: A replication
and extension. Behavior Therapy, 26, 533–546.

Gould, R. A., Clum, G. A., & Shapiro, D. (1993). The use
of bibliotherapy in the treatment of panic: A preliminary
investigation. Behavior Therapy, 24, 241–252.

Gray, J. A. (1982). The neuropsychology of anxiety: An enquiry
into the functions of the septo-hippocampal system.
New York: Oxford University Press.

Griez, E., & van den Hout, M. A. (1986). CO2 inhalation in
the treatment of panic attacks. Behaviour Research and
Therapy, 24, 145–150.

Grilo, C. M., Money, R., Barlow, D. H., Goddard, A. W., Gorman,
J. M., Hofmann, S. G., et al. (1998). Pretreatment
patient factors predicting attrition from a multicenter randomized
controlled treatment study for panic disorder.
Comprehensive Psychiatry, 39, 323–332.

Haby, M., Donnelly, M., Corry, J., & Vos, T. (2006). Cognitive
behavioural therapy for depression, panic disorder and
generalized anxiety disorder: A meta-regression of factors
that may predict outcome. Australian and New Zealand
Journal of Psychiatry, 40, 9–19.

Hafner, R. J. (1984). Predicting the effects on husbands of behavior
therapy for agoraphobia. Behaviour Research and
Therapy, 22, 217–226.

Hamilton, S. P., Fyer, A. J., Durner, M., Heiman, G. A., Baisre


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

de Leon, A., Hodge, S. E., et al. (2003). Further genetic evidence
for a panic disorder syndrome mapping to chromosome
13q. Proceedings of National Academy of Science
USA, 100, 2550–2555.

Hamilton, S. P., Slager, S. L., De Leon, A. B., Heiman, G.
A., Klein, D. F., Hodge, S. E., et al. (2004). Evidence for
genetic linkage between a polymorphism in the adenosine
2A receptor and panic disorder. Neuropsychopharmacology,
29, 558–565.

Hamilton, S. P., Slager, S. L., Helleby, L., Heiman, G. A.,
Klein, D. F., Hodge, S. E., et al. (2001). No association
or linkage between polymorphisms in the genes encoding
cholecystokinin and the cholecystokinin B receptor and
panic disorder. Molecular Psychiatry, 6, 59–65.

Hand, I., & Lamontagne, Y. (1976). The exacerbation of interpersonal
problems after rapid phobia removal. Psychotherapy:
Theory, Research and Practice, 13, 405–411.

Haslam, M. T. (1974). The relationship between the effect of
lactate infusion on anxiety states and their amelioration by
carbon dioxide inhalation. British Journal of Psychiatry,
125, 88–90.

Hayes, S. C., Strosahl, K. D., & Wilson, K. G. (1999). Acceptance
and commitment therapy: An experiential approach
to behavior change. New York: Guilford Press.

Hayes, S. C., Wilson, K. G., Gifford, E. V., & Follette, V. M.
(1996). Experiential avoidance and behavioral disorders:
A functional dimensional approach to diagnosis and treatment.
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,
64(6), 1152–1168.

Hayward, C., Killen, J. D., Hammer, L. D., Litt, I. F., Wilson,
D. M., Simmonds, B., et al. (1992). Pubertal stage
and panic attack history in sixth- and seventh-grade girls.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 149, 1239–1243.

Hayward, C., Killen, J. D., Kraemer, H. C., & Taylor, C. B.
(2000). Predictors of panic attacks in adolescents. Journal
of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry,
39(2), 1–8.

Hecker, J. E., Losee, M. C., Fritzler, B. K., & Fink, C. M.
(1996). Self-directed versus therapist-directed cognitive
behavioral treatment for panic disorder. Journal of Anxiety
Disorders, 10, 253–265.

Hecker, J. E., Losee, M. C., Roberson-Nay, R., & Maki, K.
(2004). Mastery of your anxiety and panic and brief therapist
contact in the treatment of panic disorder. Journal of
Anxiety Disorders, 18(2), 111–126.

Helbig-Lang, S., & Petermann, F. (2010). Tolerate or eliminate?:
A systematic review on the effects of safety behavior
across anxiety disorders. Clinical Psychology: Science
and Practice, 17(3), 218–233.

Heldt, E., Manfro, G. G., Kipper, L., Blaya, C., Isolan,
L., & Otto, M. W. (2006). One-year follow-up of
pharmacotherapy-resistant patients with panic disorder
treated with cognitive-behavior therapy: Outcome and
predictors of remission. Behaviour Research and Therapy,
44(5), 657–665.

Hermans, D., Craske, M. G., Mineka, S., & Lovibond, P. F.
(2006). Extinction in human fear conditioning. Biological
Psychiatry, 60, 361–368.

Heuzenroeder, L., Donnelly, M., Haby, M. M., Mihalopoulos,
C., Rossell, R., Carter, R., et al. (2004). Cost-effectiveness
of psychological and pharmacological interventions for
generalized anxiety disorder and panic disorder. Australian
and New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry, 38(8),
602–612.

Hibbert, G., & Pilsbury, D. (1989). Hyperventilation: Is it a
cause of panic attacks? British Journal of Psychiatry, 155,
805–809.

Himadi, W., Cerny, J., Barlow, D., Cohen, S., & O’Brien, G.
(1986). The relationship of marital adjustment to agoraphobia
treatment outcome. Behaviour Research and Therapy,
24, 107–115.

Hoffart, A. (1995). A comparison of cognitive and guided
mastery therapy of agoraphobia. Behaviour Research and
Therapy, 33, 423–434.

Hoffart, A. (1997). Interpersonal problems among patients
suffering from panic disorder with agoraphobia before and
after treatment. British Journal of Medical Psychology,
70(2), 149–157.

Hoffart, A., & Hedley, L. M. (1997). Personality traits among
panic disorder with agoraphobia patients before and after
symptom-focused treatment. Journal of Anxiety Disorders,
11, 77–87.

Hoffart, A., Sexton, H., Hedley, L., & Martinsen, E. W.
(2008). Mechanisms of change in cognitive therapy for
panic disorder with agoraphobia. Journal of Behavior
Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry, 39(3), 262–275.

Hofmann, S. G., Shear, M. K., Barlow, D. H., Gorman, J. M.,
Hershberger, D., Patterson, M., et al. (1988). Effects of
panic disorder treatments on personality disorder characteristics.
Depression and Anxiety, 8(1), 14–20.

Hofmann, S. G., Suvak, M. K., Barlow, D. H., Shear, M. K.,
Meuret, A. E., et al. (2007). Preliminary evidence for cognitive
mediation during cognitive-behavioral therapy of
panic disorder. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,
75(3), 374–379.

Holden, A. E. O., O’Brien, G. T., Barlow, D. H., Stetson, D.,
& Infantino, A. (1983). Self-help manual for agoraphobia:
A preliminary report of effectiveness. Behavior Therapy,
14, 545–556.

Holt, P., & Andrews, G. (1989). Hyperventilation and anxiety
in panic disorder, agoraphobia, and generalized anxiety
disorder. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 27, 453–
460.

Hope, D. A., Rapee, R. M., Heimberg, R. G., & Dombeck,

M. J. (1990). Representations of the self in social phobia:
Vulnerability to social threat. Cognitive Therapy and Research,
14, 177–189.
Hornsveld, H., Garssen, B., Fiedeldij Dop, M., & van Spiegel,

P. (1990). Symptom reporting during voluntary hyperventilation
and mental load: Implications for diagnosing

Panic Disorder and Agoraphobia

hyperventilation syndrome. Journal of Psychosomatic Research,
34, 687–697.

Huppert, J. D., Bufka, L. F., Barlow, D. H., Gorman, J. M.,
Shear, M. K., & Woods, S. W. (2001). Therapist, therapist
variables, and cognitive-behavioral therapy outcome in a
multicenter trial for panic disorder. Journal of Consulting
and Clinical Psychology, 69(5), 747–755.

Issakidis, C., & Andrews, G. (2004). Pretreatment attrition
and dropout in an outpatient clinic for anxiety disorders.
Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 109(6), 426–433.

Ito, L. M., Noshirvani, H., Basoglu, M., & Marks, I. M.
(1996). Does exposure to internal cues enhance exposure
to external exposure to external cues in agoraphobia with
panic. Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics, 65, 24–28.

Izard, C. E. (1992). Basic emotions, relations among emotions,
and emotion cognition relations. Psychological Review,
99, 561–565.

Jacob, R. G., Furman, J. M., Clark, D. B., & Durrant, J. D.
(1992). Vestibular symptoms, panic, and phobia: Overlap
and possible relationships. Annals of Clinical Psychiatry,
4(3), 163–174.

Kampfe, C. K., Gloster, A. T., Wittchen, H.-U., Helbig-Lang,
S., Lang, T., & Gerlach, A. L. (2012). Experiential avoidance
and anxiety sensitivity in patients with panic disorder
and agoraphobia: Do both constructs measure the same?
International Journal of Clinical and Health Psychology,
12, 5–22.

Kampman, M., Keijsers, G. P. J., Hoogduin, C. A. L., & Hendriks,
G.-J. (2002). A randomized, double-blind, placebocontrolled
study of the effects of adjunctive paroxetine
in panic disorder patients unsuccessfully treated with
cognitive-behavioral therapy alone. Journal of Clinical
Psychiatry, 63(9), 772–777.

Katon, W., Von Korff, M., Lin, E., Lipscomb, P., Russo, J.,
Wagner, E., et al. (1990). Distressed high utilizers of medical
care: DSM-III-R diagnoses and treatment needs. General
Hospital Psychiatry, 12(6), 355–362.

Katschnig, H., & Amering, M. (1998). The long-term course
of panic disorder and its predictors. Journal of Clinical
Psychopharmacology, 18(6, Suppl. 2), 6S–11S.

Keijsers, G. P., Kampman, M., & Hoogduin, C. A. (2001).
Dropout prediction in cognitive behavior therapy for panic
disorder. Behavior Therapy, 32(4), 739–749.

Keijsers, G. P., Schaap, C. P., Hoogduin, C. A., & Lammers,

M. W. (1995). Patient–therapist interaction in the behavioral
treatment of panic disorder with agoraphobia. Behavior
Modification, 19, 491–517.
Keller, M. L., & Craske, M. G. (2008). Panic disorder and
agoraphobia. In J. Hunsley & E. J. Mash (Eds.), A guide to
assessments that work (pp. 229–253). New York: Oxford
University Press.

Kendler, K. S., Bulik, C. M., Silberg, J., Hettema, J. M.,
Myers, J., & Prescott, C. A. (2000). Childhood sexual
abuse and adult psychiatric and substance use disorders

in women: An epidemiological and co-twin analysis. Archives
of General Psychiatry, 57, 953–959.

Kendler, K. S., Heath, A. C., Martin, N. G., & Eaves, L. J.
(1987). Symptoms of anxiety and symptoms of depression:
Same genes, different environments? Archives of General
Psychiatry, 44, 451–457.

Kessler, R. C., Berglund, P., Demler, O., Jin, R., & Walters, E.

E. (2005). Lifetime prevalence and age-of-onset distributions
of DSM-IV disorders in the National Comorbidity
Survey Replication. Archives of General Psychiatry, 62,
593–602.
Kessler, R. C., Chiu, W. T., Demler, O., & Walters, E. E.
(2005). Lifetime prevalence and age-of-onset distributions
of DSM-IV disorders in the National Comorbidity Survey
Replication. Archives of General Psychiatry, 62(6),
593–602.

Kessler, R. C., Chiu, W. T., Jin, R., Ruscio, A. M., Shear, K.,
& Walters, E. E. (2006). The epidemiology of panic attacks,
panic disorder, and agoraphobia in the National Comorbidity
Survey Replication. Archives of General Psychiatry,
63, 415–424.

Kessler, R. C., Davis, C. G., & Kendler, K. S. (1997). Childhood
adversity and adult psychiatric disorder in the U.S.
National Comorbidity Survey. Psychological Medicine,
27, 1101–1119.

Kessler, R. C., McGonagle, K. A., Zhao, S., Nelson, C. B.,
Hughes, M., Eshkeman, S., et al. (1994). Lifetime and 12
month prevalence of DSM-III-R psychiatric disorders in
the United States: Results from the National Comorbidity
Study. Archives of General Psychiatry, 51, 8–19.

Kessler, R. C., Petukhova, M., Sampson, N. A., Zaslavsky,

A. M., & Wittchen, H.-U. (2012). Twelve-month and
life time prevalence and lifetime morbid risk of anxiety
and mood disorders in the United States. International
Journal of Methods in Psychiatric Research, 21(3), 169–
184.
Keyl, P. M., & Eaton, W. W. (1990). Risk factors for the onset
of panic disorder and other panic attacks in a prospective,
population-based study. American Journal of Epidemiology,
131, 301–311.

Kikuchi, M., Komuro, R., Hiroshi, O., Kidani, T., Hanaoka,
A., & Koshino, Y. (2005). Panic disorder with and without
agoraphobia: Comorbidity within a half-year of the onset
of panic disorder. Psychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences,
58, 639–643.

Kindt, M., Soeter, M., & Vervliet, B. (2009). Beyond extinction:
Erasing human fear responses and preventing the return
of fear. Nature Neuroscience, 12, 256–258.

Kircanski, K., Craske, M. G., Epstein, A. M., & Wittchen,
H.-U. (2009). Subtypes of panic attacks: A critical review
of the empirical literature. Depression and Anxiety, 26,
878–887.

Kircanski, K., Mortazavi, A., Castriotta, N., Baker, A., Mystkowski,
J., Yi, R., et al. (2011). Challenges to the traditional
exposure paradigm: variability in exposure therapy


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

for contamination fears. Journal of Behavior Therapy and
Experimental Psychiatry, 43, 745–751.

Kiropoulos, L. A., Klein, B., Austin, D. W., Gilson, K., Pier,
C., Mitchell J., et al. (2008). Is internet-based CBT for
panic disorder and agoraphobia as effective as face-to-face
CBT? Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 22, 1273–1284.

Kraft, A. R., & Hoogduin, C. A. (1984). The hyperventilation
syndrome: A pilot study of the effectiveness of treatment.
British Journal of Psychiatry, 145, 538–542.

Kroeze, S., & van den Hout, M. A. (2000). Selective attention
for cardiac information in panic patients. Behaviour
Research and Therapy, 38, 63–72.

Krystal, J. H., Woods, S. W., Hill, C. L., & Charney, D. S.
(1991). Characteristics of panic attack subtypes: Assessment
of spontaneous panic, situational panic, sleep panic,
and limited symptom attacks. Comprehensive Psychiatry,
32(6), 474–480.

Lake, R. I., Eaves, L. J., Maes, H. H., Heath, A. C., & Martin,

N. G. (2000). Further evidence against the environmental
transmission of individual differences in neuroticism from
a collaborative study of 45,850 twins and relatives of two
continents. Behavior Genetics, 30(3), 223–233.
Lang, A. J., & Craske, M. G. (2000). Manipulations of exposure
based therapy to reduce return of fear: a replication.
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 38, 1–12.

Lehman, C. L., Brown, T. A., & Barlow, D. H. (1998). Effects
of cognitive-behavioral treatment for panic disorder
with agoraphobia on concurrent alcohol abuse. Behavior
Therapy, 29, 423–433.

Lelliott, P., Marks, I., McNamee, G., & Tobena, A. (1989).
Onset of panic disorder with agoraphobia: Toward an
integrated model. Archives of General Psychiatry, 46,
1000–1004.

Levitt, J. T., Brown, T. A., Orsillo, S. M., & Barlow, D. H.
(2004). The effects of acceptance versus suppression of
emotion on subjective and psychophysiological response
to carbon dioxide challenge in patients with panic disorder.
Behavior Therapy, 35, 747–766.

Lewis-Fernandez, R., Hinton, D. E., Laria, A. J., Patterson,

E. H., Hofmann, S. G., Craske, M. et al. (2010). Culture
and the anxiety disorders: recommendations for DSM-V.
Depression and Anxiety, 27, 212–229.
Lidren, D. M., Watkins, P., Gould, R. A., Clum, G. A., Asterino,
M., & Tulloch, H. L. (1994). A comparison of
bibliotherapy and group therapy in the treatment of panic
disorder. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,
62, 865–869.

Lovibond, P. F., Davis, N. R., & O’Flaherty, A. S. (2000).
Protection from extinction in human fear conditioning.
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 38, 967–983.

Lissek, S., Powers, A. S., McClure, E. B., Phelps, E. A., Wolderhawariat,
G., et al. (2005). Classical fear conditioning
in the anxiety disorders: A meta-analysis. Behaviour Research
and Therapy, 43, 1391–1424.

Lissek, S., Rabin, S. J., Heller, R. E., Lukenbaugh, D., Geraci,

M., Pine, D. S., et al. (2010). Overgeneralization of conditioned
fear as a pathogenic marker of panic disorder.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 167(1), 47–55.

Lissek, S., Rabin, S. J., McDowell, D. J., Divir, S., Bradford,

D. E., Geraci, M., et al. (2009). Impaired discriminative
fear-conditioning resulting from elevated fear responding
to learned safety cues among individuals with panic disorder.
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 47(2), 111–118.
Maidenberg, E., Chen, E., Craske, M., Bohn, P., & Bystritsky,

A. (1996). Specificity of attentional bias in panic disorder
and social phobia. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 10,
529–541.
Maier, S. F., Laudenslager, M. L., & Ryan, S. M. (1985).
Stressor controllability, immune function and endogenous
opiates. In F. R. Brush & J. B. Overmeier (Eds.), Affect,
conditioning and cognition: Essays on the determinants
of behavior (pp. 183–201). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

Maller, R. G., & Reiss, S. (1992). Anxiety sensitivity in 1984
and panic attacks in 1987. Journal of Anxiety Disorders,
6(3), 241–247.

Mannuzza, S., Fyer, A. J., Liebowitz, M. R., & Klein, D. F.
(1990). Delineating the boundaries of social phobia: Its
relationship to panic disorder and agoraphobia. Journal of
Anxiety Disorders, 4(1), 41–59.

Marchand, A., Goyer, L. R., Dupuis, G., & Mainguy,

N. (1998). Personality disorders and the outcome of
cognitive-behavioural treatment of panic disorder with
agoraphobia. Canadian Journal of Behavioural Science,
30(1), 14–23.
Margraf, J., Taylor, C. B., Ehlers, A., Roth, W. T., & Agras,

W. S. (1987). Panic attacks in the natural environment.
Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 175, 558–565.
Marks, I. M., Swinson, R. P., Basoglu, M., Kuck, K.,
Noshirvani, H., O’Sullivan, G., et al. (1993). Alprazolam
and exposure alone and combined in panic disorder with
agoraphobia: A controlled study in London and Toronto.
British Journal of Psychiatry, 162, 776–787.

Martin, N. G., Jardine, R., Andrews, G., & Heath, A. C.
(1988). Anxiety disorders and neuroticism: Are there genetic
factors specific to panic? Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica,
77, 698–706.

Mavissakalian, M., & Hamman, M. (1987). DSM-III personality
disorder in agoraphobia: II. Changes with treatment.
Comprehensive Psychiatry, 28, 356–361.

McLean, P. D., Woody, S., Taylor, S., & Koch, W. J. (1998).
Comorbid panic disorder and major depression: Implications
for cognitive-behavioral therapy. Journal of Consulting
and Clinical Psychology, 66, 240–247.

McNally, R. J., & Lorenz, M. (1987). Anxiety sensitivity in
agoraphobics. Journal of Behavior Therapy and Experimental
Psychiatry, 18(1), 3–11.

McNally, R. J., Riemann, B. C., Louro, C. E., Lukach, B.
M., & Kim, E. (1992). Cognitive processing of emotional
information in panic disorder. Behaviour Research and
Therapy, 30, 143–149.


Panic Disorder and Agoraphobia

McNamee, G., O’Sullivan, G., Lelliott, P., & Marks, I. M.
(1989). Telephone-guided treatment for housebound agoraphobics
with panic disorder: Exposure vs. relaxation.
Behavior Therapy, 20, 491–497.

Mellman, T. A., & Uhde, T. W. (1989). Sleep panic attacks:
New clinical findings and theoretical implications. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 146, 1204–1207.

Messenger, C., & Shean, G. (1998). The effects of anxiety
sensitivity and history of panic on reactions to stressors in
a non-clinical sample. Journal of Behavior Therapy, 29,
279–288.

Meuret, A. E., Rosenfield, D., Seidel, A., Bhaskara, L., &
Hofmann, S. G. (2010). Respiratory and cognitive mediators
of treatment change in panic disorder: Evidence for
intervention specificity. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 78, 691–704.

Meuret, A. E., Twohig, M. P., Rosenfield, D., Hayes, S. C.,
& Craske, M. G. (2012). Brief acceptance and commitment
therapy and exposure for panic disorder: A pilot
study. Cognitive and Behavioral Practice, 19(4), 606–
618.

Meuret, A. E., Wilhelm, F. H., Ritz, T., & Roth, W. T. (2008).
Feedback of end-tidal pCO2 as a therapeutic approach for
panic disorder. Journal of Psychiatric Research, 42(7),
560–568.

Michelson, L., Mavissakalian, M., Marchione, K., Ulrich,
R., Marchione, N., & Testa, S. (1990). Psychophysiological
outcome of cognitive, behavioral, and psychophysiologically
based treatments of agoraphobia. Behaviour
Research and Therapy, 28, 127–139.

Milton, F., & Hafner, J. (1979). The outcome of behavior
therapy for agoraphobia in relation to marital adjustment.
Archives of General Psychiatry, 36, 807–811.

Mineka, S., Cook, M., & Miller, S. (1984). Fear conditioned
with escapable and inescapable shock: The effects of a
feedback stimulus. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Animal Behavior Processes, 10, 307–323.

Moisan, D., & Engels, M. L. (1995). Childhood trauma and
personality disorder in 43 women with panic disorder.
Psychological Reports, 76, 1133–1134.

Murphy, M. T., Michelson, L. K., Marchione, K., Marchione,
N., & Testa, S. (1998). The role of self-directed in vivo
exposure in combination with cognitive therapy, relaxation
training, or therapist-assisted exposure in the treatment of
panic disorder with agoraphobia. Behaviour Research and
Therapy, 12, 117–138.

Mystkowski, J. L., Craske, M. G., Echiverri, A. M., & Labus,

J. S. (2006). Mental reinstatement of context and return
of fear in spider-fearful participants. Behavior Therapy,
37(1), 49–60.
Nader, K., Schafe, G. E., & Le Doux, J. E. (2000). Fear memories
require protein synthesis in the amygdala for reconsolidation
after retrieval. Nature, 406, 722–726.

Neron, S., Lacroix, D., & Chaput, Y. (1995). Group vs individual
cognitive behaviour therapy in panic disorder: An

open clinical trial with a six month follow-up. Canadian
Journal of Behavioural Science, 27, 379–392.

Neumann, D. L., Lipp, O. V., & Cory, S. E. (2007). Conducting
extinction in multiple contexts does not necessarily
attenuate the renewal of shock expectancy in a fearconditioning
procedure with humans. Behaviour Research
and Therapy, 45, 385–394.

Niles, A. N., Sherbourne, C., Roy-Byrne, P., Stein, M., Sullivan,
G., Bystritsky, A., et al. (2013). Anxiety treatment
improves physical functioning with oblique scoring of the
SF-12 Short Form Health Survey. General Hospital Psychiatry,
35(3), 291–296.

Norberg, M. M., Krystal, J. H., & Tolin, D. F. (2008). A metaanalysis
of D-cycloserine and the facilitation of fear extinction
and exposure therapy. Biological Psychiatry, 63,
1118–1126.

Norton, G. R., Cox, B. J., & Malan, J. (1992). Nonclinical
panickers: A critical review. Clinical Psychology Review,
12, 121–139.

Norton, P., & Price, E. (2007). A meta-analytic review of
adult cognitive-behavioral treatment outcome across the
anxiety disorders. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease,
195, 521–531.

Noyes, R., Clancy, J., Garvey, M. J., & Anderson, D. J. (1987).
Is agoraphobia a variant of panic disorder or a separate illness?
Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 1, 3–13.

Noyes, R., Crowe, R. R., Harris, E. L., Hamra, B. J.,
McChesney, C.M., & Chaudhry, D. R. (1986). Relationship
between panic disorder and agoraphobia: A family
study. Archives of General Psychiatry, 43, 227–232.

Noyes, R., Reich, J., Suelzer, M., & Christiansen, J. (1991).
Personality traits associated with panic disorder: Change
associated with treatment. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 32,
282–294.

Okamura, N., Garau, C., Duangdao, D. M., Clark, S. D.,
Jungling, K., Hans-Christian, P., et al. (2011). Neuropeptide
S enhances memory during the consolidation phase
and interacts with noradrenergic systems in the brain.
Neuropsychopharmacology, 36(4), 744–752.

Öst, L.-G. (1988). Applied relaxation vs. progressive relaxation
in the treatment of panic disorder. Behaviour Research
and Therapy, 26, 13–22.

Öst, L.-G., Thulin, U., & Ramnero, J. (2004). Cognitive
behavior therapy vs exposure in vivo in the treatment of
panic disorder with agoraphobia. Behaviour Research and
Therapy, 42(1), 1105–1127.

Öst, L. G., & Westling, B. E. (1995). Applied relaxation vs
cognitive behavior therapy in the treatment of panic disorder.
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 33, 145–158.

Öst, L. G., Westling, B. E., & Hellström, K. (1993). Applied
relaxation, exposure in vivo, and cognitive methods in the
treatment of panic disorder with agoraphobia. Behaviour
Research and Therapy, 31, 383–394.

Otto, M. W., Pollack, M. H., & Sabatino, S. A. (1996). Maintenance
of remission following cognitive behavior therapy


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

for panic disorder: Possible deleterious effects of concurrent
medication treatment. Behavior Therapy, 27, 473–
482.

Otto, M. W., Tolin, D. F., Simon, N. M., Pearlson, G. D.,
Basden, S., Meunier, S. A., et al. (2010). Efficacy of Dcycloserine
for enhancing response to cognitive-behavior
therapy for panic disorder. Biological Psychiatry, 67(4),
365–370.

Pauli, P., Amrhein, C., Muhlberger, A., Dengler, W., & Wiedemann,
G. (2005). Electrocortical evidence for an early
abnormal processing of panic-related words in panic disorder
patients. International Journal of Psychophysiology,
57, 33–41.

Payne, L. A., White, K. S., Gallagher, M. W., Woods, S.
W., Shear, M. K., Gorman, J. M., et al. (2012). Secondstage
treatments for relative non-responders to cognitivebehavioral
therapy (CBT) for panic disorder with and
without agoraphobia. Manuscript submitted for publication.


Pennebaker, J. W., & Roberts, T. (1992). Toward a his and
hers theory of emotion: Gender differences in visceral
perception. Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology,
11(30), 199–212.

Perna, G., Bertani, A., Arancio, C., Ronchi, P., & Bellodi,

L. (1995). Laboratory response of patients with panic and
obsessive–compulsive disorders to 35% CO2 challenges.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 152, 85–89.
Prenoveau, J. M., Zinbarg, R. E., Craske, M. G., Mineka, S.,
Griffith, J. W., & Epstein, A. (2010). Testing a hierarchical
model of anxiety and depression in adolescents: A trilevel
model. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 24, 334–344.

Rachman, S., Lopatka, C., & Levitt, K. (1988). Experimental
analyses of panic: II. Panic patients. Behaviour Research
and Therapy, 26, 33–40.

Rachman, S., Shafran, R., Radomsky, A. S., & Zysk, E.
(2011). Reducing contamination by exposure plus safety
behaviour. Journal of Behavior Therapy and Experimental
Psychiatry, 42, 397–404.

Rapee, R. (1986). Differential response to hyperventilation in
panic disorder and generalized anxiety disorder. Journal
of Abnormal Psychology, 95, 24–28.

Rapee, R. M. (1994). Detection of somatic sensations in
panic disorder. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 32,
825–831.

Rapee, R. M., Brown, T. A., Antony, M. M., & Barlow, D.

H. (1992). Response to hyperventilation and inhalation of
5.5% carbon dioxide-enriched air across the DSM-III-R
anxiety disorders. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 101,
538–552.
Rapee, R. M., Craske, M. G., & Barlow, D. H. (1990). Subject
described features of panic attacks using a new selfmonitoring
form. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 4, 171–
181.

Rapee, R. M., Craske, M. G., & Barlow, D. H. (1995). Assessment
instrument for panic disorder that includes fear

of sensation-producing activities: The Albany Panic and
Phobia Questionnaire. Anxiety, 1, 114–122.

Rapee, R. M., Craske, M. G., Brown, T. A., & Barlow, D. H.
(1996). Measurement of perceived control over anxietyrelated
events. Behavior Therapy, 27(2), 279–293.

Rapee, R. M., & Medoro, L. (1994). Fear of physical sensations
and trait anxiety as mediators of the response to
hyperventilation in nonclinical subjects. Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 103(4), 693–699.

Rapee, R. M., & Murrell, E. (1988). Predictors of agoraphobic
avoidance. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 2, 203–217.

Rathus, J. H., Sanderson, W. C., Miller, A. L., & Wetzler, S.
(1995). Impact of personality functioning on cognitive behavioral
treatment of panic disorder: A preliminary report.
Journal of Personality Disorders, 9, 160–168.

Razran, G. (1961). The observable unconscious and the inferable
conscious in current soviet psychophysiology: Interoceptive
conditioning, semantic conditioning, and the
orienting reflex. Psychological Review, 68, 81–147.

Reich, J., Perry, J. C., Shera, D., Dyck, I., Vasile, R., Goisman,

R. M., et al. (1994). Comparison of personality disorders
in different anxiety disorder diagnoses: Panic, agoraphobia,
generalized anxiety, and social phobia. Annals of
Clinical Psychiatry, 6(2), 125–134.
Reiss, S. (1980). Pavlovian conditioning and human fear: An
expectancy model. Behavior Therapy, 11, 380–396.

Reiss, S., Peterson, R., Gursky, D., & McNally, R. (1986).
Anxiety sensitivity, anxiety frequency, and the prediction
of fearfulness. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 24, 1–8.

Rescorla, R. A. (2006). Deepened extinction from compound
stimulus presentation. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Animal Behavior Processes, 32, 135–144.

Richards, J., Klein, B., & Carlbring, P. (2003). Internet-based
treatment for panic disorder. Cognitive Behaviour Therapy,
32, 125–135.

Richards, J. C., Klein, B., & Austin, D. W. (2006). Internet
cognitive behavioural therapy for panic disorder: Does the
inclusion of stress management information improve endstate
functioning? Clinical Psychologist, 10(1), 2–15.

Rowe, M. K., & Craske, M. G. (1998). Effects of an
expanding-spaced vs massed exposure schedule on fear
reduction and return of fear. Behaviour Research and
Therapy, 36, 701–717.

Roy-Byrne, P. P., & Cowley, D. S. (1995). Course and outcome
in panic disorder: A review of recent follow-up studies.
Anxiety, 1, 151–160.

Roy-Byrne, P., Craske, M. G., Stein, M. B., Sullivan, G., Bystritsky,
A., Katon, W., et al. (2005). A randomized effectiveness
trial of cognitive-behavioral therapy and medication
for primary care panic disorder. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 62, 290–298.

Roy-Byrne, P., Craske, M. G., Sullivan, G., Rose, R. D., Edlund,
M. J., Lang, A. J., et al. (2010). Delivery of evidencebased
treatment for multiple anxiety disorders in primary
care. Journal of American Medicine, 303(19), 1921–1928.


Panic Disorder and Agoraphobia

Roy-Byrne, P., Stein, M. B., Russo, J., Craske, M. G., Katon,
W., Sullivan, G., et al. (2005). Medical illness and response
to treatment in primary care panic disorder. General
Hospital Psychiatry, 27(4), 237–243.

Roy-Byrne, P. P., Mellman, T. A., & Uhde, T. W. (1988).
Biologic findings in panic disorder: Neuroendocrine and
sleep-related abnormalities [Special issue: Perspectives on
Panic-Related Disorders]. Journal of Anxiety Disorders,
2, 17–29.

Roy-Byrne, P. P., Stein, M. B., Russo, J., Mercier, E., Thomas,
R., McQuaid, J., et al. (1999). Panic disorder in the primary
care setting: Comorbidity, disability, service utilization,
and treatment. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 60(7),
492–499.

Safren, S. A., Gershuny, B. S., Marzol, P., Otto, M. W., & Pollack,
M. H. (2002). History of childhood abuse in panic
disorder, social phobia, and generalized anxiety disorder.
Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 190(7), 453–456.

Salkovskis, P., Clark, D., & Hackmann, A. (1991). Treatment
of panic attacks using cognitive therapy without exposure
or breathing retraining. Behaviour Research and Therapy,
29, 161–166.

Salkovskis, P. M. (1991). The importance of behaviour in the
maintenance of anxiety and panic: A cognitive account
[Special issue: The changing Face of Behavioural Psychotherapy].
Behavioural Psychotherapy, 19(1), 6–19.

Salkovskis, P. M., Clark, D. M., & Gelder, M. G. (1996).
Cognition–behaviour links in the persistence of panic. Behaviour
Research and Therapy, 34, 453–458.

Schade, A., Marquenie, L. A., van Balkom, A. J., Koeter, M.
W., de Beurs, E., van den Brink, W., et al. (2005). The
effectiveness of anxiety treatment on alcohol-dependent
patients with a comorbid phobic disorder: A randomized
controlled trial. Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental
Research, 29(5), 794–800.

Schmidt, N. B., Lerew, D. R., & Jackson, R. J. (1997). The
role of anxiety sensitivity in the pathogenesis of panic:
Prospective evaluation of spontaneous panic attacks during
acute stress. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 106,
355–364.

Schmidt, N. B., Lerew, D. R., & Jackson, R. J. (1999). Prospective
evaluation of anxiety sensitivity in the pathogenesis
of panic: Replication and extension. Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 108, 532–537.

Schmidt, N. B., McCreary, B. T., Trakowski, J. J., Santiago,

H. T., Woolaway-Bickel, K., & Ialong, N. (2003). Effects
of cognitive behavioral treatment on physical health status
in patients with panic disorder. Behavior Therapy, 34(1),
49–63.
Schmidt, N. B., Woolaway-Bickel, K., Trakowski, J., Santiago,
H., Storey, J., Koselka, M., et al. (2000). Dismantling
cognitive-behavioral treatment for panic disorder: Questioning
the utility of breathing retraining. Journal of Consulting
and Clinical Psychology, 68(3), 417–424.

Schneider, A. J., Mataix-Cols, D., Marks, I. M., & Bachofen,

M. (2005). Internet-guided self-help with or without exposure
therapy for phobic and panic disorders. Psychotherapy
and Psychosomatics, 74(3), 154–164.
Schumacher, J., Jamra, R. A., Becker, T., Klopp, N., Franke,
P., Jacob, C., et al. (2005). Investigation of the DAOA/
G30 locus in panic disorder. Molecular Psychiatry, 10,
428–429.

Seidel, A., Rosenfield, D., Bhaskara, L., Hofmann, S. G., &
Meuret, A. E. (2009). Pathways of biobehavioral change
in exposure therapy of panic disorder. Paper presented
at the 43rd Annual Convention of the Association of Advancement
for Behavioral and Cognitive Therapies, New
York.

Sharp, D. M., Power, K. G., Simpson, R. J., Swanson, V., &
Anstee, J. A. (1997). Global measures of outcome in a controlled
comparison of pharmacological and psychological
treatment of panic disorder and agoraphobia in primary
care. British Journal of General Practice, 47, 150–155.

Sharp, D. M., Power, K. G., & Swanson, V. (2004). A comparison
of the efficacy and acceptability of group versus
individual cognitive behaviour therapy in the treatment of
panic disorder and agoraphobia in primary care. Clinical
Psychology and Psychotherapy, 11(2), 73–82.

Shear, M. K., Brown, T. A., Barlow, D. H., Money, R., Sholomskas,
D. E, Woods, S. W., et al. (1997). Multicenter
collaborative Panic Disorder Severity Scale. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 154, 1571–1575.

Shear, M. K., Rucci, P., Williams, J., Frank, E., Grochocinski,
V., Vander-Bilt, J., et al. (2001). Reliability and validity of
the Panic Disorder Severity Scale: Replication and extension.
Journal of Psychiatric Research, 35(5), 293–296.

Shear, M. K., & Schulberg, H. C. (1995). Anxiety disorders
in primary care. Bulletin of the Menninger Clinic, 59(2,
Suppl. A), A73–A85.

Shulman, I. D., Cox, B. J., Swinson, R. P., Kuch, K., & Reichman,
J. T. (1994). Precipitating events, locations and reactions
associated with initial unexpected panic attacks.
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 32, 17–20.

Sloan, T., & Telch, M. J. (2002). The effects of safety-seeking
behavior and guided threat reappraisal on fear reduction
during exposure: An experimental investigation. Behaviour
Research and Therapy, 40(3), 235–251.

Soeter, M., & Kindt, M. (2010). Dissociating response systems:
Erasing fear from memory. Neurobiology of Learning
and Memory, 94(1), 30–41.

Sokolowska, M., Siegel, S., & Kim, J. A. (2002). Intraadministration
associations: Conditional hyperalgesia elicited by
morphine onset cues. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Animal Behavior Processes, 28(3), 309–320.

Sotres-Bayon, F., Cain, C. K., & LeDoux, J. E. (2006). Brain
mechanisms of fear extinction: historical perspectives on
the contribution of prefrontal cortex. Biological Psychiatry,
60, 329–336.

Spiegel, D. A., Bruce, T. J., Gregg, S. F., & Nuzzarello, A.
(1994). Does cognitive behavior therapy assist slow-taper


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

alprazolam discontinuation in panic disorder? American
Journal of Psychiatry, 151(6), 876–881.

Stein, M. B., Walker, J. R., Anderson, G., Hazen, A. L., Ross,

C. A., Eldridge, G., et al. (1996). Childhood physical and
sexual abuse in patients with anxiety disorders and a community
sample. American Journal of Psychiatry, 153,
275–277.
Sturges, L. V., Goetsch, V. L., Ridley, J., & Whittal, M.
(1998). Anxiety sensitivity and response to hyperventilation
challenge: Physiologic arousal, interoceptive acuity,
and subjective distress. Journal of Anxiety Disorders,
12(2), 103–115.

Suárez, L., Bennett, S., Goldstein, C., & Barlow, D. H.
(2008). Understanding anxiety disorders from a “triple
vulnerabilities” framework. In M. M. Anthony & M. B.
Stein (Eds.), Oxford handbook of anxiety and related disorders
(pp. 153–172). New York: Oxford University Press.

Swinson, R. P., Fergus, K. D., Cox, B. J., & Wickwire, K.
(1995). Efficacy of telephone-administered behavioral
therapy for panic disorder with agoraphobia. Behaviour
Research and Therapy, 33, 465–469.

Taylor, S., Koch, W. J., & McNally, R. J. (1992). How does
anxiety sensitivity vary across the anxiety disorders?
Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 6, 249–259.

Taylor, S., Zvolensky, M. J., Cox, B .J., Deacon, B., Heimberg,

R. G., Ledley, D. R., et al. (2007). Robust dimensions of
anxiety sensitivity: development and initial validation of
the Anxiety Sensitivity Index–3. Psychological Assessment,
19(2), 176–188.
Teachman, B. A., Marker, C. D., & Smith-Janik, S. B. (2008).
Automatic associations and panic disorder: Trajectories of
change over the course of treatment. Journal of Consulting
and Clinical Psychology, 76(6), 988–1002.

Telch, M. J., Brouillard, M., Telch, C. F., Agras, W. S., &
Taylor, C. B. (1989). Role of cognitive appraisal in panicrelated
avoidance. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 27,
373–383.

Telch, M. J., Lucas, J. A., & Nelson, P. (1989). Nonclinical
panic in college students: An investigation of prevalence
and symptomatology. Journal of Abnormal Psychology,
98, 300–306.

Telch, M. J., Lucas, J. A., Schmidt, N. B., Hanna, H. H., LaNae,
Jaimez, T., et al. (1993). Group cognitive-behavioral treatment
of panic disorder. Behaviour Research and Therapy,
31, 279–287.

Telch, M. J., Sherman, M., & Lucas, J. (1989). Anxiety sensitivity:
Unitary personality trait or domain specific appraisals?
Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 3, 25–32.

Thorgeirsson, T. E., Oskarsson, H., Desnica, N., Kostic, J. P.,
Stefansson, J. G., Kolbeinsson, H., et al. (2003). Anxiety
with panic disorder linked to chromosome 9q in Iceland.
American Journal of Human Genetics, 72, 1221–1230.

Thyer, B. A., Himle, J., Curtis, G. C., Cameron, O. G., &
Nesse, R. M. (1985). A comparison of panic disorder and

agoraphobia with panic attacks. Comprehensive Psychiatry,
26, 208–214.

Tiemens, B. G., Ormel, J., & Simon, G. E. (1996). Occurrence,
recognition, and outcome of psychological disorders
in primary care. American Journal of Psychiatry,
153, 636–644.

Tsao, J. C. I., Lewin, M. R., & Craske, M. G. (1998). The effects
of cognitive-behavior therapy for panic disorder on
comorbid conditions. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 12,
357–371.

Tsao, J. C. I., Mystkowski, J. L., Zucker, B. G., & Craske,

M. G. (2002). Effects of cognitive-behavioral therapy for
panic disorder on comorbid conditions: Replication and
extension. Behavior Therapy, 33, 493–509.
Tsao, J. C. I., Mystkowski, J. L., Zucker, B. G., & Craske,

M. G. (2005). Impact of cognitive-behavioral therapy for
panic disorder on comorbidity: A controlled investigation.
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 43, 959–970.
Uhde, T. W. (1994). The anxiety disorders: Phenomenology
and treatment of core symptoms and associated sleep
disturbance. In M. Kryger, T. Roth, & W. Dement (Eds.),
Principles and practice of sleep medicine (pp. 871–898).
Philadelphia: Saunders.

van Balkom, A. J., de Beurs, E., Koele, P., Lange, A., & van
Dyck, R. (1996). Long-term benzodiazepine use is associated
with smaller treatment gain in panic disorder with
agoraphobia. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease,
184, 133–135.

van Beek, N., Schruers, K. R., & Friez, E. J. (2005). Prevalence
of respiratory disorders in first-degree relatives of
panic disorder patients. Journal of Affective Disorders, 87,
337–340.

van den Hout, M., Arntz, A., & Hoekstra, R. (1994). Exposure
reduced agoraphobia but not panic, and cognitive therapy
reduced panic but not agoraphobia. Behaviour Research
and Therapy, 32, 447–451.

van den Hout, M., Brouwers, C., & Oomen, J. (2006). Clinically
diagnosed Axis II co-morbidity and the short term
outcome of CBT for Axis I disorders. Clinical Psychology
and Psychotherapy, 13(1), 56–63.

van Megen, H. J., Westenberg, H. G., Den Boer, J. A., & Kahn,

R. S. (1996). The panic-inducing properties of the cholecystokinin
tetrapeptide CCK4 in patients with panic disorder.
European Neuropsychopharmacology, 6, 187–194.
Vansteenwegen, D., Vervliet, B., Iberico, C., Baeyens, F., van
den Bergh, O., & Hermans, D. (2007). The repeated confrontation
with videotapes of spiders in multiple contexts
attenuates renewal of fear in spider-anxious students. Behavior
Research and Therapy, 45(6), 1169–1179.

Veltman, D. J., van Zijderveld, G., Tilders, F. J., & van Dyck,

R. (1996). Epinephrine and fear of bodily sensations in
panic disorder and social phobia. Journal of Psychopharmacology,
10(4), 259–265.
Verburg, K., Griez, E., Meijer, J., & Pols, H. (1995). Respira



Panic Disorder and Agoraphobia

tory disorders as a possible predisposing factor for panic
disorder. Journal of Affective Disorders, 33, 129–134.

Vos, S. P., Huibers, M. J., Diels, L., & Arntz, A. (2012).
A randomized clinical trial of cognitive behavioral therapy
and interpersonal psychotherapy for panic disorder
with agoraphobia. Psychological Medicine, 42(12), 2661–
2672.

Wade, W. A., Treat, T. A., & Stuart, G. L. (1998). Transporting
an empirically supported treatment for panic disorder
to a service clinic setting: A benchmarking strategy.
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 66,
231–239.

Walker, D. L., & Davis, M. (2002). The role of amygdala glutamate
receptors in fear learning, fear-potentiated startle,
and extinction. Pharmacology, 71, 379–392.

Wardle, J., Hayward, P., Higgitt, A., Stabl, M., Blizard, R., &
Gray, J. (1994). Effects of concurrent diazepam treatment
on the outcome of exposure therapy in agoraphobia. Behaviour
Research and Therapy, 32, 203–215.

Watson, D., & Clark, L. A. (1984). Negative affectivity: The
disposition to experience aversive emotional states. Psychological
Bulletin, 96(3), 465–490.

Weems, C. F., Hayward, C., Killen, J., & Taylor, C. B. (2002).
A longitudinal investigation of anxiety sensitivity in adolescence.
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 111(3), 471–
477.

Welkowitz, L., Papp, L., Cloitre, M., Liebowitz, M., Martin,
L., & Gorman, J. (1991). Cognitive-behavior therapy for
panic disorder delivered by psychopharmacologically oriented
clinicians. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease,
179, 473–477.

Westra, H. A., Stewart, S. H., & Conrad, B. E. (2002). Naturalistic
manner of benzodiazepine use and cognitive behavioral
therapy outcome in panic disorder and agoraphobia.
Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 16(3), 223–246.

White, K. S., Allen, L. B., Barlow, D. H., Gorman, J. M.,
Shear, M. K., & Woods, S. W. (2010). Attrition in a multicenter
clinical trial of panic disorder. Journal of Nervous
and Mental Diseases, 198, 665–671.

White, K. S., Payne, L. A., Gorman, J. M., Shear, M. K.,
Woods, S. W., Saska, J. R., et al. (2013). Does maintenance
CBT contribute to long-term treatment response of panic

disorder with or without agoraphobia?: A randomized controlled
clinical trial. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 81, 47–57.

Wilkinson, D. J., Thompson, J. M., Lambert, G. W., Jennings,
G. L., Schwarz, R. G., Jefferys, D., et al. (1998).
Sympathetic activity in patients with panic disorder at rest,
under laboratory mental stress, and during panic attacks.
Archives of General Psychiatry, 55(6), 511–520.

Williams, K. E., & Chambless, D. (1990). The relationship
between therapist characteristics and outcome of in vivo
exposure treatment for agoraphobia. Behavior Therapy,
21, 111–116.

Williams, K. E., & Chambless, D. L. (1994). The results of
exposure-based treatment in agoraphobia. In S. Friedman
(Ed.), Anxiety disorders in African Americans (pp. 149–
165). New York: Springer.

Williams, S. L., & Falbo, J. (1996). Cognitive and
performance-based treatments for panic attacks in people
with varying degrees of agoraphobic disability. Behaviour
Research and Therapy, 34, 253–264.

Williams, S. L., & Zane, G. (1989). Guided mastery and stimulus
exposure treatments for severe performance anxiety
in agoraphobics. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 27,
237–245.

Wittchen, H.-U., Gloster, A. T., Beesdo-Baum, K., Fava, G.
A., & Craske, M. G. (2010). Agoraphobia: A review of the
diagnostic classificatory position and criteria. Depression
and Anxiety, 27, 113–133.

Wolitzky-Taylor, K., Castriotta, N., Lenze, E., Stanley, M.
A., & Craske, M. G. (2010). Anxiety disorders in older
adults: A comprehensive review. Depression and Anxiety,
27, 190–211.

Zinbarg, R. E., & Barlow, D. H. (1996). Structure of anxiety
and the anxiety disorders: A hierarchical model. Journal
of Abnormal Psychology, 105(2), 184–193.

Zinbarg, R. E., Barlow, D. H., & Brown, T. A. (1997). Hierarchical
structure and general factor saturation of the
Anxiety Sensitivity Index: Evidence and implication. Psychological
Assessment, 9, 277–284.

Zoellner, L. A., & Craske, M. G. (1999). Interoceptive accuracy
and panic. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 37,
1141–1158.


CHaPter 2

Posttraumatic stress Disorder

caNDice M. MoNsoN
Patricia a. resick
shireeN l. rizvi

severe, unexpected trauma may occur in less than a minute but have lifelong consequences.
The tragedy that is posttraumatic stress disorder (PTsD) is brought into stark
relief when the origins of the trauma occur in the context of people’s inhumanity to
others. in this chapter, the case of “Tom” illustrates the psychopathology associated with
PTsD in all its nuances and provides a very personal account of its impact. in one of any
number of events summarized dryly every day in the middle pages of the newspaper,
Tom, in the fog of war in iraq, shoots and kills a pregnant woman and her young child
in the presence of her husband and father. The impact of this event devastates him. The
sensitive and skilled therapeutic intervention described in this chapter is a model for new
therapists, and belies the notion that, in these severe cases, manualized therapy can be
rote and automated. in addition, the next generation of treatment for PTsD, termed “cognitive
processing therapy” by the authors, is sufficiently detailed to allow knowledgeable
practitioners to incorporate this treatment program into their practice. This comprehensive
treatment program takes advantage of the latest developments in our knowledge of
the psychopathology of trauma impact by incorporating treatment strategies specifically
tailored to overcome trauma‑related psychopathology, and does so in the context of the
significant changes to diagnostic criteria in DsM‑5.—D. H. B.

DiaGNosis

Unlike most other psychological disorders, posttraumatic
stress disorder (PTSD) requires the occurrence
of a specific type of event from which the person affected
does not recover. First, to qualify for a diagnosis
of PTSD according to the fifth edition of the Diagnostic
and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders

(DSM-5; American Psychiatric Association, 2013), the
individual must have experienced, witnessed, or otherwise
been confronted with an event or events that
involved actual or threatened death, serious injury, or
sexual violence. Exposure to traumatic events may take

the form of experiencing an event directly, witnessing
the event happen to someone else, learning of violent
or accidental trauma that happened to a close friend or
family member, or being repeatedly or extremely exposed
to aversive elements of a traumatic event (e.g., a
rescue worker collecting body parts). Symptom criteria
fall into four broad categories: reexperiencing (criterion
B), avoidance (criterion C), negative alterations
in cognition and mood (criterion D; e.g., memory difficulties,
feeling detached, persistent negative beliefs)
and hyperarousal (criterion E). According to criterion
B, the reexperiencing symptoms must be experienced
in one of the following ways: Memories of the trauma

62


Posttraumatic Stress Disorder

may intrude into consciousness repetitively, without
warning, seemingly “out of the blue,” without triggers
or reminders to elicit them. The person with PTSD may
experience intensely vivid reenactment experiences, or
flashbacks. Intrusive memories may also occur during
the sleeping state in the form of thematically related
nightmares. Additionally, when faced with cues associated
with the traumatic event, whether actual or symbolic,
the individual may exhibit intense psychological
reactions (e.g., terror, disgust, depression) and/or physiological
responses (e.g., increased heart rate, perspiration,
rapid breathing).

These reexperiencing symptoms are generally distressing
and intrusive because the individual has no control
over when or how they occur, and they elicit strong
negative emotions associated with the initial trauma
(Janoff-Bulman, 1992; Resick & Schnicke, 1992). Fear
stimuli (cues) are sometimes obvious, such as the combat
veteran who ducks in fear when a car backfires and
sounds like gunfire. But sometimes the relationship between
the trauma and the cue is not immediately clear.
For example, one survivor of rape was fearful of taking
showers, even though the rape had occurred away
from her home. However, as she began to process the
rape in treatment, she realized that every time she took a
shower, she felt very vulnerable because she was alone,
naked, had no escape routes, and had diminished vision
and hearing—all stimuli that reminded her of the rape.

Avoidance symptoms (criterion C) reflect the individual’s
attempt to gain physical and psychological
distance from the trauma. Some have suggested that
avoidance symptoms are a response to reexperiencing
symptoms (Buckley, Blanchard, & Hickling, 1998;
Creamer, Burgess, & Pattison, 1992; Taylor, Kuch,
Koch, Crockett, & Passey, 1998). As traumatic memories
intrude into consciousness, so do the painful negative
emotions associated with the trauma. Thus, the
individual may avoid thoughts and feelings about the
trauma, may avoid situations and events reminiscent of
the trauma, or may actually forget significant aspects
of the trauma (criterion D1). Avoidance of the trauma
memory leads to a temporary decrease in painful emotions
but, paradoxically, increases avoidance behavior.
Trauma survivors frequently report highly constricted
lifestyles after the traumatic experience due to the need
to avoid reminders of the traumatic memory and associated
emotions. At least three types of avoidance
behavior are required before a diagnosis can be made.

Similarly, detachment or numbing symptoms (part
of criterion D) are attempts to cut off the aversive feel


ings associated with intrusive memories (Astin, Layne,
Camilleri, & Foy, 1994; Resick & Schnicke, 1992).
This detachment may then generalize to all emotions,
both positive and negative. Trauma survivors commonly
state that they no longer have any strong feelings, or
that they feel numb a great deal of the time. This sort
of pervasive detachment may interfere profoundly with
the individual’s ability to relate to others, enjoy daily
life, remain productive, and plan for the future. It is also
important to note that not all trauma survivors experience
emotional numbing. On the contrary, some find
themselves experiencing continuous, intense negative
emotions such as anger or shame. Trauma survivors
may experience persistent cognitive symptoms, also
classified under criterion D. These include negative beliefs
about about themselves, others, or life in general
(e.g., “I’ll never be able to have a normal relationship,”
“Nowhere is 100% safe”). They may have distorted
perceptions, often involving self-blame, about why the
trauma occurred or its consequences.

The trauma survivor may also experience symptoms
of hyperarousal (criterion E). This suggests that the individual
is in a constant state of “fight or flight,” which
is similar to how the individual’s body responded during
the actual traumatic event. In this state of alert, the
individual is primed to react to new threats of danger,
even in relatively safe situations. During a crisis, this
is adaptive because it facilitates survival. However,
as a steady state, hyperarousal interferes with daily
functioning and leads to exhaustion. In this state, the
individual spends a great deal of energy scanning the
environment for danger cues (hypervigilance). The
individual is likely to experience sleep disturbance,
decreased concentration, irritability, and overreactivity
to stimuli (exaggerated startle response). There is
evidence to suggest that this constant state of tension
has deleterious effects on overall physical health (e.g.,
Kulka et al., 1990). At least two criterion E behaviors
must be present for a diagnosis of PTSD.

The previously described symptom criteria must be
met concurrently for at least 1 month to warrant a diagnosis
of PTSD, and the symptoms must be perceived as
distressing or cause functional impairment. A substantial
proportion of trauma survivors exhibit symptoms
consistent with a PTSD diagnosis immediately after
the traumatic event. However, these rates drop almost
in half within 3 months posttrauma, then tend to stabilize.
For example, rape trauma survivors assessed at
2 weeks, 1 month, 3 months, 6 months, and 9 months
posttrauma exhibited PTSD diagnostic rates of 94, 65,


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

47, 42, and 42%, respectively (Rothbaum & Foa, 1992).
Thus, after 3 months, PTSD rates did not decrease
substantially. Another study that assessed survivors of
rape trauma at approximately 2 weeks and at 3 months
postassault found very similar rates of PTSD (Gutner,
Rizvi, Monson, & Resick, 2006). At the first assessment,
81% of the rape survivors met symptom criteria
for PTSD (minus the time criterion), and at 3 months
postrape, 53% continued to meet criteria. Other, more
heterogeneous events (greater variability in the severity
of the event), such as combat, disasters, or physical
assaults, are associated with lower rates of PTSD than
rape (Kessler, Sonnega, Bromet, Hughes, & Nelson,
1995). Delayed onset of PTSD is rare and may reflect
earlier subthreshold symptoms (perhaps due to dissociation,
amnesia, or extensive avoidance) or a change in
the meaning of the event at a later time (e.g., the perpetrator
kills a later victim, thereby changing the meaning
of the event for the survivor).

The introduction of DSM-5 in 2013 brought about
changes in diagnostic criteria that impact research and
treatment of PTSD. Whereas PTSD was classified as
an anxiety disorder in previous DSM editions, it is currently
listed among trauma- and stressor-related disorders.
This change makes sense given that PTSD does
not group cleanly with the anxiety disorders based on
factor analyses (e.g., Cox, Clara, & Enns, 2002; Miller,
Greif, & Smith, 2003; Miller, Kaloupek, Dillon, &
Keane, 2004; Miller & Resick, 2007) and may include
a range of emotions such as anger, sadness, guilt, or
horror (see DSM-5 criterion D). DSM-5 also tightened
the stressor criterion, and criterion D (negative alterations
in cognitions and mood) is new to DSM-5.

The intrusion criterion clearly does not include ruminating
about the event but it does include at least
one of the following: spontaneous or cued distressing
memories of the traumatic event; recurrent distressing
dreams in which the content or emotions are related to
the event; dissociative reactions in which the individual
feels or acts as if the traumatic event(s) are happening
again; psychological distress when confronted with internal
or external cues that symbolize or resemble the
traumatic event; or marked physiological reactions to
reminders of the traumatic event(s).

The avoidance criterion includes two items: avoidance
of internal reminders or avoidance of external reminders
of the traumatic event. Only one of the two is
required for diagnosis.

The third symptom criterion includes some clarified
items and some items newly introduced in DSM-5. The

individual must experience at least two of the following
types of symptoms: inability to remember an important
aspect of the traumatic event(s); persistent and exaggerated
negative cognitions about one’s self, others, or
the world; distorted blame of self or others about the
cause or consequences of the event(s); global negative
emotional states (e.g., fear, horror, anger, guilt, shame);
markedly diminished interest or participation in significant
activities; feeling of detachment or estrangement
from others; or persistent inability to experience
positive emotions (e.g., inability to have loving feelings,
psychic numbing).

Compared to DSM-IV, in DSM-5 the fourth symptom
criterion is expanded beyond physiological arousal
to dysfunctional and impulsive behaviors, and includes
irritable or aggressive behavior; reckless or selfdestructive
behavior; hypervigilance; exaggerated startle
response; problems with concentration; and sleep
disturbance.

Unlike DSM-IV, DSM-5 stipulates that symptoms
cannot be due to the direct physiological effects of a
substance or a general medical condition (e.g., traumatic
brain injury, coma).

New to DSM-5 is a dissociative subtype of PTSD,
which has been added due to a convergence of literature
from epidemiological studies (e.g., Wolf et al., 2012),
psychophysiological studies (e.g., Griffin, Resick &
Mechanic, 1997); neuroimaging studies (e.g., Lanius
et al., 2010), and treatment studies (Cloitre, Petkova,
Wang, & Lu Lassell, 2012; Resick, Williams, Suvak,
Monson, & Gradus, 2012) that have found a small
group (15%) of people with severe PTSD who are also
highly dissociative. These individuals appear to respond
differently to treatment than those with severe
PTSD without dissociative features.

In addition, DSM-5 offers separate classification for
PTSD in young children, as well as PTSD in which
symptom onset is not for at least 6 months after the
trauma.

PrevaleNce

Epidemiological studies document high rates of trauma
exposure and PTSD in the population (Kessler et al.,
1995; Kilpatrick, Saunders, Veronen, Best, & Von,
1987; Kulka et al., 1990). In a national (U.S.) random
probability sample of 4,008 women, Resnick, Kilpatrick,
Dansky, Saunders, and Best (1993) found a high
rate of trauma experiences (69%). When they extrapo



Posttraumatic Stress Disorder

lated their results to the U.S. population based on census
statistics for 1989, they estimated that 66 million
women in the United States had experienced at least
one major traumatic event. Of those who had experienced
a criterion A stressor, Resnick and colleagues
found the following lifetime PTSD rates: completed
rape, 32%; other sexual assault, 31%; physical assault,
39%; homicide of family or friend, 22%; any crime
victimization, 26%; and noncrime trauma (e.g., natural
and manmade disasters, accidents, injuries), 9%.

In the first large national civilian prevalence study
of the psychological effects of trauma, Kessler and colleagues
(1995) surveyed a representative U.S. national
sample of 5,877 persons (2,812 men and 3,065 women).
This study assessed 12 categories of traumatic stressors
and found that a majority of people had experienced at
least one major traumatic event. They found that whereas
20.4% of women and 8.2% of men were likely to develop
PTSD following exposure to trauma, the rates for
specific traumas were often much higher. For example,
rape was identified as the trauma most likely to lead to
PTSD among men, as well as women, and 65% of men
and 46% of women who identified rape as their most
distressing trauma were diagnosed with PTSD. Among
men who identified other traumas as most distressing,
the probability of having PTSD was 39% for those with
combat exposure, 24% for those who suffered childhood
neglect, and 22% of those who experienced childhood
physical abuse. Among women, aside from rape,
PTSD was associated with physical abuse in childhood
(49%), threat with a weapon (33%), sexual molestation
(27%), and physical attack (21%). As with Resnick and
colleagues’ (1993) study, accidents and natural disasters
were much less likely to precipitate PTSD among
men and women. On the other hand, Norris (1992)
pointed out that although motor vehicle accidents
(MVAs) occur less frequently than some traumas (e.g.,
tragic death or robbery) and are less traumatic than
some events (sexual and physical assault), when both
frequency and impact are considered together, MVAs
may be the single most significant event. The lifetime
frequency of MVAs is 23%, and the PTSD rate is 12%,
which results in a rate of 28 seriously distressed people
for every 1,000 adults in the United States, just from
one type of event.

More recently, Kessler and his colleagues (Kessler,
Berglund, et al., 2005; Kessler, Chiu, Demler, Merikangas,
& Walters, 2005) reported on another large
National Comorbidity Survey with over 9,200 respondents.
The overall prevalence of PTSD was 6.8% in this

study; this compares to the 7.8% population prevalence
reported in the 1995 study.

The largest study of combat veterans to date, the National
Vietnam Veterans Readjustment Study (NVVRS;
Kulka et al., 1990), was mandated by the U.S. Congress
in 1983 to assess PTSD and other psychological problems
following the Vietnam War. During the years
of the war, over 8 million people served in the U.S.
military. Of those, 3.1 million served in Vietnam (theater
veterans) and the remainder served in other areas
abroad or in the United States (era veterans). Women
comprised 7,200 of those serving in Vietnam, and over
255,000 of those serving elsewhere during the Vietnam
era. The NVVRS conducted in-depth interviews and
assessments with three groups: 1,632 Vietnam theater
veterans, 716 Vietnam era veterans, and 668 nonveterans/
civilian counterparts, for a total of 3,016 participants.


The results of the NVVRS indicated that the majority
of Vietnam theater veterans made a successful readjustment
to civilian life and did not suffer from PTSD
or other problems. However, the researchers also found
that 31% of men and 27% of women veterans had a
full diagnosis of PTSD at some time during their lives.
Furthermore, 15% of men and 9% of women veterans
had PTSD at the time of the study, over a decade after
the end of the war. These rates translated to 479,000
Vietnam veterans with current PTSD. In addition, 11%
of men and 8% of women veterans were found to have
significant symptoms and distress but did not meet the
full criteria for PTSD. This translated to an additional
350,000 men and women in the United States alone
who were still suffering in the aftermath of the Vietnam
War.

Data from the NVVRS were reevaluated using very
strict criteria that only included those incidents that
could be verified through historical records. Dohrenwend
and colleagues (2006) found very little falsification
of events and a strong relationship between the
amount of trauma exposure and rates of PTSD (i.e.,
dose–response relationship). They did, however, find
lower rates of PTSD after controlling for people who
developed PTSD before or after their deployment to
Vietnam and eliminating those people with unverifiable
events. Using these stricter criteria, they found that
18.7% of the veterans met the criteria for war-related
PTSD at some point, and 9.1% still had PTSD when
assessed 11 to 12 years later. These rates should be
considered minimum likelihood rates given that people
can be traumatized by events that may not be verifi



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

able (e.g., rape, accidents) in historical accounts of war.
Currently under way is a study of the participants of the
NVVRS, called the National Vietnam Veterans Longitudinal
Study (NVVLS), which will inform us about
the long-term effects of PTSD.

More recent conflicts in Iraq and Afghanistan saw
the first attempts to assess PTSD during a war (Hoge
et al., 2004; Hoge, Auchterlonie, & Milliken, 2006).
Hoge and his colleagues (2004) studied 2,530 Army
soldiers and Marines before and 3,671 after deployment
to Iraq or Afghanistan. They found that mental health
problems were significantly greater among those who
returned from deployment than among those not yet
deployed, and that mental health problems were greater
in those who deployed to Iraq compared with Afghanistan.
Prior to deployment, 9% of the service personnel
exceeded the cutoff used for likely PTSD, whereas
11.5% of those deployed to Afghanistan and 18–20% of
those deployed to Iraq exceeded the cutoff. There was
a linear relationship between the number of firefights
reported and the severity of PTSD. Being wounded or
otherwise physically injured was also associated with
greater PTSD symptomatology.

Because the military began screening all military
personnel for PTSD following deployment, a
population-based study of 303,905 Army soldiers and
Marines who deployed to Afghanistan, Iraq, or other
locations could be conducted for a 1-year period (May
2003 to April 2004; Hoge et al., 2006). As with the
previous report, service men and women were more
likely to report mental health problems after serving in
Iraq (19.1%) than after serving in Afghanistan (11.3%)
or other locations (8.5%). In this study 32,500 women
were also assessed, comprising 10.7% of the total
sample. There was an overall sex difference in mental
health concerns, with 23.6% of women compared
with 18.6% of men reporting a mental health concern.
However, this sex comparison did not take into account
preexisting traumas or PTSD, exposure to combat traumas
or sexual assault, or other variables that might
explain these differences. Also, the PTSD screen was
a four-item questionnaire in which two “yes” answers
indicated possible PTSD. On this screen, 9.8% of those
who had served in Iraq met criteria for possible PTSD,
and there was again an association between the amount
of combat exposure and PTSD.

Recently, Vogt and colleagues (2011) reported on the
effects of combat on women, which is a change from
prior wars, as well as predictors of PTSD with a national
random survey of veterans of Iraq and Afghanistan

who had returned from deployment within the previous
year. The researchers attempted to contact 2,000
veterans, oversampling female veterans to have equal
numbers of men and women. The sample comprised
579 veterans who completed the survey. Significantly
more men (49%) than women (43%) reported warfare
exposure. Women also reported significantly lower levels
of relationship concerns. However, men and women
did not differ with regard to perceived threat, childhood
family functioning, prior stressors, postdeployment
stressors, postdeployment social support, or PTSD
symptom severity. This study did not examine military
sexual trauma, which has been found to be higher
among women, perhaps explaining the equal rates of
PTSD for men and women in this sample (Street, Gradus,
Vogt, Giasson, & Resick, 2013).

theoretical MoDels of PtsD

As researchers and clinicians began to study and treat
survivors of rape trauma and Vietnam veterans in the
1970s, they began to draw upon learning theory as an
explanation for the symptoms they were observing.
Mowrer’s two-factor theory (1947) of classical and
operant conditioning was first proposed to account for
posttrauma symptoms (Becker, Skinner, Abel, Axelrod,
& Cichon, 1984; Holmes & St. Lawrence, 1983;
Keane, Zimering, & Caddell, 1985; Kilpatrick, Veronen,
& Best, 1985; Kilpatrick, Veronen, & Resick,
1982). Classical conditioning was used to explain the
high levels of distress and fear observed in trauma
victims in reaction to trauma-related stimuli. Operant
conditioning explained the onset of PTSD avoidance
symptoms and maintenance of fear over time, despite
the fact that the unconditioned stimulus, the traumatic
stressor, does not recur. Because the trauma memory
and other cues (conditioned stimuli) elicit fear and anxiety
(conditioned emotional responses), people avoid
(or escape from) these cues, and the result is a reduction
in fear and anxiety. In this manner, avoidance of the
conditioned stimuli is negatively reinforced, which prevents
deterioration of the link between the trauma cues
and anxiety that would normally be expected without
repetition of the trauma itself.

Although learning theory accounts for much of the
onset and maintenance of the fear and avoidance in
PTSD, it does not fully explain “intrusion symptoms”
(i.e., repetitive memories of the trauma that intrude
into survivors’ thoughts in both conscious and uncon



Posttraumatic Stress Disorder

scious, states such as nightmares). Based on Lang’s
(1977) information-processing theory of anxiety development,
Foa, Steketee, and Rothbaum (1989) suggested
that PTSD emerges due to the development of a
fear network in memory that elicits escape and avoidance
behavior. Mental fear structures include stimuli,
response, and meaning elements. Anything associated
with the trauma may elicit the fear structure or
schema and subsequent avoidance behavior. The fear
network in people with PTSD is thought to be stable
and to generalize broadly, so that it is easily accessed.
Chemtob, Roitblat, Hamada, Carlson, and Twentyman
(1988) proposed that these structures are always at least
weakly activated in individuals with PTSD and guide
their interpretation of events as potentially dangerous.
When the fear network is activated by reminders of
the trauma, the information in the network enters consciousness
(intrusive symptoms). Attempts to avoid this
activation result in the avoidance symptoms of PTSD.
According to information-processing theory, repetitive
exposure to the traumatic memory in a safe environment
results in habituation of fear and subsequent
changes in the fear structure. As emotion decreases,
clients with PTSD begin to modify their meaning elements
spontaneously, and consequently change their
self-statements and reduce their generalization.

Cognitive theories are also concerned with information
processing, but they focus on the effect of trauma
on the survivor’s belief system and the adjustments
that are necessary to reconcile a traumatic event with
prior beliefs and expectations. The first and most influential
cognitive theorist, Horowitz (1986), moved from
a more psychodynamic view to a cognitive processing
theory. Horowitz proposed that processing is driven by a
“completion tendency,” the psychological need for new,
incompatible information to be integrated with existing
beliefs. The completion tendency keeps the trauma information
in active memory until the processing is complete
and the event is resolved. Horowitz also theorized
that there is a basic conflict between the person’s need
to resolve and reconcile the event into his or her history,
and the desire to avoid emotional pain. When images
of the event (flashbacks, nightmares, intrusive recollections),
thoughts about the meanings of the trauma,
and emotions associated with the trauma become overwhelming,
psychological defense mechanisms take over,
and the person exhibits numbing or avoidance. Horowitz
suggested that a person with PTSD oscillates between
phases of intrusion and avoidance, and that if successfully
processed, the oscillations become less frequent

and less intense. According to this theory, chronic PTSD
occurs because the trauma remains in active memory
without becoming fully integrated; therefore, it is still
able to stimulate intrusive and avoidant reactions.

Several other social-cognitive researchers and theorists
who have focused more on the content of the cognitions
in PTSD propose that basic assumptions about
the world and oneself are “shattered.” Constructivist
theories are based on the idea that people actively create
their own internal representations of the world (and
themselves). New experiences are assigned meaning
based on a person’s model of the world (Janoff-Bulman,
1985, 1992; Mahoney & Lyddon, 1988; McCann &
Pearlman, 1990). The task for recovery is to reconstruct
fundamental beliefs and establish equilibrium.
Janoff-Bulman (1985) suggested that this process is
accomplished by reinterpreting the event to reduce the
distance between the prior beliefs and the new beliefs.
Other theorists have proposed that if one’s preexisting
beliefs are particularly positive or particularly negative,
then more severe PTSD symptoms result (McCann &
Pearlman, 1990; Resick & Schnicke, 1992; Resick,
Monson, & Chard, 2007). Foa, Steketee, and Rothbaum
(1989) focused particularly on beliefs regarding
the predictability and controllability of the trauma,
whereas McCann and Pearlman (1990) proposed that
several areas of cognition might be either disrupted or
seemingly confirmed, that is, beliefs regarding safety,
trust, control/power, esteem, and intimacy. The Resick
and colleauges (2007) model focuses particularly on
the “just world” myth and the human desire (and illusion)
that we can predict and control our lives.

In a cognitive model, affective expression is needed,
not for habituation, but for the trauma memory to be
processed fully. It is assumed that the natural affect,
once accessed, dissipates rather quickly, and that the
work of accommodating the memory with beliefs can
begin. Once faulty beliefs regarding the event (selfblame,
guilt) and overgeneralized beliefs about oneself
and the world (e.g., safety, trust, control, esteem,
intimacy) are challenged, then the secondary emotions
also decrease, along with the intrusive reminders.
The fact that both stress inoculation training without
trauma exposure exercises (Foa, Rothbaum, Riggs, &
Murdock, 1991; Foa et al., 1999) and cognitive therapy
without written or oral accounts of the traumatic experience
(e.g., Ehlers et al., 2003; Resick et al., 2008;
Tarrier et al., 1999) are effective treatments for PTSD
undermines the assumption that habituation is the sole
mechanism of change.


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

Ehlers and Clark (2000) proposed a cognitive model
of PTSD that focuses on perceived threat and memory.
Although the event occurred in the past, Ehlers and
Clark propose that people with PTSD are unable to see
the event as time-limited and assume that it has larger
implications for the future. Individuals with PTSD appraise
the event such that they believe themselves to be
currently at risk. There are several ways in which this
misappraisal happens. One is to overgeneralize based
on the event and assume that normal activities are more
dangerous than they objectively are. Individuals may
overestimate the probability that the event will recur.
After the trauma happens, they may misconstrue the
meaning of their PTSD symptoms such that they perceive
themselves to be in greater danger (false alarms
are assumed to be true alarms) or interpret their symptoms
to mean that they cannot cope with events in the
future.

Ehlers and Clark’s (2000) cognitive theory also
considers the apparent memory disturbance that occurs,
such that persons with PTSD may have trouble
intentionally accessing their memory of the event but
have involuntary intrusions of parts of the event. They
propose that because memory encoded at the time of
the trauma is poorly elaborated and integrated with
other memories with regard to details, context of time,
sequence, and so forth, this might explain why people
with PTSD have poor autobiographical memory, yet
may be triggered to have memory fragments that have
a here-and-now quality (no time context) or lack appropriate
posttrauma appraisals (e.g., “I did not die”). Like
the emotional processing models, Ehlers and Clark
also propose that strong associative learning is paired
with fear responses and may generalize. In response to
perceptions of threat, people with PTSD adopt various
maladaptive coping strategies, depending on their
appraisals. For example, people who believe they will
go crazy if they think about the traumatic event try to
avoid thoughts about the trauma and keep their minds
occupied as much as possible. Someone who believes
that he or she must figure out why the traumatic event
occurred to keep it from happening again will ruminate
about how it could have been prevented. Those
who think they were being punished for their actions
may become immobilized and be unable to make decisions.
These maladaptive strategies, most often avoidance
behaviors, may (1) increase symptoms, (2) prevent
change in negative appraisals, or (3) prevent change in
the trauma memory.

In an attempt to reconcile the theories of PTSD,
Brewin, Dalgleish, and Joseph (1996) proposed a
dual-representation theory that incorporates both
information-processing and social-cognitive theories,
and introduces research and theory from cognitive science
with regard to memory. They have suggested that
the concept of a single emotional memory is too narrow
to describe the full range of memory that has been
evident in research and clinical observations. Based
on prior research, they proposed that sensory input is
subject to both conscious and nonconscious processing.
The memories that are conscious and can be deliberately
retrieved, termed “verbally accessible memories”
(VAMs), contain some sensory information, information
about emotional and physical reactions, and the
personal meaning of the event. Although VAMs might
be reasonably detailed, they may also be very selective
because attention is narrowed under conditions
of stress, and short-term memory capacity may be decreased.


The other type of memories are theorized to be
nonconsious and are termed “situationally accessed
memories” (SAMs). This type of information, which
is probably much more extensive than autobiographical
memories of the event, cannot be accessed deliberately
and is not as easily altered or edited as the more
explicitly accessed VAMs. SAMs comprise sensory
(e.g., auditory, visual, tactile), physiological, and motoric
information that may be accessed automatically
when a person is exposed to a stimulus situation similar
in some fashion to the trauma, or when that person
consciously thinks about the trauma. SAMs are then
experienced as intrusive sensory images or flashbacks
accompanied by physiological arousal.

Dual-representation theory posits two types of emotional
reactions: One type is conditioned during the
event (e.g., fear, anger), recorded in the SAMs, and activated
along with reexperienced sensory and physiological
information. The other type, secondary emotions,
result from the consequences and implications (meaning)
of the trauma. These secondary emotions may include
not only fear and anger but also guilt, shame, and
sadness.

Brewin and colleagues (1996) proposed that emotional
processing of the trauma has two elements. One
element of the processing is the activation of SAMS
(as suggested by information-processing theories), the
purpose of which is to aid in cognitive readjustment by
supplying detailed sensory and physiological informa



Posttraumatic Stress Disorder

tion concerning the trauma. The activation of SAMs
may eventually diminish in frequency when they are
blocked by the creation of new SAMs, or when they are
altered by the incorporation of new information. When
the SAMs are brought into consciousness, they can
be altered by being paired with different bodily states
(e.g., relaxation or habituation) or different conscious
thoughts. Eventually, if the SAMs are replaced or altered
sufficiently, there is a reduction in negative emotions
and a subsequent reduction in attentional bias and
accessibility of the memory.

The second element (as proposed by the socialcognitive
theorists) is the conscious attempt to search
for meaning, to ascribe cause or blame, and to resolve
conflicts between the event and prior expectations and
beliefs. The goal of this process is to reduce the negative
emotions and to restore a sense of relative safety
and control in one’s environment. To obtain this second
goal, the traumatized person may have to edit his or her
autobiographical memory (VAMs) to reconcile conflicts
between the event and the person’s belief system.
The traumatized person may either alter the memory of
the event in some way to reestablish the preexisting belief
system or alter preexisting beliefs and expectations
to accommodate this new information.

Brewin and colleagues (1996) suggest that for cases
in which the emotions are primary and driven by
SAMs, exposure therapy may be all that is needed.
However, when secondary emotions such as self-blame,
guilt, or shame are present, cognitive therapy may be
needed. Although both exposure and cognitive therapies
have been found to be effective in treating PTSD,
no research thus far has matched types of therapy to
client profiles.

Another multirepresentational cognitive model
called SPAARS (Dalgleish, 2004) was originally
proposed to explain everyday emotional experience
and was then applied to PTSD. This model also endeavors
to encompass previous theories. The model
proposes four types or levels of mental representation
systems: schematic, propositional, analogue, and associative
representational systems. The schematic level
represents abstract generic information, or schemas.
Propositional-level information is verbally accessible
meanings, similar to VAMs, whereas information at
the analogue level is stored as “images” across all types
of sensory systems, similar to SAMs. Associative representations
are similar to the fear structures hypothesized
in emotional processing theory as representing

the connections between other types of representations.
In the SPAARS model, emotions are generated through
two routes. One, similar to the Ehlers and Clark (2000)
cognitive model, is through appraisals at the schematic
level, in which events are compared against important
goals. A person appraises an event to be threatening
if it blocks an important goal, then experiences fear.
Because traumatic events are threats to survival, they
are appraised as threatening and elicit fear. The second
route to emotion is through associative learning, which
is automatic and similar to the fear activation described
by Foa and her colleagues (1989).

Within the SPAARS model, a traumatic event triggers
intense appraisal-driven fear, helplessness, or horror,
as well as a range of other emotions. Information
about the traumatic event is encoded in the schematic,
propositional, and analogue levels simultaneously. Because
the memory of the traumatic event represents
an ongoing threat to goals, the person is left with lowlevel
fear activation, cognitive bias to attend to threat
appraisals, and intrusive sensory images and appraisals.
The trauma memory exists across different levels
of mental representation but is unincorporated into
the person’s larger mental representations; the memory
may be elicited as flashbacks or nightmares. Such
strong memory and emotional intrusions result in efforts
to cope through avoidance.

assessMeNt

Any comprehensive assessment of PTSD must capture
whether or not a life event meets the seriousness and
subjective response requirements of a traumatic stressor
(criterion A), as well as the presence and severity
of the DSM-IV-TR 20 associated symptoms (criteria
B–E). Although interview-based measures are considered
the “gold standard” for assessing PTSD, a number
of self-report measures have been developed in recent
years to provide a quicker, less resource-heavy method
for assessing PTSD. New DSM-5 criteria continue to
be psychometrically validated, and assessment and research
are adapting accordingly.

Assessment of Traumatic Events

The first essential step in the assessment of PTSD is to
identify traumas in the patient’s history. Often this is
difficult to achieve because many trauma survivors, es



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

pecially rape and child sexual abuse trauma survivors,
do not spontaneously disclose their trauma history.
This is consistent with general patterns of avoidance
of trauma-related reminders and may reflect shame,
embarrassment, and self-blame regarding the incidents.
Even when seeking treatment for mental health problems,
trauma survivors often fail to recognize that their
psychological difficulties may be associated with their
trauma history. Kilpatrick (1983) suggested several
other reasons survivors might not be forthcoming with
this information, including fear of a negative reaction
to disclosure, especially if previous disclosure has resulted
in disbelief or blame. Additionally, many trauma
survivors do not recognize or label their experience as
“trauma,” “rape,” or “abuse,” especially if the assailant
was an acquaintance or a relative, or if the trauma
was experienced by many people, as in combat. Finally,
in the absence of a strong alliance with the therapist,
many people choose not to disclose such deeply personal
information. It is therefore important for the clinician
to forge a positive alliance as early as possible and
be forthcoming about the purpose of the questioning,
any limits of confidentiality, and how the obtained information
may be used (i.e., diagnosis, treatment planning,
research purposes).

In terms of questions regarding the presence of traumatic
experiences, a behavioral, descriptive prompt
such as “Has anyone ever made you have unwanted
sexual contact by physical force or threat of force?” is
more detailed and is preferable to asking, “Have you
ever been raped?” In the latter case, someone who is
married (or dating) and has been sexually assaulted
may say “no,” because “rape” might not be a term that
he/she associates with forced sex by one’s partner. The
same problem may exist with child abuse. A client may
indicate that he was not abused as a child but readily
admit, when asked, that a parent whipped him with a
belt until he had welts. In general, it is recommended
that clinicians always begin with broad questions about
experiences, then move to more specific, behaviorally
anchored questions.

Some structured interviews have been developed
with the primary purpose of assessing traumas in more
detail. The Potential Stressful Events Interview (Kilpatrick,
Resnick, & Freedy, 1991) has behaviorally
anchored questions that are particularly good for assessing
interpersonal victimization, as well as a range
of other traumatic stressors. The DSM-IV version of
the Clinician-Administered PTSD Scale (CAPS; Blake
et al., 1995; reviewed in more detail later, and used

in the majority of extant PTSD research), includes a
self-report screening scale (Life Events Checklist), followed
by interviewer prompts to establish whether a
trauma meets criterion A. Validation of the most recent
CAPS (Weathers, Blake, et al., 2013), reflecting current
DSM-5 criteria, is ongoing.

Many clinicians may choose to circumvent some
of these extensive questions by using self-report measures,
such as checklists, to acquire some initial information.
Although clinicians should not rely on them
exclusively, a number of checklists can be used as a
springboard for further inquiry. In addition to the Life
Events Checklist, the Traumatic Stress Schedule (Norris,
1990), the Trauma History Questionnaire (THQ;
Green, 1996), the Traumatic Life Events Questionnaire
(TLEQ; Kubany, Haynes, et al., 2000), and the
Traumatic Events Scale (Vrana & Lauterbach, 1994)
all assess a number of different types of trauma, including
accidents, natural disaster, sexual assault, and
threats of, or actual, physical harm. The Posttraumatic
Stress Diagnostic Scale (PDS; Foa, 1995) has two sections
prior to assessment of symptoms. The first section
assesses 13 potentially traumatic events, whereas
the second has questions to determine whether an event
meets the definition of criterion A. With regard to combat
in particular, the Combat Exposure Scale (Keane,
Fairbank, Caddell, & Zimering, 1989) has been used
widely to assess the degree of combat exposure.

Structured Diagnostic Interviews

The CAPS, developed by Blake and colleagues (1995),
has become a “gold-standard” assessment of PTSD
and is now the most widely used diagnostic interview
(Weathers, Keane, & Davidson, 2001; Weathers, Ruscio,
& Keane, 1999). The CAPS has several attractive
features. In addition to a detailed assessment of individual
trauma experiences, it assesses both severity
and frequency of symptoms, using specific criteria.
Furthermore, the CAPS includes questions on associated
features of PTSD, including dissociation, survivor
guilt, and social and occupational impairment. Additionally,
it gives clear guidelines for assessing changes
in behavior following exposure to trauma. The CAPS
has a large body of research demonstrating its reliability
and validity across a wide variety of trauma populations.
One disadvantage is its length of administration,
which, on average, takes about 1 hour, and the need
for administration by a mental health clinician. The
length of administration may be decreased slightly


Posttraumatic Stress Disorder

by assessing only the 17 core DSM-IV symptoms. As
mentioned, the CAPS has been revised to be consistent
with DSM-5 criteria (Weathers, Blake, et al., 2013) and
is currently undergoing testing.

The Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV
(SCID; First, Spitzer, Williams, & Gibbon, 1995), one
of the most widely used diagnostic scales, includes assessment
of PTSD symptomatology and was developed
for use by experienced clinicians. Although it assesses
all of the symptoms of PTSD and can provide information
about whether an individual meets criteria for
the diagnosis, it is important to note that the interview
does not assess for frequency or severity of individual
symptoms. Furthermore, by using the SCID, one can
only determine a count of the number of positive symptoms,
thereby limiting its utility in research or clinical
settings in which a continuous measure of severity may
be desirable. Resnick, Kilpatrick, and Lipovsky (1991)
recommended certain modifications of the SCID for
use with rape victims, including more sensitive screening
questions for history of rape and other major traumatic
events. The SCID is being modified to reflect
current DSM-5 criteria for PTSD.

Another highly structured interview, the Diagnostic
Interview Schedule (DIS; Robins, Helzer, Croughan,
& Ratcliff, 1981), has the advantage of requiring less
training and experience to administer than the CAPS
and the SCID. Like the SCID, the DIS results in diagnosis
but does not have continuous severity scores. One
potential problem is that the PTSD section assesses
exposure to civilian trauma, including sexual assault,
but uses the term “rape” without any further specification.
Thus, the modifications suggested by Resnick and
colleagues (1991) relative to rape may be appropriate
for this instrument, as well as when assessing interpersonal
traumas. Kessler and colleagues (1995) also have
modified the DIS for better diagnosis of PTSD in large
studies with lay interviewers.

The PTSD Symptom Scale—Interview (PSS-I; Foa,
Riggs, Dancu, & Rothbaum, 1993) has a particular
advantage in its ease of administration and brevity.
The PSS-I originally comprised 17 items and prompts
matching the 17-symptom PTSD criteria in DSM-IV,
and an updated version reflecting DSM-5 criteria is undergoing
validation. The PSS-I can result in continuous
scores to reflect frequency of symptoms or to determine
PTSD diagnosis. Another advantage is its companion
self-report measure (PSS-SR), to which scores on the
interview can be compared. Thus, after conducting an
initial interview, one could administer the PSS-SR on

a more regular basis (e.g., biweekly) to monitor symptom
change, without having to readminister the interview
frequently. A disadvantage of the interview is that
symptoms are assessed only over a current, 2-week
period instead of 1 month, so it is possible that some
diagnoses may be incorrect per DSM-5. The time frame
should be modified for careful diagnosis.

Self‑Report Instruments

There are now a number of self-report scales of PTSD
that have good psychometric properties. Among them
are the PSS-SR (Falsetti, Resnick, Resick, & Kilpatrick,
1993; Foa et al., 1993), the Purdue PTSD Scale—
Revised (Lauterbach & Vrana, 1996), the PTSD Checklist
(PCL; Weathers, Litz, Herman, Huska, & Keane,
1993), the Distressing Event Questionnaire (DEQ;
Kubany, Leisen, Kaplan, & Kelly, 2000), the Mississippi
Scale for Combat-Related PTSD (Mississippi
Scale; Keane, Caddell, & Taylor, 1988), and the PDS
(Foa, 1995). Most of these scales were developed with
specific populations, such as rape trauma survivors
(e.g., PSS) or combat veterans (e.g., Mississippi Scale,
PCL), and research on their validity with other populations
in some cases is minimal. Thus, it is important for
clinicians to think about their target population before
adopting a measure. Moreover, as with any self-report
measure, there are limitations to relying exclusively on
questionnaires for diagnosis or symptom severity. Used
in conjunction with structured interviews, however,
they can be useful for screening purposes or for demonstrating
changes over time as a result of a particular
intervention. There is also evidence that self-report and
clinician interview of PTSD symptoms are correlated
over the course of treatment (Monson et al., 2008).

The Impact of Event Scale—Revised (IES-R; Weiss
& Marmar, 1997) and the Mississippi Scale (Keane
et al., 1988, 1989) are two of the oldest self-report
measures. The IES-R is useful for measuring trauma
impact and maps onto DSM-IV criteria, including
symptoms of avoidance, intrusion and arousal (Weiss
& Marmar, 1997). The original 35-item Mississippi
Scale assessed both diagnostic criteria and associated
features of PTSD in combat veterans; a newer version
has been created for use with civilians (Lauterbach,
Vrana, King, & King, 1997). The PDS (Foa, 1995), a
49-item scale designed to assess all five PTSD criteria,
has strong psychometrics. Griffin, Uhlmansiek, Resick,
and Mechanic (2004) found a strong correlation
between the PDS and the CAPS.


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

Two measures of PTSD have been empirically derived
from other scales. The Keane PTSD Scale (PK)
of the Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory
(MMPI) and MMPI-2 has been used successfully to
discriminate between Vietnam combat veterans with
and without PTSD (Keane, Malloy, & Fairbank, 1984;
Weathers & Keane, 1999). The Symptom Checklist
90—Revised (SCL-90-R; Derogatis, 1983) has also
been examined by Saunders, Arata, and Kilpatrick
(1990) and by Weathers and colleagues (1999), who
developed PTSD subscales derived from different sets
of items for female crime victims and combat veterans,
respectively.

The PCL is widely used in Department of Veterans
Affairs (VA) and military settings with a Military Version
(PCL-M) that refers specifically to military-related
traumas. The Civilian Version of the scale (PCL-C) assesses
civilian traumas, and the Specific Version (PCL-

S) allows the assessor to identify the specific trauma
of reference. Like the PDS, the PCL reflects DSM-IV
symptoms of PTSD and like the CAPS, the PCL has
now been revised to reflect the DSM-5 and is undergoing
testing (Weathers, Litz, et al., 2013).
In response to a need to screen large numbers of
people for PTSD after combat or disasters, or in medical
settings when time is limited, a brief PTSD screen
has been developed for use in primary care settings
or for large-group administrations, such as those with
military personnel following deployment (Prins et al.,
2004). The Primary Care PTSD Screen (PC-PTSD)
was developed for such a purpose and is now being
used routinely in the United States with anyone returning
from military deployment or receiving any kind of
treatment in the VA medical system (Hoge et al., 2006).
This scale has four yes–no items that represent the four
major symptom clusters found in most PTSD factoranalytic
studies that separate effortful avoidance from
numbing. These four items were found to be highly associated
with PTSD as measured by the CAPS. In fact,
the PC-PTSD outperformed the PCL with regard to
sensitivity and specificity, as well as efficiency. A cutoff
of 3 was recommended as an optimally efficient score
for both men and women, and a cutoff of 2 was recommended
for maximum sensitivity.

Finally, it should be noted that only one traumarelated
scale, the Trauma Symptom Inventory (TSI;
Briere, 1995), includes scales to assess response bias.
For forensic purposes, in which response bias may be
of particular concern, the assessor may wish to include
the TSI or administer the MMPI-2, which contains

both the PK scale and Validity subscales. In addition to
clinical scales, the TSI also includes subscales assessing
tendencies to overendorse unusual or bizarre symptoms,
to respond in an inconsistent or random manner,
and to deny symptoms that others commonly endorse.
In addition to PTSD-related subscales, such as Intrusive
Experiences, Defensive Avoidance, and Anxious
Arousal, it also includes subscales that measure frequently
observed problems: Depression, Anger, Dissociation,
Tension-Reduction Behaviors, and Disruptions
in Self-Perception and Sexual Functioning.

Psychophysiological Assessment

The ideal assessment includes measurement in multiple
response channels, including physiological responses.
This is especially true in PTSD assessment because
physiological reactivity to trauma cues is one of the criteria
of the disorder. However, a psychophysiological
test might not be feasible in clinical settings because
the required technology and expertise are not always
available. Despite this limitation, it is important to be
aware of the research in this area and to be alert to obvious
physiological symptoms in patients when talking
about their trauma experiences (e.g., signs of agitation,
sweating, flushing). Research has demonstrated
consistent group differences in physiological reactivity
between individuals with and without PTSD when
exposed to trauma-related stimuli, such as through the
use of individualized trauma scripts (for a systematic
review of this body of research, see Orr, Metzger, Miller,
& Kaloupek, 2004). Vietnam veterans with PTSD
have consistently been found to be more reactive to
combat imagery than combat veterans without PTSD,
even when the comparison samples had other anxiety
disorders or other psychological problems (Keane et
al., 1998; Pitman, Orr, Forgue, & Altman, 1990; Pitman,
Orr, Forgue, de Jong, & Claiborn, 1987). Similar
results have been found in people with PTSD as a result
of MVAs and child sexual abuse (Blanchard, Hickling,
Buckley, & Taylor, 1996; Orr et al., 1998).

The largest investigation of physiological reactivity
was a multisite study of over 1,300 veterans (Keane et
al., 1998). Using four psychophysiological measures,
Keane and colleagues (1998) were able to classify correctly
two-thirds of those who had PTSD. This indicates
that whereas psychophysiological reactivity can
help to distinguish between many members of PTSD
and non-PTSD groups, it should not be used as a sole
measure of diagnostic assessment. In fact, a number of

%%%CUT%%%
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder

factors may affect physiological reactivity, and these
must be taken into account when assessing the validity
of psychophysiological findings. For example, the
presence of psychotropic drugs (i.e., benzodiazepines,
beta-adrenergic blockers) can affect an individual’s
response. In addition to people who do not respond
physiologically, some people appear to have an alternative
response to arousal. Griffin and colleagues (1997)
studied psychophysiological reactivity in recent rape
trauma survivors using a methodology that differed in
two significant ways from prior studies. First, rather
than listening to generated scripts, participants were
asked to talk for 5 minutes on both a neutral recall topic
and their rapes. These neutral and trauma phases were
interspersed with baseline conditions. Second, instead
of looking at the PTSD group as a whole, the researchers
examined physiological reactivity by degree of
“peritraumatic dissociation” (PD), which refers to the
extent to which someone dissociated during the traumatic
event. Griffin and colleagues found that a small
group of women with high PD responded in a very different
manner than other women with PTSD. Whereas
skin conductance and heart rate of women with low PD
scores increased as expected while they were talking
about the rape, those with high PD scores showed a decrease
in the physiological measures. When the participants’
subjective distress during each of the phases was
examined, the high-PD group reported the same level
of distress as the low-PD group. Therefore, despite experiencing
distress, the physiological responses of the
high-PD group were suppressed. Griffin and colleagues
speculated that there may be a dissociative subtype of
individuals with PTSD who physiologically respond
quite differently than those with the more phobic type
of PTSD. The addition of neuroimaging has demonstrated
that instead of a strong amygdala response, individuals
who are highly dissociative appear to have an
overmodulated response and strong activation of the
frontal lobes (Lanius et al., 2010). Research such as
this supports the dissociative subtype found in DSM-5.

In general, there are two major aims in assessment
in clinical practice: diagnosis and treatment planning.
Whether the primary purpose of assessment is diagnosis
or treatment planning, a multidimensional, multiaxial
approach is desirable. Because a cross-sectional
view taken at a single point in time may fail to capture
the full range and pattern of symptoms, a longitudinal
approach to assessment has been advocated by Denny,
Robinowitz, and Penk (1987), and Sutker, Uddo-Crane,
and Allain (1991). Certainly for the purposes of treat


ment, ongoing assessment of symptom patterns and
treatment effectiveness is essential. Even when measuring
PTSD cross-sectionally, it has been suggested that
multiple measures and methods be used, depending on
the purpose of the assessment (Keane, Brief, Pratt, &
Miller, 2007; Weathers & Keane, 1999).

Some final notes regarding assessment are in order.
First, given the empirical evidence linking PTSD with
increased risk of suicide, suicide risk should always be
carefully assessed and monitored. The National Women’s
Study (Kilpatrick, Edmunds, & Seymour, 1992)
found that 13% of rape survivors had made a suicide
attempt compared with 1% of nonvictims. Additionally,
33% of rape survivors, compared with 8% of nonvictims,
stated that they had seriously considered suicide
at some point. Furthermore, the presence of comorbid
PTSD has been associated with a greater number of suicide
attempts among individuals with major depressive
disorder (Oquendo et al., 2003). These data highlight
the need for careful monitoring of suicidal ideation and
self-harm behavior among individuals being assessed
or treated for PTSD.

Second, a growing body of research suggests that
individuals with PTSD are at increased risk of perpetrating
physical aggression against others. McFall,
Fontana, Raskind, and Rosenheck (1999) found that
male Vietnam veteran inpatients with PTSD were
more likely than inpatients without PTSD or a community
sample of Vietnam veterans to perpetrate acts
of violence toward objects or others. Results from the
NVVRS indicated that 33% of Vietnam veterans with
PTSD had assaulted their partner within the previous
year (Jordan et al., 1992). Risk of violence is not limited
to Vietnam veterans. There is evidence of increased
risk of violence in other traumatized populations, including
women (e.g., Miller et al., 2004). Given also
that outbursts of anger are one of the DSM-5 symptoms
of PTSD, it is important that history of aggressive acts
(under criterion E), as well as current impulses toward
aggression (e.g., angry mood in criterion D), be carefully
assessed and addressed.

treatMeNt

Types of Therapy for PTSD

There have been four predominant forms of therapy
for PTSD: coping, skills-focused treatments; exposurebased
treatments; cognitive therapy; combination


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

treatments; and eye movement desensitization and
reprocessing (EMDR; which may be a combination
treatment). Before reviewing the research on treatment
outcome for PTSD, we describe some of the treatment
protocols.

Stress Inoculation Training

The earliest comprehensive approach described specifically
for use with rape survivors was stress inoculation
training (SIT; Kilpatrick & Amick, 1985; Kilpatrick et
al., 1982). Based on Meichenbaum’s (1985) approach
to anxiety, its aim is to give clients a sense of mastery
over their fears by teaching a variety of coping skills.
The approach is tailored to the individual problems and
needs of each client, so it is flexible and can be used in
individual or group settings. SIT is approached in phases.
The first phase, preparation for treatment, includes
an educational element to provide an explanatory or
conceptual framework from which the client can understand
the nature and origin of his/her fear and anxiety,
and make sense of the trauma and its aftermath. In
SIT, a social learning theory explanation is used. Along
with this, fear and anxiety reactions are explained as
occurring along three channels (Lang, 1968): (1) the
physical or autonomic channel; (2) the behavioral or
motoric channel; and (3) the cognitive channel. Specific
examples are given for each, and the patient identifies
his/her own reactions within each channel. Interrelationships
among the three channels are explained
and discussed. The second phase of SIT is the training
of coping skills directed at each of these channels of response.
It includes, in sequence, a definition of the coping
skill, a rationale, an explanation of the mechanism
by which the skill works, a demonstration of the skill,
application by the client of the skill to a problem area
unrelated to the target behaviors, a review of how well
the skill worked, and, finally, application and practice
of the skill with one of the target fears. Skills taught
most often for coping with fear in the physical channel
are muscle relaxation and breathing control.

For the behavioral channel, covert modeling and role
playing are the coping skills usually taught. The client
is taught to visualize a fear- or anxiety-provoking
situation and to imagine him/herself confronting it successfully.
For the cognitive channel, the client is taught
guided self-dialogue. The client is taught to focus on his/
her internal dialogue and trained to label negative, irrational,
and maladaptive self-statements. He/she is then
taught to substitute more adaptive self-verbalizations.

Self-dialogue is taught in four categories: preparation,
confrontation and management, coping with feelings
of being overwhelmed, and reinforcement. For each of
these categories, a series of questions and/or statements
is generated that encourages the client to assess the actual
probability that the negative event will occur, to
manage the overwhelming fear and avoidance behavior,
to control self-criticism and self-devaluation, to
engage in the feared behavior, and finally to reinforce
him/herself for making the attempt and following the
steps.

Exposure Techniques

Beginning in the early 1980s, forms of exposure therapy
were investigated as a treatment for PTSD. Although
systematic desensitization (SD) has been demonstrated
to be effective for treating PTSD in a number of case
study reports and controlled studies, it was not widely
adopted as a preferred treatment (Bowen & Lambert,
1986; Brom, Kleber, & Defares, 1989; Frank et al.,
1988; Frank & Stewart, 1983, 1984; Schindler, 1980;
Shalev, Orr, & Pitman, 1992). Because people with
PTSD may fear and avoid a wide range of traumarelated
stimuli, SD may require a number of hierarchies
that can be quite inefficient.

Extended exposure to feared cues or to the trauma
memory itself is a more efficient treatment and has been
employed more widely. Known variously as direct therapeutic
exposure (DTE), flooding, or prolonged exposure,
these exposure techniques require clients to confront
feared situations in vivo, to imagine themselves in
a fear-producing situation, or to recall their particular
trauma for extended periods of time. Rothbaum, Hodges,
Ready, Graap, and Alarcon (2001) experimented
with the use of virtual reality for treating veterans. The
veteran with PTSD can take a virtual helicopter trip
in Vietnam, complete with gunfire, or drive a vehicle
in Middle Eastern streets, as well as experience other
stimuli that may evoke memories of traumatic events.

Foa and colleagues (1991; Rothbaum & Foa, 1992)
were the first to focus extensively on the specific trauma
memory rather than fear-producing stimuli. Prolonged
exposure (PE) is conducted individually in 9–12
weekly or biweekly 90-minute sessions. The first two
sessions are for information gathering, treatment planning,
and explanation of the treatment rationale. Clients
are also taught breathing retraining. A hierarchical list
of major stimuli that are feared and avoided is created.
Clients are instructed to confront feared cues for at least


Posttraumatic Stress Disorder

45 minutes a day, starting with a moderately anxietyprovoking
stimulus on the hierarchy. Beginning with
Session 3, the trauma scene is relived in imagination,
and the client is asked to describe it aloud in the present
tense. The level of detail is left to the client for the first
two exposures, but thereafter he/she is encouraged to
include more and more detail about external cues and
internal cues, such as thoughts, physiological responses,
and feared consequences. Descriptions are repeated
several times each session (for 60 minutes) and audiorecorded.
Clients are assigned as homework listening
to the recording and engaging in in vivo tasks. Care is
taken in sessions to ensure that the client’s anxiety decreases
before the session is terminated, aided by the
therapist, if necessary (Foa & Rothbaum, 1998).

Marks, Lovell, Noshirvani, Livanou, and Thrasher
(1998) have conducted exposure therapy somewhat differently.
Their version of the therapy includes five sessions
of imaginal exposure, then five sessions of live
exposure. During the imaginal exposure, clients are
asked to relive aloud in the first person, present tense,
the details of their experience, then to imagine and describe
critical aspects of the event (rewind and hold).
Clients listen to their therapy recordings daily between
sessions. During the live exposure portion of therapy,
clients (most often therapist-accompanied) progress
through a hierarchy of feared, avoided, and disabling
trauma-related stimuli. They are asked to practice the
live exposure for an hour a day between sessions.

Cognitive Interventions

Cognitive therapy for PTSD has generally taken two
forms. One form is more present-focused and typically
uses daily diaries or monitoring forms to elicit current
thoughts that the client has recorded during the week.
These homework sheets form the basis of the cognitive
interventions that occur during treatment through
the use of teaching and Socratic questioning. Clients
are taught to identify and to dispute their unrealistic
or exaggerated thoughts about themselves, the world,
and their futures with more probabilistic reasoning
and evidence-based argument. Examples of researchers
who have used this model of cognitive restructuring
are Blanchard and colleagues (2003) and Foa and colleagues
(2005).

The other form of cognitive therapy is traumafocused
and constructivist, focusing on the particular
meanings that the traumatic event(s) has for the client
and how those interpretations of the event contradict

or seemingly confirm previously held beliefs about
self and others. These distorted assumptions about the
event (e.g., “I should have been able to stop the event,
so it is my fault that it happened”) may maintain a belief
in a just world or a sense of controllability, but at
the cost of reduced self-esteem, shame, or guilt. The
focus of treatment is on how clients may have distorted
the event itself to maintain prior beliefs about justice
or the role of others (assimilation), or conversely, how
they may have changed their beliefs about themselves
and the world too much (overaccommodation) in an
attempt to regain a sense of control or safety in the
present or the future (“I cannot trust other people at
all any more”). Treatment includes Socratic questioning
and using cognitive worksheets to teach clients to
challenge their thinking about their traumatic events
and the implications they have constructed. Examples
of trauma-focused cognitive therapy are studies by Resick
and colleagues (2002, 2008) and Tarrier and colleagues
(1999).

Cognitive processing therapy (CPT) initially was developed
specifically to treat the specific symptoms of
PTSD in sexual assault survivors (Resick & Schnicke,
1992, 1993), but it has since been updated and applied
to other populations (Resick et al., 2007). CPT, which
can be delivered in either individual or group formats,
is a 12-session, structured therapy program that is predominantly
a cognitive therapy. After an introduction
to PTSD symptoms and the therapy, clients are asked
to write an Impact Statement, which is a description of
how their most distressing traumatic event has affected
them. Clients are asked to focus on any self-blame they
experience regarding the trauma and the effects of the
event on their beliefs about self and others. This statement
is used to understand how they may have distorted
the cause of the event or overgeneralized its meaning,
such that their functioning has been compromised. For
example, if someone thinks that he/she should have
been able to stop the event, then the individual might
feel guilt afterward. If a client has decided that the
event means no one is to be trusted, then he/she will
behave as though this is true.

Before examining the trauma in depth, the client is
taught to label emotions and recognize the connection
among events, thoughts, and feelings, then is asked to
write a detailed account of the index traumatic event
and read it to him/herself every day. In sessions he/
she reads it to the therapist and is encouraged to feel
whatever emotions emerge and to complete worksheets
on identified stuck points about the trauma. The thera



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

pist begins to challenge problematic thinking about the
traumatic event with Socratic dialogue. After writing
and reading the account for a second time, the therapist
focuses on teaching the client the skill of challenging
thoughts and assumptions with Socratic questions for
him/herself through a series of worksheets. The client
is first taught to question a single thought, then look
for patterns of problematic thinking, and, finally, to
generate alternative, more balanced thoughts about the
event itself, then overgeneralized assumptions about
self and world. In the last five sessions, clients are provided
modules to assist them in thinking about specific
themes that are commonly disrupted following traumatic
events: safety, trust, power and control, esteem,
and intimacy. In an alternative version that is receiving
increased research attention, the written account is
omitted. This is discussed below in the research section.


Combination Treatments/Additive Studies

Some studies that we review below refer to the protocols
as cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT; e.g.,
Blanchard et al., 2003). These therapy packages are
typically combinations of various forms of exposure
(imaginal, in vivo) and cognitive therapy, but they may
also include relaxation or other coping skills. Some of
these protocols were developed as a combination treatment
at the outset or reflect additive studies in which
a new component is added to an existing treatment to
determine whether the extra component adds value to
the existing therapy. An important distinction between
these two types of protocols is that the combination
treatments were designed to be a specific length to accommodate
the components of the treatment. In other
words, the therapy package was designed to achieve the
optimal goals of the exposure or cognitive components.
Additive studies must accommodate to the original
protocol length; therefore, they may not be designed
with the optimal amount of therapy needed to achieve
the goals of the components. In additive studies, the
amount of exposure, stress management, or cognitive
therapy in combination is shortened to maintain the
length of the original protocol being compared.

STAIR/MPE

Cloitre, Koenen, Cohen, and Han (2002) proposed that
survivors of child sexual abuse trauma have problems
of affect regulation and interpersonal effectiveness, in

addition to their PTSD, that compromise their ability
to profit from trauma-focused interventions. Thus, they
developed a protocol called STAIR (i.e., skills training
in affective and interpersonal regulation) that includes
treatment for these problems prior to implementing a
modification of prolonged exposure (MPE). This combination
treatment first trains patients in emotion management
and interpersonal skills for 8 weeks, followed
by a second phase of treatment with imaginal exposure.
The imaginal exposure phase also includes postexposure
emotional management and cognitive therapy.

Eye Movement Desensitization and Reprocessing

Eye movement desensitization and reprocessing
(EMDR) is a controversial therapy that evolved not from
theory or application of effective techniques for other
disorders, but from a personal observation. As originally
developed by Shapiro (1989, 1995), EMDR was
based on a chance observation that troubling thoughts
were resolved when her eyes followed the waving of
leaves during a walk in the park. Shapiro developed
EMDR on the basis of this observation and argues that
lateral eye movements facilitate cognitive processing
of the trauma. Subsequently, EMDR has been conceptualized
as a cognitive-behavioral treatment aimed at
facilitating information processing of traumatic events
and cognitive interventions for negative, trauma-related
cognitions. In the early presentations, EMDR was
touted as a one-session cure for a range of disorders.
However, more recent studies are typically of traumarelated
symptoms, with a course more similar to the
other trauma therapies. EMDR is now described as an
eight-phase treatment that includes history taking, client
preparation, target assessment, desensitization, installation,
body scan, closure, and reevaluation of treatment
effects. EMDR includes exposure and cognitive
components, as well as the lateral eye movements.

In the basic EMDR protocol, clients are asked to
identify and focus on a traumatic image or memory
(target assessment phase). Next, the therapist elicits
negative cognitions or belief statements about the
memory. Clients are asked to assign a rating to the
memory and negative cognitions on an 11-point scale
of distress and to identify the physical location of the
anxiety. The therapist helps clients generate positive
cognitions that would be preferable to associate with
the memory. These are rated on a 7-point scale of how
much the clients believe the statement. Once the therapist
has instructed a client in the basic EMDR proce



Posttraumatic Stress Disorder

dure, he/she is asked to do four things simultaneously
(desensitization phase): (1) visualize the memory; (2)
rehearse the negative cognitions; (3) concentrate on
the physical sensations of the anxiety; and (4) visually
track the therapist’s index finger. While the client does
this, the therapist rapidly moves his/her index finger
back and forth from right to left, 30–35 centimeters
from the client’s face, with two back-and-forth movements
per second (there are now light bars available to
do this). These are repeated 24 times. Then the client is
asked to blank out the memory and take a deep breath.
Subsequently, she or he brings back the memory and
cognitions and rates the level of distress. Sets of eye
movements (saccades) are repeated until the distress
rating equals 0 or 1. At this point, the client is asked
how she or he feels about the positive cognition and
gives a rating for it (installation phase).

Evidence for Treatment Efficacy

CBT and EMDR have been established as efficacious
treatments in multiple meta-analyses (e.g., Bradley,
Greene, Russ, Dutra, & Westen, 2005; Powers, Halpern,
Ferenschak, Gillihan, & Foa, 2010; van Etten &
Taylor, 1998). They have also been recommended as
first-line treatments in multiple treatment guidelines
for PTSD (e.g., Foa, Keane, Friedman, & Cohen, 2008;
National Institute of Clinical Excellence, 2005; U.S.
Departments of Veterans Affairs and Defense, 2010).

Randomized controlled trials have consistently
shown CBT to be superior to waiting-list and treatmentas-
usual conditions (e.g., Chard, 2005; Foa et al., 1999;
Monson et al., 2006; Resick et al., 2002), and generally
better than therapies designed to control for the essential
and nonspecific elements of efficacious psychotherapy
(e.g., Blanchard et al., 2003; Neuner, Schauer,
Klaschik, Karunakara, & Elbert, 2004; Schnurr et al.,
2007). Head-to-head trials have shown few differences
between different CBT packages at posttreatment (e.g.,
Bryant, Moulds, Guthrie, Dang, & Nixon, 2003; Foa et
al., 1999; Resick et al., 2002; Tarrier et al., 1999), and
there have been equivocal results regarding differential
efficacy at longer-term follow-up (i.e., ≥
5 years posttreatment;
Resick et al., 2012; Tarrier & Sommerfield,
2004). The addition or removal of different elements of
CBT protocols have not generally affected the efficacy
of these packages (e.g., Foa et al., 1999; Resick et al.,
2008).

Randomized controlled trials show EMDR to be
superior to waiting-list conditions (e.g., Rothbaum,

Astin, & Marsteller, 2005). However, several studies
have shown CBT to be more efficacious than EMDR
(e.g., Devilly & Spence, 1999; Taylor et al., 2003), others
have reported no difference (e.g., Ironson, Freund,
Strauss, & Williams, 2002; Power et al., 2002; Rothbaum
et al., 2005), and still others report EMDR to be
superior to CBT for at least intrusive symptoms (Lee,
Gavriel, Drummond, Richards, & Greenwald, 2002).
Although Shapiro maintains that lateral eye movements
are an essential therapeutic component of EMDR, dismantling
studies examining this have yielded mixed
results (e.g., Pitman, Orr, Altman, Longpre, Poire, &
Macklin, 1996; Renfrey & Spates, 1994; Wilson, Silver,
Covi, & Foster, 1996).

In summary, different forms of CBT focused on
skills development or trauma processing through cognitive
or behavioral methods have been found to be efficacious
in the treatment of PTSD and to have longterm,
sustained effects. Studies have documented the
efficacy of EMDR, although the evidence supporting
lateral eye movements as an active treatment ingredient
are equivocal.

Therapist, Client, and Setting Variables

Gender and Ethnicity

According to the National Comorbidity Survey Replication
study (Kessler, Berglund, et al., 2005) lifetime
prevalence rates of PTSD are nearly three times higher
in women (9.7%) than in with men (3.6%). Tolin and
Foa’s (2006) meta-analysis of sex differences in the
risk for exposure to potentially traumatic events and
PTSD indicated that women are more likely than men
to meet criteria for PTSD but less likely to have experienced
potentially traumatic events. Women are more
likely than men to experience sexual assault and child
sexual abuse but less likely to experience accidents and
nonsexual assaults; to witness death and injury; and to
experience disaster, fire, and war-related trauma. Within
specific types of traumatic events, women still exhibited
greater PTSD, suggesting that risk of exposure
to particular types of trauma only partially explains the
differential PTSD risk in men and women.

Because sexual assault is predominantly perpetrated
by men, and is a highly personal and intimate crime,
survivors of sexual assault often distrust men. Consequently,
the issue of therapist sex can be relevant. Frequently,
clients prefer or insist on a female therapist.
The effectiveness of male therapists has not been stud



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

ied specifically, but they may be quite effective, if well
trained (Resick, Jordan, Girelli, Hutter, & Marhoeder-
Dvorak, 1988). Issues for male therapists, discussed by
Silverman (1977) and Koss and Harvey (1991), include
the tendency for men to view rape more as a sexual
crime than as a crime of violence (Burt, 1980), therefore
focusing too much on sexual aspects of the experience
and its aftermath.

In treating survivors of sexual assault, regardless of
therapist sex, it is essential that the therapist be knowledgeable
about rape and PTSD. This includes the literature
on reactions to rape, rape myths, and attitudes
about rape. Therapists bring their culturally learned
perceptions with them, as do clients, and these can interfere
with their effectiveness if they adhere to any of
the common misperceptions about rape (e.g., rape is
primarily about sex, most rapists are strangers, it is not
rape unless the woman actively resists). Sexual assault
survivors are extremely sensitive to insinuations that
they might have been to blame, for example, and many
drop out of treatment if they sense that the therapist
might harbor victim-blaming attributions.

Similarly, combat veterans are often hesitant to start
treatment with novice therapists who may not know
particular war details or relevant history. It is important
for therapists to acknowledge their level of familiarity
and work with clients to understand more fully their
trauma experiences and the context surrounding them.

The role of ethnicity in CBT for PTSD has received
little attention in outcome research. This limitation,
unfortunately, is not restricted to PTSD treatment research;
the minority-focused supplement of the Surgeon
General’s report on mental health (U.S. Department
of Health and Human Services, 2001) made clear
that there is a paucity of empirical research on treatment
for depression and anxiety in minorities. The few
studies of prevalence rates among ethnic groups have
shown mixed results that, in part, may reflect differential
rates of trauma exposure (Breslau, Davis, & Andreski,
1995; Norris, 1992).

Two program evaluation studies compared African
American and European American male veterans with
PTSD. Rosenheck, Fontana, and Cottrol (1995) found
less improvement among African American veterans
on some measures. However, Rosenheck and Fontana’s
(1996) study did not support this finding. Only a few
studies to date have examined the efficacy of CBT with
African American women with PTSD. Zoellner, Feeny,
Fitzgibbons, and Foa (1999) compared African American
and European American women who were survi


vors of either sexual or nonsexual assault. Treatment
comprised PE, SIT, or a combination of the two. There
were no ethnic group differences in treatment efficacy.
These results were achieved in spite of an inability to
match clients and therapists on ethnicity. Lester, Resick,
Young-Xu, and Artz (2010) combined the datasets from
both Resick and colleagues (2002, 2008) studies to examine
the dropout and outcomes of treatment among
94 African American and 214 European American
female victims of interpersonal trauma. The dropout
rate was significantly greater for African-American patients
(45% vs. 73% completed all sessions). However,
despite that, in the intention-to-treat analyses in which
everyone was randomized, there were no differences
between the racial groups in treatment outcome. The
differences appeared to be due to the fact that African
American patients who dropped out of therapy benefited
more from treatment than the European American
patients who dropped out. Although these results are
encouraging, continued attention to racial, ethnic, and
cultural issues in treatment is important (see McNair &
Neville, 1996).

Vicarious Traumatization

Working with trauma victims can have negative effects
on therapists that have been labeled “secondary”
or “vicarious” traumatization by some. McCann and
Pearlman (1990) discuss this impact as disruption of
the therapist’s own cognitive schemas about self and
the world. Hearing clients’ traumatic experiences may
be shocking and lead to lasting alterations in assumptions
and expectations, which in turn affect therapists’
feelings, behaviors, and relationships. Working with
trauma victims may challenge therapists’ assumptions
about personal invulnerability and safety, as well as
beliefs that the world is a meaningful, orderly place
filled with trustworthy people. According to McCann
and Pearlman’s model, an individual therapist’s reaction
depends on the degree of discrepancy between
the survivor’s trauma and the therapist’s cognitive
schemas. For example, if the therapist’s own complex
experiences have led to the development of safety assumptions
(schemas) as central to his/her well-being,
working with trauma survivors may be distressing due
to a heightened sense of vulnerability. In addition, the
therapist’s memory system may be altered to incorporate
traumatic imagery that can become intrusive.

To counteract the negative effects of working with
traumatized individuals, therapists should be prepared


Posttraumatic Stress Disorder

to recognize and acknowledge these effects and take
steps to deal with them. McCann and Pearlman (1990)
recommend the use of one’s professional network as a
source of support and to prevent isolation. Talking to
other professionals who work with trauma survivors is
especially useful because they can help the therapist to
recognize these effects and normalize these reactions.
Other coping strategies suggested by McCann and
Pearlman include balancing one’s caseload with trauma
and nontrauma cases, engaging in other professional
and personal activities, recognizing one’s own limitations,
working for social change, and focusing on the
positive personal impact of work with trauma survivors
and ways it can enrich one’s life.

“Resistance”

Clients with PTSD can be difficult to engage and treat
due to their ambivalence about therapy. They may want
help, but they fear confronting their memories and
have difficulty trusting others, including therapists.
They may also have strong feelings of shame about the
traumatic event that interfere with their willingness to
disclose information that they feel may lead to rejection
by others. Of course, it is important to remember
that avoidance behaviors, including avoiding thoughts
about the trauma, are part of the criteria for PTSD.
Therefore, it is to be expected that avoidance will also
occur in the context of treatment. No-shows are common,
and both subtle and obvious avoidance behaviors
are seen throughout the beginning stages of therapy. If
possible, therapists should consider treatment as starting
on the telephone prior to the first session. The noshow
rate is likely to decrease if the therapist expresses
understanding of the client’s hesitance to come in and
encourages attendance. Early in therapy, the therapist
should describe avoidance as a symptom of PTSD and
an ineffective, though understandable, means of coping.
Labeling this as “resistance” likely only increases
judgmentalness toward the client and hinders therapist
effectiveness. This and other challenges in working
with rape trauma survivors are discussed by Koss and
Harvey (1991) and Kilpatrick and Veronen (1983). Shay
and Munroe (1999) discuss the challenges of working
with combat veterans with complex PTSD.

Multiply Traumatized Victims

The treatment approaches presented here have been
shown to produce significant improvement in civilian

trauma victims within a brief time. The studies presented
typically did not exclude anyone for his/her trauma
history, and most had extensive trauma histories, even
when there was an identified trauma that was the primary
inclusion criterion (rape, combat). Moreover, in
a secondary analysis of Resick and colleagues’ (2002)
trial, Resick and colleagues (2003) showed that the 42%
of patients with childhood sexual abuse (CSA) experiences
in addition to their adult index trauma had significant
improvements in their PTSD and did not differ
from those without a CSA history. In recent years, there
has been a surge in evidence of treatment success in
individuals with more chronic or repeated trauma histories,
such as domestic violence (Kubany et al., 2004),
combat (Monson et al., 2006), and long-standing CSA
(Chard, 2005; Cloitre, Stovall-McClough, Miranda,
& Chemtob, 2004). This research points to the utility
of evidence-based treatment for complex cases and
debunks the myth that CBT only works for “simple”
cases of a single trauma. That said, therapists should
be aware of attending to special issues in working with
these cases. For example, some research suggests that
PTSD in sexual assault trauma survivors may play a
role in repeat traumatization (e.g., Kilpatrick et al.,
1987), although this relationship appears to be complex
(Wilson, Calhoun, & Bernat, 1999). Survivors of
CSA may present additional challenges (Cloitre, 1998)
because their traumatization may have interfered with
processes of normal development. Given that the abuse
often involves a relative or trusted adult, it represents
a serious betrayal by someone on whom the child depended
for basic safety and protection. They may need
more help with skills development as well, especially
interpersonal and emotion regulation skills. In some
cases, sexual dysfunctions must be addressed. This can
be added to an individual treatment program or the client
may be referred to a sex therapy specialist, but only
after the treatment for other trauma-related problems is
complete. Veterans may present with issues specific to
committing acts of violence or killing others, distrust
of the government and authority figures, ethnic/racial
stereotyping, and protracted grief reactions (Monson,
Price, & Ranslow, 2005).

Group Treatment

The decision whether to use a group or an individual
format for treatment is usually made on the basis of
clinical judgment and practicality. There is scant research
comparing the two formats. Some interventions


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

that have been used with trauma victims are adaptable
for use in either format. Recent research has shown that
standardized group treatments may be successful for
combat veterans and CSA trauma survivors (Chard,
2005; Creamer, Morris, Biddle, & Elliott, 1999). Recently
Morland, Hynes, Macintosh, Resick, and Chard
(2011) produced pilot data for an ongoing study in
which group CPT was conducted through telehealth
with a group on one of the Hawaiian islands while the
therapist was on another island. Although the main
randomized trial has not been completed yet, the findings
appear promising that there will be equivalence
between telehealth and in-person groups.

Group treatment has several advantages that make it
popular with both trauma survivors and professionals.
Koss and Harvey (1991) discussed a number of these.
Group treatment reduces the sense of isolation felt by
most survivors, who withdraw from interactions and
believe that others cannot understand their feelings. It
provides social support that is unambiguous and nonblaming.
It helps to validate and to normalize feelings
and reactions to the trauma. Group treatment confirms
the reality of the traumatic experience and allows sharing
of coping strategies. It counteracts self-blame and
promotes self-esteem. Because it is more egalitarian
than individual therapy, group treatment can promote
empowerment and decrease dependency. It provides a
safe environment for developing attachment and intimacy
with others, and an opportunity for sharing grief
and loss. Finally, group treatment can help trauma survivors
assign meaning to the event, promoting cognitive
processing.

Group approaches have drawbacks as well, and care
should be taken to screen clients to assess their readiness
for joining a group. McCann and Pearlman (1990)
suggest that clients with severe PTSD should be in individual
therapy simultaneously with group treatment because
groups may elicit strong affect and memories that
can overwhelm an unprepared client. For similar reasons,
Resick and Markaway (1991) warn against having
group members share their rape experiences during
the first few sessions. Although important for recovery,
the sharing of “war stories” should be done later
in the group process or in individual sessions, to avoid
frightening other group members or sensitizing them to
other vulnerable situations. Poor candidates for group
treatment, as suggested by Koss and Harvey (1991) and
McCann and Pearlman, are suicidal clients; those with
heavy substance abuse problems; self-mutilating or

substance-abusing clients with a borderline personality
disorder diagnosis; clients with very unstable, disorganized
lives; and clients who have never before spoken
about the trauma or whose memory of it is incomplete.

case stuDy

“Tom” is a 23-year-old, single, white male who presented
for treatment approximately 1 year after a traumatic
event that occurred during his military service in Iraq.
Tom received CPT while on active duty in the Army.

Background

Tom was born the third of four children to his parents.
He described his father as an alcoholic who was frequently
absent from the home due to work travel prior
to his parents’ divorce. Tom indicated that his father
was always emotionally distant from the family, especially
after the divorce. Tom had close relationships
with his mother and siblings. He denied having any
significant mental health or physical health problems
in his childhood. However, he described two significant
traumatic events in his adolescence. Specifically,
he described witnessing his best friend commit suicide
by gunshot to the head. Tom indicated that this event
severely affected him, as well as his entire community.
He went on to report that he still felt responsible for not
preventing his friend’s suicide. The second traumatic
event was the death of Tom’s brother in an automobile
accident when Tom was 17 years old. Tom did not receive
any mental health treatment during his childhood
or after these events, though he indicated that he began
using alcohol and illicit substances after these traumatic
events in his youth. He admitted to using cannabis
nearly daily during high school, as well as daily use of
alcohol, drinking as much as a 24-pack of beer per day
until he passed out. Tom reported that he decreased his
alcohol consumption and ceased using cannabis after
his enlistment.

Tom served in the Infantry. He went to Basic Training,
then attended an advanced training school prior
to being deployed directly to Iraq. While in Iraq, Tom
witnessed and experienced a number of traumatic incidents.
He spoke about fellow soldiers who were
killed and injured in service, as well as convoys that
he witnessed being hit by improvised explosive devices
(IEDs). However, the traumatic event that he identified


Posttraumatic Stress Disorder

as most distressing and anxiety-provoking was shooting
a pregnant woman and child.

Tom described this event as follows: Suicide bombers
had detonated several bombs in the area where Tom
served, and a control point had been set up to contain
the area. During the last few days of his deployment,
Tom was on patrol at this control point. It was dark outside.
A car began approaching the checkpoint, and officers
on the ground signaled for the car to stop. The car
did not stop in spite of these warnings. It continued to
approach the control point, entering the area where the
next level of Infantrymen were guarding the entrance.
Per protocol, Tom fired a warning shot to stop the approaching
car, but the car continued toward the control
point. About 25 yards from the control point gate, Tom
and at least one other soldier fired upon the car several
times.

After a brief period of disorientation, a crying man
with clothes soaked with blood emerged from the car
with his hands in the air. The man quickly fell to his
knees, with his hands and head resting on the road.
Tom could hear the man sobbing. According to Tom,
the sobs were guttural and full of despair. Tom looked
over to find in the pedestrian seat a dead woman who
was apparently pregnant. A small child in the backseat
was also dead. Tom never confirmed this, but he and
his fellow soldiers believed that the man crying on the
road was the husband of the woman and the father of
the child and fetus.

Tom was immediately distressed by the event, and a
Combat Stress Control unit in the field eventually had
him sent back to a Forward Operating Base because
of his increasing reexperiencing and hypervigilance
symptoms. Tom was eventually brought to a major
Army hospital and received individual CPT within this
setting.

Tom was administered the CAPS at pretreatment;
his score was in the severe range, and he met diagnostic
criteria for PTSD. He also completed the Beck Depression
Inventory–II (BDI-II) and the State–Trait Anxiety
Inventory (STAI). His depression and anxiety symptoms
at pretreatment were in the severe range. Tom was
provided feedback about his assessment results in a
session focused on an overview of his psychological assessment
results and on obtaining his informed consent
for a course of CPT. After providing feedback about
his assessment, the therapist gave Tom an overview of
CPT, with an emphasis on its trauma-focused nature,
expectation of out-of-session practice adherence, and

the client’s active role in getting well. Tom signed a
“CPT Treatment Contract” detailing this information
and was provided a copy of the contract for his records.
The CPT protocol began in the next session.

Session 1

Tom arrived 15 minutes prior to his first scheduled appointment
of CPT. He sat down in the chair the therapist
gestured that he sit in, but he was immediately restless
and repositioned frequently. Tom quickly asked to move
to a different chair in the room, so that his back was
not facing the exterior door and his gaze could monitor
both the door and the window. He asked the therapist
how long his session would take and whether he would
have to “feel anything.” The therapist responded that
this session would last 50–60 minutes, and that, compared
with other future sessions, she would be doing
most of the talking. She added that, as discussed during
the treatment contracting session, the focus would be
on Tom’s feelings in reaction to the traumatic event but
that the current session would focus less on this. The
therapist also explained that she would have the treatment
manual in her lap, and would refer to it throughout
to make sure that she delivered the psychotherapy as it
was prescribed. She encouraged Tom to ask any questions
he might have as the session unfolded.

The therapist explained that at the beginning of each
session they would develop an agenda for the session.
The purposes of the first therapy session were to (1)
describe the symptoms of PTSD; (2) give Tom a framework
for understanding why these symptoms had not
remitted; (3) present an overview of treatment to help
Tom understand why practice outside of session and
therapy attendance were important to elicit cooperation
and to explain the progressive nature of the therapy; (4)
build rapport between Tom and the therapist; and (5)
give the client an opportunity to talk briefly about his
most distressing traumatic event or other issues.

The therapist then proceeded to give didactic information
about the symptoms of PTSD. She asked Tom
to provide examples of the various clusters of PTSD
symptoms that he was experiencing, emphasizing how
reexperiencing symptoms are related to hyperarousal
symptoms, and how hyperarousal symptoms elicit a
desire to avoid or become numb. The paradoxical effect
of avoidance and numbing in maintaining, or even
increasing, PTSD symptoms was also discussed. Tom
indicated that this was the first time someone had ex



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

plained the symptoms of PTSD in this way, putting
them “in motion” by describing how they interact with
one another.

The therapist transitioned to a description of trauma
aftereffects within an information-processing framework.
She described in lay terms how traumas may be
schema-discrepant events; traumatic events often do
not fit with prior beliefs about oneself, others, or the
world. To incorporate this event into one’s memory,
the person may alter his/her perception of the event
(assimilate the event into an existing belief system).
Examples of assimilation include looking back on the
event and believing that some other course of action
should have been taken (“undoing” the event) or blaming
oneself because it occurred. The therapist went
on to explain that Tom could have also attempted to
change his prior belief system radically to overaccommodate
the event to his prior beliefs. “Overaccommodation”
was described as changing beliefs too much as
a result of the traumatic event (e.g., “I can’t trust myself
about anything”). She explained that several areas of
beliefs are often affected by trauma, including safety,
trust, power/control, esteem, and intimacy. She further
explained that these beliefs could be about the self and/
or others. The therapist also pointed out that if Tom had
negative beliefs prior to the traumatic event relative to
any of these topics, the event could serve to strengthen
these preexisting negative beliefs.

At this point, Tom described his childhood and adolescent
experiences, and how they had contributed to
his premilitary trauma beliefs. The therapist noted that
Tom tended to blame himself and to internalize the bad
things that had happened in his family and the suicide
of his friend. She also noted his comment, “I wonder if
my father drank to cope with me and my siblings.” In
Tom’s case, it seemed likely that the traumatic experience
served more to confirm his preexisting beliefs that
he had caused or contributed to bad things happening
around and to him.

Tom then spent some time describing how drastically
things had changed after his military traumas.
Prior to his military experiences and, specifically, the
shooting of the woman and child, Tom described himself
as “proud of being a soldier” and “pulling his life
together.” He indicated that the military structure had
been very good for him in developing self-discipline
and improving his self-esteem. He indicated that he
felt good about “the mission to end terrorism” and was
proud to serve his country. He felt camaraderie with his
fellow soldiers and considered a career in the military.

He denied any authority problems and in fact believed
that his commanding officers had been role models
of the type of leader he wished to be. Prior to his deployment
to Iraq, Tom met and married his wife, and
they appeared to have a stable, intimate relationship.
After his return from Iraq, Tom indicated that he did
not trust anyone, especially anyone associated with the

U.S. government. Tom expressed his disillusionment
with the war effort and distrust of the individuals who
commanded his unit. He also articulated distrust of
himself: “I always make bad decisions when the chips
are down.” He stated that he felt completely unsafe in
his environment. In his immediate postdeployment period,
Tom had occasionally believed snipers on the base
grounds had placed him in their crosshairs to kill him.
He indicated that he minimally tolerated being close
to his wife, including sexual contact between the two
of them.
The therapist introduced the notion of “stuck points,”
or ways of making sense of the trauma or of thinking
about himself, others, and the world, as getting in the
way of Tom’s recovery from the traumatic events. The
therapist noted that a large number of individuals are
exposed to trauma. In fact, military personnel are
among the most trauma-exposed individuals. However,
most people recover from their trauma exposure. Thus,
a primary goal of the therapy was to figure out what had
prevented Tom from recovering (i.e., how his thinking
had got him “stuck,” leading to the maintenance of his
PTSD symptoms).

The therapist then asked Tom to provide a 5-minute
account of his index traumatic event. Tom immediately
responded, “There were so many bad things over there.
How could I pick one?” The therapist asked, “Which of
those events do you have the most thoughts or images
about? Which of those events do you dislike thinking
about the most?” The therapist indicated that Tom did
not need to provide a fine-grained description of the
event, but rather a brief overview of what happened.
Tom provided a quick account of the shooting of the
woman and child. The therapist praised Tom for sharing
about the event with her and asked about his feelings
as a result of sharing the information. Tom said
that he felt anxious and wanted the session to be over.
The therapist used this as an opportunity to describe
the differences between “natural” and “manufactured”
emotions.

The therapist first described “natural” emotions as
those feelings that are commensurate reactions to experiences
that have occurred. For example, if we perceive


Posttraumatic Stress Disorder

that someone has wronged us, it is natural to feel anger.
If we encounter a threatening situation, it is natural to
feel fear. Natural emotions have a self-limited and diminishing
course. If we allow ourselves to feel these
natural emotions, they will naturally dissipate. The
therapist used the analogy of the energy contained in
a bottle of carbonated soda to illustrate this concept.
If the top of the bottle is removed, the pressure initially
comes out with some force, but that force subsides
and eventually has no energy forthcoming. On
the other hand, there are “manufactured” emotions,
or emotions that a person has a role in making. Our
thoughts contribute to the nature and course of these
emotions. The more that we “fuel” these emotions with
our self-statements, the more we can increase the “pressure”
of these emotions. For example, if a person tells
himself over and over that he is a stupid person and
reminds himself of more and more situations in which
he perceived that he made mistakes, then he is likely to
have more and more anger toward himself. The therapist
reiterated that the goals of the therapy were (1) to
allow Tom to feel the natural emotions he has “stuffed,”
which keep him from recovering from his trauma; and

(2) to figure out how Tom was manufacturing emotions
that were unhelpful to him.
The therapist summarized for Tom the three major
goals of the therapy: (1) to remember and to accept
what happened to him by not avoiding those memories
and associated emotions; (2) to allow himself to feel his
natural emotions and let them run their course, so the
memory could be put away without such strong feelings
still attached; and (3) to balance beliefs that had been
disrupted or reinforced, so that Tom did not manufacture
unhelpful emotions.

The therapist made a strong pitch for the importance
of out-of-session practice adherence before assigning
Tom the first practice assignment. The therapist told
Tom that there appeared to be no better predictor of
response to the treatment than how much effort a patient
puts into it. She pointed out that of the 168 hours
in a week, Tom would be spending 1–2 hours of that
week in psychotherapy sessions (Note. We have found
it helpful to do twice-weekly sessions, at least in the
initial portion of the therapy, to facilitate rapport building,
to overcome avoidance, and to capitalize on early
gains in the therapy.) If Tom only spent the time during
psychotherapy sessions focused on these issues, he
would be spending less than 1% of his week focused
on his recovery. To get better, he would be using daily
worksheets and other writing assignments to promote

needed skills in his daily life and to decrease his avoidance.
The therapist also pointed out that at the beginning
of each session they would review the practice assignments
that Tom had completed. The therapist asked
Tom if this made sense, and he responded, “Sure. It
makes sense that you get out of it what you put into it.”

Tom’s first assignment was to write an Impact Statement
about the meaning of the event to determine how
he had made sense of the traumatic event, and to help
him begin to determine what assimilation, accommodation,
and overaccommodation had occurred since
the event. Stuck points that get in the way of recovery
are identified with this first assignment. Tom was instructed
to start writing the assignment later that day
to address directly any avoidance about completing the
assignment. He was specifically reminded that this was
not a trauma account (that would come later) and that
this assignment was specifically designed to get at the
meaning of the event in his life, and how it had impacted
his belief systems.

The specific assignment was as follows:

Please write at least one page on what it means to
you that you that this traumatic experience happened.
Please consider the effects that the event has had on
your beliefs about yourself, your beliefs about others,
and your beliefs about the world. Also consider the following
topics while writing your answer: safety, trust,
power/competence, esteem, and intimacy. Bring this
with you to the next session.

Session 2

The purposes of the second session are (1) to discuss
the meaning of the event and (2) to help Tom begin to
recognize thoughts, label emotions, and see the connection
between what he says to himself and how he
feels. Tom arrived with obvious anger and appeared
defensive throughout most of the session. He stated
that he had been feeling quite angry all week, and that
he was “disgusted” with society and particularly politicians,
who were “all self-interested or pandering to
those with money.” He expressed a great deal of anger
over the reports of alleged torture at Abu Ghraib prison,
which was a major news item during his therapy.
The therapist was interested in the thinking behind
Tom’s anger about the events at Abu Ghraib. However,
she first reviewed Tom’s practice assignment, writing
the first Impact Statement, to reinforce the completion
of this work and to maintain the session structure she
had outlined in the first session.


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

The therapist asked Tom to read his Impact Statement
aloud. Clients in individual CPT are always asked
to read their practice assignments aloud. Should the
therapist read them, the client could dissociate or otherwise
avoid his/her own reactions to their material.
Tom had written:

The reason that this traumatic event happened is because
I was friggin’ stupid and made a bad decision.
I killed an innocent family, without thinking. I murdered
a man’s wife and child. I can’t believe that I did
it. I took that man’s wife and child, and oh, yeah, his
unborn child, too. I feel like I don’t deserve to live, let
alone have a wife and child on the way. Why should I be
happy when that man was riddled with despair, and that
innocent woman, child, and unborn child died? Now, I
feel like I’m totally unsafe. I don’t feel safe even here
on the hospital grounds, let alone in the city or back
home with my family. I feel like someone is watching
me and is going to snipe at me and my family because
the terrorists had information about the situation and
passed it on. I also don’t feel that people are safe around
me. I might go off and hurt someone, and God forbid
it be my own family. With my wife pregnant, I am really
concerned that I might hurt her. I don’t trust anyone
around me, and especially the government. I don’t
even trust the military treating me. I also don’t trust
myself. If I made a bad decision at that time, who is
to say that I won’t make a bad decision again? About
power and control, I feel completely out of control of
myself, and like the military and my commanding officer
have complete control over me. My self-esteem is
in the toilet. Why wouldn’t it be given the crappy things
that I have done? I don’t think there are many positive
things that I’ve done with my life, and when the chips
are down, I always fail and let others down. I’m not sure
what other-esteem is, but I do like my wife. In fact, I
don’t think she deserves to have to deal with me, and I
think they would be better without me around. I don’t
want to be close to my wife, or anyone else for that matter.
It makes me want to crawl out of my skin when my
wife touches me. I feel like I’ll never get over this. It
wasn’t supposed to be like this.

The therapist asked Tom what it was like to write and
then read the Impact Statement aloud. Tom responded
that it had been very difficult, and that he had avoided
the assignment until the evening before his psychotherapy
session. The therapist immediately reinforced
Tom for his hard work in completing the assignment.
She also used the opportunity to gently address the
role of avoidance in maintaining PTSD symptoms. She
asked specific Socratic questions aimed at elucidating

the distress associated with anticipatory anxiety, and
wondered aloud with Tom about what it would have
been like to have completed the assignment earlier in
the week. She also asked Socratic questions aimed at
highlighting the fact that Tom felt better, not worse,
after completing the assignment.

Tom’s first Impact Statement and the information he
shared in the first session made evident the stuck points
that would have to be challenged. In CPT, areas of assimilation
are prioritized as the first targets of treatment.
Assimilation is targeted first because changes
in the interpretation of the event itself are integrally
related to the other, more generalized beliefs involved
in overaccommodation. In Tom’s case, he was assimilating
the event by blaming himself. He used the term
“murderer” to describe his role in the event, disregarding
important contextual factors that surrounded the
event. These beliefs would be the first priority for challenging.
Tom’s overaccommodation is evident in his
general distrust of society and authority figures, and his
belief that he will make bad decisions in difficult situations.
His overaccommodation is also evident in his
sense of threat in his environment (e.g., snipers), difficulty
being emotionally and physically intimate with
his wife, and low esteem for others and himself.

The therapist returned to Tom’s anger about Abu
Ghraib to get a better sense of possible stuck points, and
also to experiment with Tom’s level of cognitive rigidity
or openness to cognitive challenging. The following
exchange ensued between Tom and the therapist:

tHeraPist: Earlier you mentioned that you were feel


ing angry about the reports from Abu Ghraib. Can

you tell me what makes you angry?

tom: I can’t believe that they would do that to those
prisoners.

tHeraPist: What specifically upsets you about Abu
Ghraib?

tom: Haven’t you heard the reports? I can’t believe that
they would humiliate and hurt them like that. Once
again, the U.S. military’s use of force is unacceptable.


tHeraPist: Do you think your use of force as a member
of the U.S. military was unacceptable?

tom: Yes. I murdered innocent civilians. I am no dif


ferent than those military people at Abu Ghraib. In

fact, I’m worse because I murdered them.

tHeraPist: “Murder.” That’s a strong word.


Posttraumatic Stress Disorder

tom: Yeah?

tHeraPist: From what you’ve told me, it seems like
you killed some people who may or may not have
been “innocent.” Your shooting occurred in a very
specific place and time, and under certain circumstances.


tom: Yes, they died at my hands.

tHeraPist: Yes, they died, and it seems, at least in
part, because of your shooting. Does that make you
a murderer?

tom: Innocent people died and I pulled the trigger. I
murdered them. That’s worse than what happened at
Abu Ghraib.

tHeraPist: (quietly) Really, you think it is worse?

tom: Yes. In one case, people died, and in another they
didn’t. Both are bad, and both were caused by soldiers,
but I killed people and they didn’t.

tHeraPist: The outcomes are different—that is true.
I’m curious if you think how it happened matters?

tom: Huh?

tHeraPist: Does it matter what the soldiers’ intentions
were in those situations, regardless of the outcome?
tom: No. The bottom line is killing versus no killing.

tHeraPist: (realizing that there was minimal flexibility
at this point) I agree that there is no changing the
fact that the woman and child died, and that your
shooting had something to do with that. However,
I think we might slightly disagree on the use of the
term “murder.” It is clear that their deaths have been
a very difficult thing for you to accept, and that you
are trying to make sense of that. The sense that you
appear to have made of their deaths is that you are a
“murderer.” I think this is a good example of one of
those stuck points that seem to have prevented you
from recovering from this traumatic event. We’ll
definitely be spending more time together on understanding
your role in their deaths.

In addition to testing Tom’s cognitive flexibility,
the therapist also wanted to plant the seeds of a different
interpretation of the event. She was careful not
to push too far and retreated when it was clear that
Tom was not amenable to an alternative interpretation
at this point in the therapy. He was already defensive
and somewhat angry, and she did not want to exacerbate
his defensiveness or possibly contribute to dropout
from the therapy.

From there, the therapist described how important it
was to be able to label emotions and to begin to identify
what Tom was saying to himself. The therapist and
Tom discussed how different interpretations of events
can lead to very different emotional reactions. They
generated several examples of how changes in thoughts
result in different feelings. The therapist also reminded
Tom that some interpretations and reactions follow
naturally from situations and do not need to be altered.
For example, Tom indicated that he was saddened by
the death of the family; the therapist did not challenge
that statement. She encouraged Tom to feel his sadness
and to let it run its course. He recognized that he had
lost something, and it was perfectly natural to feel sad
as a result. At this point Tom responded, “I don’t like to
feel sad. In fact, I don’t like to feel at all. I’m afraid I’ll
go crazy.” The therapist gently challenged this belief.
“Have you ever allowed yourself to feel sad?” Tom responded
that he worked very hard to avoid any and all
feelings. The therapist encouraged Tom, “Well, given
that you don’t have much experience with feeling your
feelings, we don’t know that you’re going to go crazy
if you feel your feelings, right?” She also asked him
whether he had noticed anyone in his life who had felt
sad and had not gone crazy. He laughed. The therapist
added, “Not feeling your feelings hasn’t been working
for you so far. This is your opportunity to experiment
with feeling these very natural feelings about the traumatic
event to see whether it can help you recover now
from what has happened.”

Tom was given a number of A-B-C Sheets as practice
assignments to begin to identify what he was telling
himself and his resulting emotions. In the first column,
under A, “Something happens,” Tom was instructed
to write down an event. Under the middle column, B,
“I tell myself something,” he was asked to record his
thoughts about the event. Under column C, “I feel and/
or do something,” Tom was asked to write down his
behavioral and emotional responses to the event. The
therapist pointed out that if Tom says something to
himself a lot, it becomes automatic. After a while, he
does not need to think the thought consciously, he can
go straight to the feeling. It is important to stop and recognize
automatic thoughts to decide whether they either
make sense or should be challenged and changed.

Session 3

Tom handed the therapist his practice assignments as
soon as he arrived. The therapist went over the individ



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

ual A-B-C Sheets Tom had completed and emphasized
that he had done a good job in identifying his feelings
and recognizing his thoughts. Some of this work is
shown in Figure 2.1.

The purpose of reviewing this work at this point in
the therapy is to identify thoughts and feelings, not to
heavily challenge the content of those thoughts. The
therapist did a minor correction of Tom’s identification
of the thought “I feel like I’m a bad person” (bolded
in Figure 2.1) as a feeling. She commented that feelings
are almost always one word and what you feel in
your “gut,” and that adding the stem “I feel . . . ” does
not necessarily make it a feeling. The therapist noticed
the pattern of thoughts that Tom tended to record (i.e.,
internalizing and self-blaming), as well as the characteristic
emotions he reported.

The therapist noted the themes of assimilation that
again emerged (i.e., self-blame) and chose to focus on
mildly challenging these related thoughts. She specifically
chose to focus on Tom’s thoughts and feelings related
to his wife’s pregnancy, which ultimately seemed
to be related to his assimilation of the traumatic event.

tHeraPist: You don’t think you deserve to have a family?
Can you say more about that?

tom: Why should I get to have a family when I took
someone else’s away?

tHeraPist: OK, so it sounds like this relates to the first
thought that you wrote down on the A-B-C Sheet
about being a murderer. When you say to yourself, “I
took someone else’s family away,” how do you feel?

tom: I feel bad.

tHeraPist: Let’s see if we can be a bit more precise.
What brand of bad do you feel? Remember how we
talked about the primary colors of emotion? Which
of those might you feel?

tom: I feel so angry at myself for doing what I did.

tHeraPist: OK. Let’s write that down—anger at self.
So, I’m curious, Tom, do the other people you’ve told
about this situation, or who were there at the time,
think what you did was wrong?

tom: No, but they weren’t the ones who did it, and they
don’t care about the Iraqi people like I do.

ACTIVATING
EVENT
BELIEF
CONSEQUENCE
A
B
C
“Something
happens”
“I
tell
myself
something”
“I
feel
something”


I
killed
an
innocent
family.
“I
am
a
murderer.”
I
feel
like
I’m
a
bad
person.
Avoid
talking
about
it.
My
wife
is
pregnant.
“I
don’t
deserve
to
have
a
family.”
Guilty
Abu
Ghraib
“The
government
sucks.”
Angry
Going
to
therapy
“I’m
weak.
I
shouldn’t
have
PTSD.
Angry
PTSD
is
only
for
the
weak.”


Are
my
thoughts
in
B
realistic?


Yes.


What
can
you
tell
yourself
on
such
occasions
in
the
future?


?


figUre 2.1. A-B-C Sheet.

