Borderline Personality Disorder

either SFT or TFP. Study results indicated an overall
decrease in BPD symptoms for both treatments; however,
participants who received SFT had significantly
greater improvements overall and a lower attrition rate.
Suicide and NSSI behaviors were not assessed as an
outcome measure in this study. A follow-up secondary
analyses study also demonstrated that SFT’s cost
to implement was 20% lower than the cost needed to
implement TFP (van Asselt et al., 2008). In addition,
Farrell, Shaw, and Webber (2009) demonstrated the
effectiveness of SFT in an 8-month group format. In
their study, the authors tested the effect of augmenting
TAU with an SFT group. When compared to TAU
alone, TAU–SFT resulted in significantly higher remission
from BPD.

An effectiveness trial was also conducted in 2009.
Nadort and colleagues (2009) tested a disseminated
version of SFT in regular health care centers with or
without afterhours crisis support by phone. Data from
62 participants suggested that the added phone availability
did not result in additional improvement, and
that across conditions SFT was successful, leading to
42% recovery from BPD after 1.5 years of treatment.

Weinberg and colleagues (2006) completed an RCT
of manual-assisted cognitive treatment (MACT) and
TAU. MACT is a brief cognitive-behavioral treatment
that incorporates strategies from DBT, CT, and bibliotherapy.
The treatment targets NSSI behaviors in participants
diagnosed with BPD. MACT was provided as
an adjunctive treatment to TAU for study participants
(N = 30). Participants were 30 women diagnosed with
BPD, with a history of NSSI behaviors and at least one
in the last month; however, suicide was considered one
of the exclusionary criteria for study participation. Participants
were randomly assigned to MACT plus TAU
or to TAU-alone conditions. Upon completion of the
6-week treatment and at the 6-month follow-up, participants
who received MACT had significantly fewer and
less severe NSSI behaviors than those in the TAU-alone
condition. These results should be interpreted with caution
due to small sample size and the use of self-report
measures only in assessment of NSSI behaviors.

eviDeNce for DBt
as aN effective BPD treatMeNt

DBT evolved from standard cognitive-behavioral therapy
as a treatment for BPD, particularly for recurrently
suicidal, severely dysfunctional adults. The theoretical

orientation to treatment is a blend of three theoretical
positions: behavioral science, dialectical philosophy,
and Zen practice. Behavioral science, the principles of
behavior change, is countered by acceptance of the client
(with techniques drawn both from Zen and from
Western contemplative practice); these poles are balanced
within the dialectical framework. Although
dialectics was first adopted as a description of this emphasis
on balance, dialectics soon took on the status of
guiding principles that have advanced the therapy in directions
not originally anticipated. DBT is based within
a consistent behaviorist theoretical position. However,
the actual procedures and strategies overlap considerably
with those of various alternative therapy orientations,
including psychodynamic, client-centered, strategic,
and cognitive therapies.

Efficacy

Although, as described earlier, several treatments have
demonstrated efficacy in the treatment of people diagnosed
with BPD, DBT has the most empirical support
at present and is generally considered the frontline
treatment for the disorder. DBT as a treatment for BPD
has been evaluated in a number of controlled trials (see
Table 10.1). Four of the RCTs specifically recruited
clients with suicidal behaviors (Linehan et al., 1999,
2006; Linehan, Armstrong, Suárez, Allmon, & Heard,
1991; McMain et al., 2009). Two RCTs included DBT
in both conditions, with the addition of medication in
one condition (Linehan, McDavid, Brown, Sayrs, &
Gallop, 2008; Soler et al., 2005). The results in general
have shown DBT to be highly effective. In adults
diagnosed with BPD who are at high risk for suicide, 1
year of DBT yielded significantly higher improvements
on anger outbursts, suicidal behavior, and hospitalization
compared to TAU (Linehan et al., 1991; Linehan,
Heard, & Armstrong, 1993), client-centered therapy
(CCT, Turner, 2000), and community treatment by
non-behavioral experts (CTBE; Linehan et al., 2006)
but not to a dynamic emotion-focused treatment plus
protocol-based pharmacotherapy program (McMain et
al., 2009). One study showed that participants treated
with DBT were half as likely to engage in suicidal behaviors
compared to participants in the CTBE condition,
further indicating that DBT is an effective treatment
for reducing suicidal behavior. During the 1 year
of treatment, depression, hopelessness, and suicidal
ideation improved in both DBT and control treatments
(Linehan et al., 1991, 2006; McMain et al., 2009). Fur



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

thermore, there was similar remission from major depressive
disorder (MDD) and anxiety disorders in the
DBT and in the control condition (Harned et al., 2008),
although remission from substance dependence was
significantly higher in DBT.

Treatment superiority was maintained when participants
in the DBT condition were compared to only
those control subjects who received stable individual
psychotherapy during the treatment year, and even
after researchers controlled for number of hours of psychotherapy
and telephone contacts (Linehan & Heard,
1993; Linehan et al., 1999). Superiority was also maintained
when comparing DBT with a treatment that had
equal prestige, and was administered by expert therapist
with allegiance to the treatment model (CTBE;
Linehan et al., 2006). These studies suggest that the
efficacy of DBT is due to specific treatment factors and
not general factors or the expertise of the treating psychotherapists.


In BPD samples selected regardless of their suicide
risk, findings are mixed with regard to suicidal behavior;
nevertheless DBT outperforms control conditions
in improving indices of emotion regulation (Koons et
al., 2006; Verheul et al., 2003). DBT is also effective
for adults diagnosed with BPD and a comorbid drug
dependence disorder (Linehan et al., 1999, 2002).

Evidence also suggests that DBT adaptations are
successful in treating people diagnosed with BPD.
Soler and colleagues (2009) found a 13-week DBT
skills-only intervention to be more successful in reducing
problematic emotions than a psychodynamically
informed standard group therapy (SGT) for participants
meeting diagnostic criteria for BPD.

Bohus and colleagues (2004) compared a 12-week
inpatient DBT adaptation with TAU for females diagnosed
with BPD who reported a history of suicidal behavior.
In a self-harming subsample, significantly more
patients in DBT than in TAU abstained from NSSI at
posttreatment (62 vs. 31%). Roepke and colleagues
(2011) also found that a 12-week inpatient course of
DBT resulted in significant improvement in depression
and self-esteem when compared to TAU for women diagnosed
with BPD.

Beyond BPD, studies have demonstrated the effectiveness
of DBT with older depressed adults (Lynch et
al., 2007; Lynch, Morse, Mendelson, & Robins, 2003),
with adults with binge-eating disorder (Safer & Joyce,
2011; Safer, Robinson, & Jo, 2010), with suicidal adolescents
(Barnoski, 2002; Katz, Cox, Gunasekara, &
Miller, 2004; McDonell et al., 2010; Rathus & Miller,

2002) and suicidal college students (Pistorello, Fruzzetti,
MacLane, Gallop, & Iverson, 2012), and with
adults with a cluster B personality disorder (Feigenbaum
et al., 2012).

eviDeNce for DBt as aN effective
treatMeNt for eMotioN
DysreGulatioN

As noted earlier, many mental disorders, including
BPD, can be conceptualized as disorders of emotion
regulation with deficits in both emotion up-regulation
and down-regulation. For example, theorists have proposed
that MDD should be conceptualized as an emotion
dysregulation disorder based partly on a deficit in
up-regulating and maintaining positive emotions (see
Kring & Bachorowski, 1999, for a review). Similarly,
literature reviews have demonstrated that anxiety disorders,
schizophrenia, and even bipolar disorders are
directly linked to emotion dysregulation (Kring &
Werner, 2004). Once one realizes that emotions include
both actions and action tendencies, one can see the link
between emotion dysregulation and many disorders
defined as behavior dyscontrol (e.g., substance dependence).
As previously discussed, difficulties with emotion
dysregulation, similar to those seen in BPD, are
common in other disorders. Specifically problems with
recognizing emotions, describing and labeling emotions,
knowing what to do when an emotion is on the
scene, and emotional avoidance are common in many
Axis I disorders. Therefore, an important theoretical
premise in DBT is that people who exhibit emotion dysregulation
lack the skills needed for successful regulation.
DBT includes a set of skills aimed at improving
emotion regulation in BPD in particular, and in people
who report emotion dysregulation in general.

An increasing number of RCTs suggest that DBT
skills training alone is a promising intervention for a
variety of populations (see Table 10.1). The majority of
these studies offered only the skills training component
of DBT. Therefore, although skills training was originally
developed to be part of a comprehensive intervention,
the number of studies suggests that DBT skills
training by itself can be a successful intervention for a
variety of populations with emotion regulation difficulties.
Furthermore, DBT skills use (the product of skills
training) has been shown to be an active mechanism of
change for emotion regulation outcomes in treatment
for BPD (Neacsiu, Rizvi, & Linehan, 2010).


table 10.1. table of randomized Control trials and Controlled trials for dbt

Emotion regula-
DBT variant General out-tion outcomes Study inclusion Study exclusion
Citation Design Methodology N/condition offered comes reported reported criteria criteria

401

Barnoski Controlled DBT vs. TAU (his-DBT = 42 rDBT (stan-DBT < TAU None Adolescents at a None

(2002) trial torical controls), TAU = 116 dard)—1 year in number of juvenile rehabili12-
month FU reconvictions for tation institution
assessment a felony offense
in the 12 months
following discharge


Bohus et al. RCT iDBT-PTSD vs. iDBT-PTSD iDBT adapted iDBT-PTSD None Females 17–65 Schizophrenia,

(2013) TAU-WL; assess-= 36 for PTSD—3 > TAU-WL in years old, mental retardation,
ments at pre- and TAU-WL months PTSD remis-referred for requiring immediposttreatment
and = 38 sion and PTSD childhood sexual ate other treatment,
at 6-week FU interview and abuse recent life-threatenself-
report ing suicide attempt,
assessments medical condition
contraindicated for
exposure

Bohus et al. RCT iDBT vs. WL + iDBT = 40 Inpatient DBT iDBT > TAU on DBT = TAU on Female, BPD, Lifetime schizo


(2004) TAU; assessments TAU = 20 (iDBT)—3 abstinence from anger; DBT > suicide attempt phrenia, mental
at pre- and post-months NSSI (62% vs. TAU on decrease (SA) or two retardation, bipolar
treatment; at 1- and 31%) in depression and NSSI episodes in I, current substance
3-month FU anxiety last 2 years abuse

Bradley & RCT DBT-ST vs. no DBT-ST DBT-ST adapted No significant DBT-ST > con-Self-reported None

Follingstad treatment (con-= 24 differences trol in decrease childhood abuse

(2003) trol)—9 weeks Control = 25 between condi-in depression and significant
tions across and trauma and
trauma symp-depression
toms

Carter et al. RCT DBT vs. TAU + DBT = 38 DBT (stan-DBT = TAU in None Female, BPD, Not a fi t/unmoti


(2010) WL; assessments TAU + WL dard)—6 months NSSI, hospital 18–65; mul-vated, presence of
at pretreatment, = 35 admissions or tiple episodes a disabling organic
3 months, and 6 length of stay in of NSSI, at least condition, schizomonths
hospital, quality three in the last phrenia, bipolar
of life, disability year disorder, psychotic
depression, florid
antisocial behavior,
developmental disability


(continued)


table 10.1. (continued)

Emotion regula-
DBT variant General out-tion outcomes Study inclusion Study exclusion
Citation Design Methodology N/condition offered comes reported reported criteria criteria

402

Cavanaugh, RCT Dialectical psycho-DPEW = 28 DBT-ST modi-DPEW > AMW DPEW > AMW Males, 18 or None
Solomon, & educational work-AMW = 27 fi ed for interper-(at postreat-(at postreatment) older, never
Gelles (2011) shop (DPEW) vs. sonal violence ment) in adaptive in anger manage-engaged in inti


anger management (DPEW)—8 coping skills, ment skills mate partner vioworkshop
(AMW); weeks empathy skills, lence, endorsed
assessments at pre- and in decreas-violent urges
and posttreatment ing potential risk

for interpersonal
violence

Clarkin, Levy, RCT DBT vs. TFP DBT = 17 DBT (stan-DBT = TFP = DBT = TFP = BPD, 18–50 Comorbid psychotic
Lenzenweger, vs. supportive TFP = 23 dard)—1 year ST in improving ST in improving disorders, bipolar I
& Kernberg treatment (ST); ST = 22 adapted to global function-depression and disorder, delusional
(2007) assessments at include medica-ing and social anxiety; TFP = disorder, delirium,

pretreatment, 4, 8, tion management adjustment; TFP ST (not DBT) in dementia, amnestic

and 12 months = DBT (not ST) reducing anger and other cognitive
in reducing sui-and impulsivity; disorders; active subcidality
(analyses only TFP signifi -stance dependence
only included cantly changed
people with ≥ 3 irritability and
assessments) assault behaviors

Courbasson, RCT DBT vs. TAU; TAU = 8 DBT (stan-DBT < TAU in DBT posttreat-Women ≥ 18; any Organic brain
Nishikawa, & assessments at DBT = 13 dard)—1 year dropout; DBT ment > pretreat-eating disorder syndrome; mental
Dixon (2012) pretreatment, 3, 6, posttreatment > ment in ability and substance retardation;

9, 12, 15, and 18 pretreatment in to cope and abuse/ depen-psychosis; and
months (last two dysfunctional regulate negative dence, agreed chronic suicidality;
are FU time points) eating behaviors emotions not to change in treatment for an

and attitudes; medication eating disorder or
severity and use substance use
of substances

Evershed et al. Controlled rDBT vs. TAU; rDBT = 8 Residential DBT > TAU in DBT > TAU in Male, inpatient None

(2003) trial assessments at TAU = 9 DBT adapted seriousness of self-reported in a high security
pre-, mid-, and for forensic violence inci-hostility and hospital, havposttreatment,
and sample—18 dents anger ing borderline
at 6-month FU months features

Feigenbaum et RCT DBT vs. TAU; DBT = 26 DBT (stan-DBT < TAU in DBT = TAU in Age range = Extensive forensic

al. (2012) assessments at TAU = 16 dard)—1 year decrease of self-aggression, anger 18–65, diag-history that suggests
pretreatment, 6 rated risk expression, nosed with a immediate danger to
months, and 1 year


behavior depression, irri-cluster B person-others; schizophre-
DBT = TAU in tability (signifi -ality disorder nia, bipolar disorder;
NSSI reductions, cant decrease in primary substance
use of services both conditions) use disorder, severe

cognitive impairment

Harley et RCT TAU + DBT-ST vs. TAU + DBT-ST group See next column TAU + DBT-ST Diagnosis of BPD, bipolar,

al. (2008); TAU + WL; assess-DBT-ST intervention > TAU + WL depression, psychotic spectrum

Feldman et al. ments at pre- and = 13 adapted for treat-at improving 18–65, on stable disorders, active

(2009) posttreatment and TAU + WL ment-resistant depression from medication substance abuse/
at a 6-month FU = 11 depression—16 Week 0 to Week dependence, mental
weeks 16 retardation, pervasive
developmental disorder,
active suicidality,
unstable medical
conditions, exposure
to CBT

Hill, Craig-RCT DBT-AF vs. WL DBT-AF DBT-ST—modi-DBT-AF = WL DBT-AF > WL Recent BED Male, 18 or older,

head, & Safer = 18 fi ed for AF in improvement in decreasing behavior, vomit-current diagnosis of

(2011) WL = 14 in number of depression, emo-ing as primary anorexia nervosa,
bingeing and tion dysregula-compensatory in psychotherapy,
purging episodes tion behavior. Stable current suicidal
psychotropic ideation, substance
medication. dependence, present
psychosis

Hirvikoski et RCT DBT-ST vs. DBT-ST Adapted DBT-DBT-ST = Con-None Meets diagnos-Substance abuse;

al. (2011) loosely structured = 26 ST for Swedish trol in satisfac-tic criteria for IQ ≤ 70; diagnosed
discussion group Control = 25 population—14 tion ADHD, adult, brain injury; autism
(control) sessions on stable dose of spectrum disorder;
medication suicidality; homelessness;
severe depression,
psychosis, or
bipolar without stable
medication

Katz et al. Controlled rDBT vs. TAU rDBT = 31 rDBT—average rDBT < TAU rDBT = TAU Inpatients, 14–17, Mental retardation,

(2004) trial residential unit; TAU = 31 stay = 18 days in incidents in depression admitted for sui-psychosis, bipolar
assessments at pre- on the ward; reduction and cide attempts, or disorder, severe
and posttreatment rDBT = TAU hopelessness suicidal ideation learning disability
and at 1-year FU in emergency (significant
room visits and decrease in both
hospitalizations conditions)
after discharge;
in NSSI, and in
suicidal ideation

(continued)

403


table 10.1. (continued)

Emotion regula-
DBT variant General out-tion outcomes Study inclusion Study exclusion
Citation Design Methodology N/condition offered comes reported reported criteria criteria

404

Koons et al. RCT DBT vs. TAU DBT = 10 DBT (stan-DBT < TAU in DBT > TAU on Women veterans, Schizophrenia,

(2001) TAU = 10 dard)—6 months NSSI, hospital-hopelessness, BPD bipolar, substance
izations, suicidal depression, anger dependence and
ideation, and suppression, and antisocial personality
dissociation expression disorder

Koons et al. RCT DBT vs. TAU; DBT = 10 DBT (stan-Trend for DBT DBT > TAU Women veterans, Schizophrenia,

(2006) assessments at TAU = 10 dard)—6 months to reduce NSSI in reduction of BPD bipolar disorder, subpretreatment,
3, more than TAU depression (self-stance dependence,
and 6 months (p < .10), DBT = report) and hope-antisocial personality
TAU on reduc-lessness; DBT = disorder
tion of services TAU in reduction
use; DBT > TAU of depression
in reduction of (interview),
suicidal ideation anxiety, anger
suppression;
DBT > TAU
in reduction of
anger expression

Linehan et al. RCT DBT vs. TAU; DBT = 22 DBT (stan-DBT > TAU in DBT = TAU BPD, women, Lifetime psychotic

(1991, 1993, assessments every TAU = 22 dard)—1 year reducing risk for in reduction of 18–45 with disorder, lifetime

1994) 4 months, includ-suicidal behavior depression and current and past bipolar disorder,
ing during a 1-year and decreasing hopelessness suicidal behavior mental retardation,
FU use of services; (significant (at least one epi-seizure disorder
DBT < TAU in decrease in both sode in the last 8 requiring medicareducing
drop-conditions) weeks) tion, mandate to
out; DBT = TAU treatment, need for
in decreasing primary treatment
suicidal ideation for a debilitating
condition

Linehan et al. RCT DBT vs. TAU; DBT = 12 DBT (stan-DBT > TAU in DBT = TAU in BPD, female, Psychotic disorder,

(1999) assessments every TAU = 16 dard)—1 year substance abuse anger outcomes current drug bipolar disorder,
4 months; 4 month (significant dependence mental retardation
FU decrease in both)

Linehan et al. RCT DBT + LAAM vs. DBT = 11 DBT (stan-DBT participants None Females 18–45, Bipolar disorder,

(2002) comprehensive CVT-12S dard)—1 year maintained BPD, with psychosis, seizure
validation therapy = 12 reductions in current opiate disorder, mental
with 12-step (CVT-opiate use dependence retardation,


405

12s) + LAAM; throughout the
assessments 12-month treatevery
4 months, ment; CVT-12S
including one FU participants
assessment attained the

same reductions
but increased
their use of opiates
in the last 4
months; similar
decreases in psychopathology


Linehan et RCT DBT vs. commu-DBT = 52 DBT (stan-DBT < CTBE in
al. (2006); nity treatment by CTBE = 49 dard)—1 year suicide attempts,
Harned et experts (CTBE); use of crisis seral.
(2008); assessments every vices, dropout;
Bedics, Atkins, 4 months and dur-DBT led to a
Comtois, & ing a 1-year FU significant reduc-
Linehan (2012) tion in substance

use disorders;
DBT = CTBE
in reduction of
suicidal ideation,
remission from
major depression,
anxiety, and
eating disorders;
DBT > CTBE in
introject affi liation
increases

Linehan et al. RCT DBT + placebo vs. DBT + pla-DBT (stan-Placebo > olan


(2008) DBT + olanzapine cebo = 12 dard)—6 months zapine in reduc-
DBT + tion of NSSI
olanzapine
= 12

DBT = CTBE
in reduction
of depression
(significant
decrease in both
conditions; DBT
showed signifi
cant
change in
self-affi rming,
self-loving, selfprotecting,
and
less self-attacking
through
treatment and
FU; CTBE
showed signifi
cant
treatment
interaction for
therapist affi rm/
therapist protect

Olanzapine was
faster than placebo
at reducing
irritability and
physical aggression


BPD, women,
18–45 with
current and past
suicidal behavior
(at least one episode
in the last 8
weeks)

18–60, BPD,
dysregulated
anger, scored
high on irritability


pregnancy, medical
condition for which
the use of opiate
replacement medication
was contraindicated,
indications of
treatment coercion

Lifetime psychotic
disorder, lifetime
bipolar disorder,
mental retardation,
seizure disorder
requiring medication,
mandate to
treatment, need for
primary treatment
for a debilitating
condition

Schizophrenia, bipolar
I, schizoaffective,
psychotic disorder,
mental retardation,
seizure disorder, substance
dependence
within last 6 month.
NSSI in the prior 8
weeks from screening,
pregnant

(continued)


table 10.1. (continued)

406

Emotion regula-
DBT variant General out-tion outcomes Study inclusion Study exclusion
Citation Design Methodology N/condition offered comes reported reported criteria criteria

Lynch et al. RCT 8-week medication DBT + DBT (stan-DBT + MED None Over 55 years of Bipolar disorder,

(2007) trial followed by MED = 21 dard)—6 months achieves remis-age; meets cri-psychotic symptoms,
RCT for nonre-MED = 14 sion from major teria for at least signs of cognitive
sponders: standard depressive dis-one personality impairment, current
DBT + medication order faster than disorder; scores ECT
(DBT-MED) vs. MED only high on depresmedication
only sion
(MED); assessments
at pretreatment,
2, 6, 9, and
15 months

Lynch et al. RCT Antidepres-MED = 15 DBT-ST adapta-Remission from Self-reported Current MDD, Bipolar disorder,

(2003) sants (MED) vs. DBT-ST + tion (skills depression (DBT depression (DBT age 60+; scores psychotic symptoms,
DBT-ST + MED; MED = 16 and 30-minute > MED) gap > MED) high on two signs of cognitive
assessments at phone coach-even wider at depression impairment, current
pretreatment, ing/week)—7 FU; dependency measures ECT
posttreatment, and months & adaptive cop6-
month FU ing improved in

DBT only

McDonell et Controlled rDBT vs. residen-rDBT = 106 rDBT (varied With DBT, sig-None Youth ages Admissions for legal
al. (2010) trial tial TAU (historical TAU = 104 intensity of DBT nifi cantly fewer 12–17 competence restoramatches)
therapy in resi-NSSI episodes tion

dential setting) during 1 year of
treatment than
with TAU

McMain et al. RCT DBT vs. general DBT = 90 DBT (stan-DBT = GPM in DBT = GPM BPD, ages Psychotic disorder,

(2009) psychiatric man-GPM = 90 dard)—1 year decreasing sui-in decreasing 18–60, at least bipolar I disorder,
agement (GPM); cidal behavior, depression, two episodes of delirium, dementia,
assessments every use of crisis ser-anger, symptom suicidal or NSSI mental retarda4
months and dur-vices (significant distress (signifi -episodes in the tion, substance
ing 1-month FU decrease in both cant decrease in past 5 years, dependence in the

conditions) both conditions) at least one of last month, mediwhich
was in the cal condition that
3 months preced-precluded psychiatric
ing enrollment medications, serious

medical condition,
plans to leave in the
next 2 years


Neacsiu, RCT 16-week DBT-DBT-ST DBT-ST con-DBT-ST= ASG DBT-ST >ASG Adults, ages Current psychotic
Eberle, ST vs. 16-week = 22 densed to 16 in improvements in improvements 18–65, high disorder, Bipolar
Kramer, Activities Support ASG = 22 weeks in depression in diffi culties emotion I, BPD, had DBT
Weismann, & Group (ASG); severity; DBT-with emotion dysregulation, before, mandated to
Linehan (2013) assessment every 2 ST > ASG in regulation and meets criteria for treatment, severe sui


months including a improvements in affect control a DSM-IV-TR cidality, not willing

2-month FU anxiety severity, DBT-ST = ASG diagnosis for a to discontinue ancilincrease
in skills in alexithymia depressive or lary psychotherapy
use decrease anxiety disorder

Pistorello et al. RCT DBT vs. supervi-DBT = 31 DBT (stan-DBT > SBE in DBT > SBE Ages 18–25, Psychosis, had indi


(2012) sion by experts in SBE = 32 dard)—7 months decreasing NSSI, in decreasing current suicidal vidual or group DBT
psychodynamic to 1 year use of psychotro-depression (self-ideation, past
treatment (SBE); pic medication, report) history of at least
assessment every 3 and suicidality one NSSI or one
months and during and in increasing suicide attempt
6-month FU quality of life

Rakfeldt Controlled rDBT vs. no treat-rDBT = 7 rDBT adapted rDBT = Control None Living in the None

(2005) trial ment—17 weeks; Control = 8 to include two in functioning young adult serassessments
at pre- 1-hour skills ses-index; rDBT vices residential
and posttreatment sions/ week > Control in program; has

interpersonal serious emorelationships,
tional distursocial
networks, bance
intentionality,
and global functioning


Rathus & Controlled rDBT vs. TAU rDBT = 29 rDBT DBT > TAU None Adolescents in None

Miller (2002) trial (assignment to TAU = 82 adapted—12 in reducing DBT: suicide
TAU for less severe weeks, twice psychiatric attempt in last
clients) weekly hospitalizations 16 weeks, at

DBT = TAU in least three BPD
suicide attempts criteria
(1 in DBT, 7 in
TAU)

Roepke et al. Controlled iDBT vs. WL + iDBT = 40 iDBT—3 months DBT > TAU in With DBT, Female, BPD Lifetime diagnosis

(2011) trial TAU; assessments TAU = 20 increasing self-significant of schizophrenia,
at pretreatment and esteem improvement in bipolar I or II, subat
10 weeks depression; with stance abuse within

TAU, no change last 6 months, mental
in depression retardation

(continued)

407


408

table 10.1. (continued)

Emotion regula-
DBT variant General out-tion outcomes Study inclusion Study exclusion
Citation Design Methodology N/condition offered comes reported reported criteria criteria

Safer, Telch, & RCT DBT-ST vs. WL DBT-ST DBT-ST—20 DBT > WL at Ages 18–65, at None
Agras (2001) = 14 weeks significantly least one binge–

WL = 15 reducing rates of purge episode
bingeing–purg-per week
ing

Safer, Rob-RCT (DBT-ST BED) vs. DBT-ST DBT skills DBT-ST BED = No differences Men and women Body mass index <
inson, & Jo active comparison BED = 50 training adapted ACGT in binge-in emotion-regu-over age 18; 17.5 kg/m2; in psy(
2010); Safer group therapy ACGT = 51 for BED (DBT-ing abstinence lation measures, binge-eating chotherapy; unstable
& Joyce (2011) (ACGT)—20 ST BED)—20 posttreatment eating-related disorder; within medications; regular

weekly sessions; weeks (64% in DBT and depression, commuting use of compensaassessments
at pre- 36% in ACGT); anxiety or anger, distance from tory behaviors;
and posttreatment, DBT < ACGT in depression, or study psychosis; current
and at 3-, 6-, and binge days post-self-esteem alcohol/drug abuse or
12-month FU treatment but not dependence; severe

at FU; moder-depression with
ate effect size suicide attempts; use
favoring DBT for of weight-altering
self-reports on medications; severe
restraining and medical condition;
eating concerns; current pregnancy or
DBT more likely breast feeding; planto
produce rapid ning gastric bypass
responders who
do better at FU

Salbach-RCT 25 weeks CBT vs. CBT = 19 DBT adapted for 57.9% in CBT, Small positive AN or BN ado-Unable to speak/
Andrae et al. 25 weeks DBT-DBT-AN/ adolescents with 62.5% in DBT-effect sizes in lescent females understand German;
(2009) AN/BN vs. 12 BN = 16 anorexia/bulimia AN/BN, and emotion regula-(ages 12–21), IQ psychotic disorder

weeks waitlist WL = 15 nervosa 0% in waitlist tion >85

remitted from

DSM-IV-TR

criteria for eating

disorders; DBT-

AN/BN= CBT


> WL in calorie
avoidance, meal
frequency, and
psychological
distress

409

Soler et al. RCT DBT-ST + placebo DBT-ST+ DBT– ST Olanzepine > Olanzapine BPD, ages None

(2005) vs. DBT-ST + placebo = 30 adapted—12 placebo in reduc-< placebo in 18–45, no Axis
olanzapine DBT-ST + weeks, with ing weight gain frequency of I disorder, high
olanzapine phone coaching and cholesterol impulsivity clinical severity,
= 30 added levels; olanz-and aggressive not in psychoepine
= placebo behavior. olan-therapy
in decreases of zapine > placebo
psychopathology in decreasing
depression and
anxiety

Soler et al. RCT DBT-ST vs. DBT-ST DBT-ST See next column DBT > SGT in BPD, ages Schizophrenia,

(2009) sychodynamically = 29 adapted—3 reductions of 18–45, Clinical drug-induced psyoriented
standard SGT = 30 months depression, anxi-Global Impres-chosis, organic brain
group therapy ety, irritability, sion of Severity syndrome, substance
(SGT); assess-anger, and affect score = 4, no dependence, bipolar,
ments every 2 instability current psycho-mental retardation,
weeks therapy current depression

Telch, Agras, RCT DBT-ST vs. WL; DBT-ST DBT skills train-DBT = WL on DBT women Females, ages Current psycho


& Linehan assessments at pre- = 22 ing adapted for all outcomes reported less 18–65, meet cri-therapy, weight loss

(2001) and posttreatment WL = 22 BED desire to eat teria diagnostic program, or using
and at 6-month FU when angry criteria for BED psychotropic medication;
current substance
use disorder,
current suicidality,
psychosis, pregnancy

Trupin, Stew-Controlled rDBT vs. TAU; rDBT = 45 rDBT—variable Behavioral None Adolescents in None

art, Beach, & trial assessments pre TAU = 45 length problems signifi -a Washington

Boesky (2002) and posttreatment cantly decreased State JRA, in
in DBT cottages three different
but not in TAU cottages
cottage

(continued)


TABLE 10.1. (continued)


Emotion regula-
DBT variant General out-tion outcomes Study inclusion Study exclusion
Citation Design Methodology N/condition offered comes reported reported criteria criteria

410

Turner (2000) RCT DBT vs. TAU; DBT = 12 DBT (stanassessments
at 6 TAU = 12 dard)—1
and 12 months year, adapted
to reduce
therapy time
and incorporate
psychodynamic
techniques

Van den Bosch RCT DBT vs. TAU; DBT = 27 DBT (stanet
al. (2002); assessments at TAU = 31 dard)—1 year
Verheul et al. pretreatment, at
(2003) 11, 22, 33, 44, and

52 weeks, and at
18-month FU

Van Dijk, RCT DBT-ST vs. WL DBT-ST DBT-ST adapted
Jeffrey, & Katz = 13 for bipolar disor(
2013) WL = 13 ders—12 weeks

DBT > TAU in
mental health
functioning;
DBT > TAU in
amount of suicidal
behavior,
although signifi
cant improvement
in both

DBT < TAU in
reducing suicide
attempts (DBT
= 2, TAU = 8);
NSSI signifi
cantly
decreased
in DBT and
increased in
TAU; effects
moderated by
severity of suicidal
behavior;
DBT = TAU in
substance use

DBT-ST=WL in
reducing depression,
mindfulness
(both
improved)

DBT = TAU in BPD, willing to Schizophrenia,
improvement be randomized schizoaffective, bipoof
emotional lar, organic mental
functioning disorder, and/or

mental retardation

DBT > TAU in BPD, female; Psychotic disorder,
reducing impul-ages 18–70 bipolar disorder,
sive acts mental retardation;

not living in the area

DBT-ST=WL in BPD, age 18 or Currently in a manic
improving affect older state, developmencontrol
(both tal delay, ongoing
improved) violent or aggressive

behaviors, unable to

understand English


411

Waltz et al. RCT DBT skills video N = 30 DBT video on Of those who DBT video view-18 or older, Previous formal DBT

(2009) vs. control (infor-“opposite action” participated in ers showed sig-literate, BPD, experience, actively
mational video), the FU, 80% had nifi cant decrease IQ > 90, aware psychotic
alternating viewing used opposite in emotional of diagnosis, in
order action at least intensity. treatment

once

Wasser, Tyler, Controlled rDBT vs. STM Primary: rDBT adapted STM > rDBT DBT = STM Adolescents at None
McIlhaney, trial (Standard Thera-rDBT = 7 due to lack for psychomo-in reducing KidsPeace
Taplin, & Hen-peutic Milieu); STM = 7 of resources tor excitation at depression
derson (2008) one primary match Secondary: (conducted by discharge; rDBT (both reduced it

(exact match on rDBT = 12 non-DBT clini-> STM psycho-significantly).
age, gender, & STM = 12 cians) pathology
having an Axis
I disorder), one
secondary match
(similar match in
age, gender)

Wolf et al. RCT DBT-ST vs. DBT-DBT-ST DBT-ST—6 DBT-ST + CBST None BPD, in therapy Schizophrenia,

(2011) ST + Computer-= 11 months with or > DBT-ST in current substance
Based Skills DBT-ST + without adjunct improvement of dependence, severe
Training (CBST) CBST = 13 CD-ROM–based skills acquisition cognitive dysfunction
self-help pro-and knowledge
gram

Note. > denotes signifi cantly greater than; < denotes signifi cantly less than; = denotes no signifi cant difference between; AF, appetite-focused; FU, follow-up; iDBT, inpatient DBT; RCT,
randomized controlled trial; TAU, treatment as usual; TFP, transference-focused psychotherapy; WL, wait list; NSSI, nonsuicidal self-injury; LAAM, levomethadyl acetate hydrochloride;
PTSD, posttraumatic stress disorder; rDBT, residential DBT; ECT, electroconvulsive therapy; DBT-ST, DBT skills training; DBT-ST BED, DBT-ST for binge-eating disorder; ADHD,
attention-defi cit/hyperactivity disorder.


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

DBt: treatMeNt overview

Philosophical Basis: Dialectics

The term “dialectics” as applied to behavior therapy
refers both to a fundamental nature of reality and to a
method of persuasive dialogue and relationship. (See
Wells [1972, cited in Kegan, 1982] for documentation
of a shift toward dialectical approaches across all the
sciences during the last 150 years; more recently, Peng
& Nisbett [1999] discussed both Western and Eastern
dialectical thought.) As a worldview or philosophical
position, dialectics guides the clinician in developing
theoretical hypotheses relevant to the client’s problems
and to the treatment. Alternatively, as dialogue and relationship,
“dialectics” refers to the treatment approach
or strategies used by the therapist to effect change.
Thus, central to DBT are a number of therapeutic dialectical
strategies.

Dialectics as a Worldview

DBT is based on a dialectical worldview that emphasizes
wholeness, interrelatedness, and process (change)
as fundamental characteristics of reality. The first characteristic,
the Principle of Interrelatedness and Wholeness,
provides a perspective of viewing the system as
a whole and how people relate to the system, rather
than seeing people as if they exist in isolation. Similar
to contextual and systems theories, a dialectical view
argues that analysis of parts of any system is of limited
value unless the analysis clearly relates the part to the
whole. The second characteristic is the Principle of Polarity.
Although dialectics focuses on the whole, it also
emphasizes the complexity of any whole. Thus, dialectics
asserts that reality is nonreducible; that is, within
each single thing or system, no matter how small, there
is polarity. For example, physicists are unable to reduce
even the smallest of molecules to one thing. Where
there is matter, there is antimatter; even every atom is
made up of both protons and electrons: A polar opposite
is always present. The opposing forces are referred to
as the “thesis” and “antithesis,” present in all existence.
Dialectics suggests that the thesis and antithesis move
toward a “synthesis,” and inherent in the synthesis will
be a new set of opposing forces. It is from these opposing
forces that the third characteristic is developed. This
characteristic of the dialectical perspective refers to the
Principle of Continuous Change. Change is produced
through the constant synthesis of the thesis and the an


tithesis, and because new opposing forces are present
within the synthesis, change is ongoing. These dialectical
principles are inherent in every aspect of DBT and
allow for continuous movement throughout the therapy
process. A very important dialectical idea is that all
propositions contain within them their own oppositions.
Or, as Goldberg (1980, pp. 295–296) put it, “I assume
that truth is paradoxical, that each article of wisdom
contains within it its own contradictions, that truths
stand side by side. Contradictory truths do not necessarily
cancel each other out or dominate each other, but
stand side by side, inviting participation and experimentation.”
One way that client and therapist address this
is by repeatedly asking: “What is being left out?” This
simple question can assist in finding a synthesis and letting
go of an absolute truth, a nondialectical stance.

Dialectics as Persuasion

From the point of view of dialogue and relationship,
dialectics refers to change by persuasion and by making
use of the oppositions inherent in the therapeutic
relationship rather than by formal impersonal logic.
Through the therapeutic opposition of contradictory
positions, both client and therapist can arrive at new
meanings within old meanings, moving closer to the essence
of the subject under consideration. The spirit of a
dialectical point of view is never to accept a proposition
as a final truth or an undisputable fact. Thus, the question
addressed by both client and therapist is “What
is being left out of our understanding?” Dialectics as
persuasion is represented in the specific dialectical
strategies we describe later in this chapter. As readers
will see, when we discuss the consultation strategies,
dialectical dialogue is also very important in therapist
consultation meetings. Perhaps more than any other
factor, attention to dialectics can reduce the chances
of what psychodynamic therapists have labeled “staff
splitting,” that is, the frequent phenomenon of therapists’
disagreeing or arguing (sometimes vehemently)
about how to treat and interact with an individual client
who has BPD. This “splitting” among staff members is
often due to one or more factions within the staff deciding
that they (and sometimes they alone) know the truth
about a particular client or clinical problem.

Dialectical Case Conceptualization

Dialectical assumptions influence case conceptualization
in DBT in a number of ways. First, dialectics


Borderline Personality Disorder

suggests that a psychological disorder is best conceptualized
as a systemic dysfunction characterized by

(1) defining the disorder with respect to normal functioning,
(2) assuming continuity between health and
the disorder, and (3) assuming that the disorder results
from multiple rather than single causes (Hollandsworth,
1990). Similarly, Linehan’s biosocial theory
of BPD assumes that BPD represents a breakdown in
normal functioning, and that this disorder is best conceptualized
as a systemic dysfunction of the emotion
regulation system. The theory proposes that the pathogenesis
of BPD results from numerous factors: Some
are genetic–biological predispositions that create individual
differences in susceptibility to emotion dysregulation,
known as “emotion vulnerability”; others result
from the individual’s interaction with the environment,
referred to as the “invalidating environment.” Assuming
a systemic view compels the theorist to integrate
work from a variety of fields and disciplines.
A second dialectical assumption that underlies the
biosocial theory is that the relationship between the individual
and the environment is a transaction between
the person and the environment. Within social learning
theory, this is the principle of “reciprocal determinism.”
Besides focusing on reciprocal influence, a
transactional view also highlights the constant state of
flux and change of the individual–environment system.
Therefore, BPD can occur in multiple environments
and families, including chaotic, perfect, and even ordinary
families.

Both transactional and interactive models, such as
the diathesis–stress model of psychopathology, call
attention to the role of dysfunctional environments in
bringing about disorder in the vulnerable individual.
A transactional model, however, highlights a number
of points that are easy to overlook in an interactive
diathesis–stress model. For example, a person (Person
A) may act in a manner stressful to an individual
(Person B) only because of the stress Person B is putting
on Person A. Take the child who, due to an accident,
requires most of the parents’ free time just to
meet survival needs. Or consider the client who, due
to the need for constant suicide precautions, uses up
much of the inpatient nursing resources. Both of these
environments are stretched in their ability to respond
well to further stress. Both may invalidate or temporarily
blame the victim if any further demand on the
system is made. Although the system (e.g., the family
or the therapeutic milieu) may have been predisposed
to respond dysfunctionally in any case, such responses

may have been avoided in the absence of exposure to
the stress of that particular individual. A transactional,
or dialectical, account of psychopathology may allow
greater compassion because it is incompatible with
the assignment of blame, by highlighting the reality of
the situation rather than judgments about each person.
This is particularly relevant with a label as stigmatized
among mental health professionals as “borderline” (for
examples of the misuse of the diagnosis, see Reiser &
Levenson, 1984).

A final assumption in our discussion regards the
definition of behavior and the implications of defining
behavior broadly. Linehan’s theory, and behaviorists in
general, take “behavior” to mean anything an organism
does involving action and responding to stimulation
(Merriam-Webster’s New Universal Unabridged
Dictionary, 1983, p. 100). Conventionally, behaviorists
categorize behavior as motor, cognitive/verbal,
and physiological, all of which may be either public or
private. There are several points to make here. First,
dividing behavior into these three categories is arbitrary
and is done for conceptual clarity rather than in
response to evidence that these response modes actually
are functionally separate systems. This point is especially
relevant to understanding emotion regulation
given that basic research on emotions demonstrates
that these response systems are sometimes overlapping,
somewhat independent, but definitely not wholly independent,
thus remaining consistent with the dialectical
worldview. A related point here is that in contrast
to biological and cognitive theories of BPD, biosocial
theory suggests that there is no a priori reason for favoring
explanations emphasizing one mode of behavior
as intrinsically more important or compelling than
others. Rather, from a biosocial perspective, the crucial
questions are under what conditions a given behavior–
behavior relationship or response system–response system
relationship holds, and under what conditions these
relationships enter causal pathways for the etiology and
maintenance of BPD.

Biosocial theory

Emotion Dysregulation

Linehan’s biosocial theory suggests that BPD is primarily
a dysfunction of the emotion regulation system.
Behavioral patterns in BPD are functionally related to
or are unavoidable consequences of this fundamental


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

dysregulation across several, perhaps all, emotions,
including both positive and negative emotions. From
Linehan’s point of view, this dysfunction of the emotion
regulation system is the core pathology; thus, it is neither
simply symptomatic nor definitional. Emotion dysregulation
is a product of the combination of emotional
vulnerability and difficulties in modulating emotional
reactions. Emotional vulnerability is conceptualized as
high sensitivity to emotional stimuli, intense emotional
responses, and a slow return to emotional baseline. Deficits
in emotion modulation may be due to difficulties in

(1) inhibiting mood-dependent behaviors; (2) organizing
behavior in the service of goals, independently of
current mood; (3) increasing or decreasing physiological
arousal as needed; (4) distracting attention from
emotionally evocative stimuli; and/or (5) experiencing
emotion without either immediately withdrawing or
producing an extreme secondary negative emotion (see
Crowell, Beauchaine, & Linehan, 2009, for a further
discussion).
Conceptually, the deficit in the emotion regulation
system leads to not only immense emotional suffering
but also multiple behavioral problems in people diagnosed
with BPD. When clinicians’ ratings of characteristics
associated with psychopathology are examined,
tendencies toward being chronically anxious and unhappy,
depressed, or despondent are the most highly descriptive
of the BPD (Bradley, Zittel, & Westen, 2005).
Dysfunction leads the individual to attempt to escape
aversive emotions, often leading to further suffering.
For example, a female client experiencing intense anger
after a fight with her partner may, in an effort to escape
the anger, engage in cutting behaviors. She begins to
feel relief from her anger for a short period of time.
However, once her anger begins to subside, shame in
response to the cutting behavior begins to increase
and the cycle of emotion escape behavior continues.
Although the mechanisms of the initial dysregulation
remain unclear, it is likely that biological factors play
a primary role. Siever and Davis (1991) hypothesized
that deficits in emotion regulation for clients with BPD
are related to both instability and hyperresponsiveness
of catecholamine function. The etiology of this dysregulation
may range from genetic influences to prenatal
factors, to traumatic childhood events affecting development
of the brain and nervous system. Furthermore,
adoption studies of monozygotic (MZ) twins (Davison
& Neale, 1994) suggest a genetic vulnerability. However,
researchers do not claim that genetic or biologi


cal factors account for all pathology. If pathology were
solely determined by genetics, then 100% of the MZ
twins would presumably share the same pathology.
Because this does not occur, we can explain the differences
through the transactions between biology, as
described earlier, and the environment.

Invalidating Environments

Most people with an initial temperamental vulnerability
to emotion dysregulation do not develop BPD. Thus,
the theory suggests further that particular developmental
environments are necessary. The crucial developmental
circumstance in Linehan’s theory is the transaction
between emotion vulnerability and the presence of
the “invalidating environment” (Linehan, 1987,1993a),
which is defined by its tendency to negate, punish, and/
or respond erratically and inappropriately to private
experiences, independent of the validity of the actual
behavior. Private experiences, and especially emotional
experiences and interpretations of events, are not taken
as valid responses to events by others; are punished,
trivialized, dismissed, or disregarded; and/or are attributed
to socially unacceptable characteristics, such
as over reactivity, inability to see things realistically,
lack of motivation, motivation to harm or manipulate,
lack of discipline, or failure to adopt a positive (or,
conversely, discriminating) attitude. The invalidating
environment can be any part of an individual’s social
environment, including immediate or extended family,
school, work, or community. Within each of these environments
are even more specific idiosyncrasies that
may impact the environment, such as birth order, years
between siblings, teachers and peers, and/or coworkers.
It is important to note that because two children
grew up in the same home does not mean that they were
raised in identical environments. Furthermore, people
are often not aware of their invalidating behaviors and
are not acting with a malicious intent.

There are three primary characteristics of the invalidating
environment. First, the environment indiscriminately
rejects communication of private experiences
and self-generated behaviors. For example, a person
may be told, “You are so angry, but you won’t admit it”
or “You can’t be hungry, you just ate.” Second, the invalidating
environment may punish emotional displays
and intermittently reinforce emotional escalation. For
example, a woman breaks up with her partner and is
feeling depressed. Her friends and family begin tell



Borderline Personality Disorder

ing her “Get over it,” “He wasn’t worth it,” and “Don’t
feel sad.” Over the course of the next week, she becomes
more depressed and is beginning to withdraw
from daily activities. Again, her environment responds
in an invalidating manner. Finally after another 3 days
of high emotional arousal she makes a suicide attempt.
At that moment the environment jumps in and provides
support by taking care of her. Unfortunately, this type
of pattern often results in inadvertent reinforcement of
extreme dysfunctional behavior. Finally, the invalidating
environment may oversimplify the ease of problem
solving and meeting goals for an individual.

The high incidence of childhood sexual abuse reported
by adults diagnosed with BPD (e.g., Herman,
1986; Herman, Perry, & van der Kolk, 1989) suggests
that sexual abuse may be a prototypical invalidating experience
for children. The relationship of early sexual
abuse to BPD, however, is quite controversial and open
to many interpretations. On the one hand, Silk, Lee,
Hill, and Lohr (1995) reported that the number of criterion
BPD behaviors met was correlated with severity
of childhood sexual abuse in a group of clients with
BPD. On the other hand, a review by Fossati, Madeddu,
and Maffei (1999) suggested that sexual abuse is not a
major risk factor for BPD.

The overall results of this transactional pattern between
the emotionally vulnerable individual and the
invalidating environment are the emotional dysregulation
and behavioral patterns exhibited by the borderline
adult. Such an individual has never learned how
to label and regulate emotional arousal, how to tolerate
emotional distress, or when to trust his/her own
emotional responses as reflections of valid interpretations
of events, resulting in self-invalidation (Linehan,
1993a). In more optimal environments, public validation
of one’s private, internal experiences results in
the development of a stable identity. In the family of
a person with BPD, however, private experiences may
be responded to erratically and with insensitivity. Thus,
the individual learns to mistrust his/her internal states,
and instead scans the environment for cues about how
to act, think, or feel. This general reliance on others
results in the individual’s failure to develop a coherent
sense of self. Emotional dysfunction also interferes
with the development and maintenance of stable interpersonal
relationships, which depend on both a stable
sense of self and a capacity to self-regulate emotions.
The invalidating environment’s tendency to trivialize
or ignore the expression of negative emotion also

shapes an expressive style later seen in the adult with
BPD—a style that vacillates from inhibition and suppression
of emotional experience to extreme behavioral
displays. Behaviors such as overdosing, cutting, and
burning have important affect-regulating properties
and are additionally quite effective in eliciting helping
behaviors from an environment that otherwise ignores
efforts to ameliorate intense emotional pain. From this
perspective, the dysfunctional behaviors characteristic
of BPD may be viewed as maladaptive solutions to
overwhelming, intensely painful negative affect.

Dialectical DileMMas

Linehan (1993a) describes “dialectical dilemmas” as
behavioral patterns of the client that often interfere
with therapy. These behavioral patterns, also referred
to as “secondary targets” in treatment (compared to
other targets we describe later), represent six behaviors
that are dichotomized into a set of three dimensions of
behavior defined by their opposite poles (see Figure
10.1). At one end of each dimension is the behavior that
theoretically is most directly influenced biologically
via deficits in emotion regulation. At the other end is
behavior that has been socially reinforced in the invalidating
environment. These secondary targets are characteristics
of people diagnosed with BPD that often interfere
with change, thus interfering with therapy.

figUre 10.1. Dialectical dilemmas in DBT.



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

Emotion Vulnerability–Self‑Invalidation

One dialectical dilemma is represented by biologically
influenced emotional vulnerability on the one hand
(e.g., the sense of being out of control or falling into the
abyss) and by socially influenced self-invalidation on
the other (e.g., hate and contempt directed toward the
self, dismissal of one’s accomplishments). Along this
dimension of behavior, clients with BPD often vacillate
between acute awareness of their own intense, unbearable,
and uncontrollable emotional suffering on the
one hand, and dismissal, judgment, and invalidation of
their own suffering and helplessness on the other.

Emotion vulnerability here refers to the client’s acute
experience and communication of emotional vulnerability
and excruciating emotional pain. “Vulnerability”
here means the acute experience of vulnerability rather
than the sensitivity to emotional cues that defines the
term when discussing the emotion dysregulation difficulties
of the person diagnosed with BPD. Three reactions
to emotional vulnerability are common in BPD:

(1) freezing or dissociating in the face of intense emotion;
(2) rage, often directed at society in general or
at people who are experienced as invalidating; and (3)
intense despair. Suicide here can function to communicate
to others the depth of one’s suffering (“I’ll show
you”) and/or as an escape from an unendurable life.
On the other side of this polarity is self-invalidation.
What is invalidated, in essence, is one’s own emotional
experiencing and dysregulated responses. The most
typical pattern here is a reaction to emotional pain with
intense self-blame and self-hate. These people identify
themselves as perpetrators, which results in intense levels
of shame and contempt toward the self (“There is
nothing wrong with me, I’m just a bad person”). Mooddependent
perfectionism is also common. Here, the
individual belittles, ignores, or discounts the difficulty
of his/her own life or may overestimate the ease of
solving current problems. Unfortunately, this may initiate
a cycle that may eventually end in death. Extreme
perfectionism often ultimately leads to failure, especially
in people who overestimate their abilities; the
failure then results in self-hatred, which cues suicidal
behaviors in these people. Finally, self-invalidation can
also be expressed through willful suppression, meaning
that the individual actively denies the experience
of all emotion. Often clients who come into our offices
simply state, “I don’t do emotions.” As with emotion
vulnerability, self-invalidation needs to be attended to

actively and directly, due to the lethal consequences of
these behaviors.

Active Passivity–Apparent Competence

A second dimension of behavior is a tendency toward
active passivity versus the socially mediated behavior
of apparent competence. Either pole of this dimension
can lead to anger, guilt, or shame on the part of the client,
and a tendency for the therapist to either under- or
overestimate the client’s capabilities.

“Active passivity” may be defined as passivity in
solving one’s own problems, while actively engaging
others to solve one’s problems. It can also be described
as passivity that appears to be an active process of shutting
down in the face of seeing problems coming in
the future. In a sense, people diagnosed with BPD do
not appear to have the ability to regulate themselves
internally, particularly when the regulation required is
non-mood-dependent behaviors. people diagnosed with
BPD appear to be “relational selves” rather than “autonomous
selves”; that is, they are more highly regulated
by their environment than by internal dialogues, choices,
and decisions. Their best form of self-regulation is
to regulate their environment, such that it then provides
the regulation they need. The problem here is that managing
one’s environment and getting the support one
needs requires a good deal of emotional consistency
and regulation, characteristics that ordinarily are difficult
for people diagnosed with BPD. Lorna Benjamin
has described this characteristic as “My misery is your
command” (1996, p. 192).

On the opposite side of the polarity is “apparent
competence,” which refers to the tendency of other
people to overestimate the capabilities of the individual
with BPD. Thus, this characteristic is defined by the
behavior of the observer rather than the behavior of the
individual with BPD. This failure to perceive their difficulties
and “disability” accurately has serious effects
on people diagnosed with BPD. Not only do they not
get the help they need, but also their emotional pain
and difficulties may easily be invalidated, leading to
a further sense of being misunderstood. A number of
behavioral patterns can precipitate this overestimation
of the competence of the individual with BPD. Often,
as a result of a significant discrepancy between the individual’s
verbal and nonverbal presentations, the individual
with BPD believes that he/she has sufficiently
communicated his/her level of distress, when in fact the


Borderline Personality Disorder

observer interprets the individual as effectively managing
a difficult situation. An example would be a woman
speaking nonchalantly and without emotion about
urges toward suicide after a fight with her husband.
People diagnosed with BPD also frequently have difficulty
generalizing behaviors across situations, especially
in relationships. For example, the person may be
able to cope well in the presence of one person, such as
a therapist, but be unable to cope when he/she is alone
or with someone other than the therapist. The therapist,
understandably, may then fail to predict the dysregulation
that occurs as the client walks away from the therapy
session. Additionally, there may be a difficulty in
generalizing coping behaviors across different moods.
In one mood, a problem is solvable; in another, it is
not. This may not be so difficult to figure out if mood
changes are readily apparent to the observer, but often
they are not. Thus, accurate estimates of the person’s
competence actually require the observer, such as the
therapist, constantly to anticipate mood changes that
might occur to be able to predict what a client might
or might not do. It is this characteristic, more than any
other, that leads so often to a client walking out of a session,
with the therapist believing that all is well, only to
end up in the emergency department with a suicide attempt
2 hours later. At times, client failures are nothing
more than failures of the therapist (and often the client,
also) to predict future behavior accurately.

Unrelenting Crisis–Inhibited Grieving

The third dimension of behavior is the tendency of the
client with BPD to experience life as a series of unrelenting
crises as opposed to the behavior of “inhibited
grieving” (i.e., an inability to experience emotions
associated with significant trauma or loss). The client
experiences each of these extremes in a way that facilitates
movement to the other extreme; for example,
attempting to inhibit emotional experiences related to
current crises may result in problem behaviors that add
to existing crises. As with all of these dialectical dilemmas,
the solution is for therapist and client to work
toward a more balanced position that represents a synthesis
of the opposing poles.

People diagnosed with BPD who experience unrelenting
crises have lives that are often characterized
as chaotic and in crisis. “Crisis” is defined as the occurrence
of problems that are extreme, with significant
pressure to resolve them quickly. The consequence of

the unrelenting crisis is that the individual with BPD,
as well as the person’s environmental resources, such
as family, friends, coworkers, and even the therapist,
slowly wear down. There are three typical scenarios
that result in a pattern of unrelenting crisis. First, people
with extreme impulsivity and emotion dysregulation
engage in behaviors that result in crisis situations.
Poor judgment is a key element to assess when analyzing
the impulsive behaviors of people diagnosed with
BPD. Second, situations that do not start out as crises
can quickly become critical due to the lack of resources
available to many people with a BPD diagnosis. This
may be due to socioeconomic status, or to lack of family
or peer support. Finally, unrelenting crises can be
due simply to fate or bad luck at a given moment, a
phenomenon that is out of the person’s control. For example,
an unexpected disaster in a client’s apartment
due to the neighbors running the water in their sink for
an extended period of time, might occur. The floors in
the client’s apartment are damaged by the water and
he/she does not have the financial resources to pay for
renter’s insurance or to replace the carpet in the apartment.
His/her apartment is now uninhabitable, but he/
she does not have any place else to stay. This problem
is out of the person’s control, but it is still that person’s
responsibility to solve.

At the other extreme, and often precipitated by a crisis,
is the phenomenon of “inhibited grieving.” In this
context, “grief” refers to the process of grieving, which
includes experiencing multiple painful emotions associated
with loss, particularly traumatic loss, not just
the one emotion of deep sadness or grief. People with a
BPD diagnosis may not be able to experience or process
the grief related to loss of the life they had expected
for themselves, and ordinarily they do not believe they
will recover from the grief if they actually try to experience
or to cope with it on their own. As one client said
to us, “I don’t do sadness.” Another said, “I feel sad,
I die.” People diagnosed with BPD may not recognize
their own emotional avoidance and shutdown. Thus, it
is crucial for the therapist to attend to emotional avoidance,
particularly of sadness and grief, and to assist
clients through the grief process. Areas that must be
confronted, grieved, and finally accepted include an insurmountably
painful childhood, a biological makeup
that makes life harder rather than easier, inability to “fit
in” in many environments, absence of loving people in
the current environment, or loss of hope for a particular
future for which one had ardently hoped. What must be


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

confronted by the therapist is that egregious losses can
be real and clients might be right: They really cannot
get out of the abyss if they fall into it. Regardless of
the situation to be grieved, avoidance of these situations
may lead to increased shame. The shame is a result of
believing that one is unloved, being alone, or fearing
that one will not be able to cope in the face of emotional
situations. Many of our clients believe that if they begin
to address any of these areas, they will not be able to
function in their lives, and often this is true. They do
not have the skills or resources to assist them with the
process of experiencing emotions. We often tell clients
that managing grief or processing emotions requires
going to the cemetery to pay tribute to what is lost, but
building a house at the cemetery and living there is not
a good idea. It is a place to visit, experience the sadness
of the loss, and then leave. The use of this metaphor
has helped many of our clients to experience emotion
without falling into the abyss.

staGes of theraPy
aND treatMeNt Goals

In theory, treatment of all clients with BPD can be organized
and determined based on their levels of disorder,
and is conceptualized as occurring in stages.
“Level of disorder” is defined by the current severity,
pervasiveness, complexity, disability, and imminent
threat presented by the client. Clients can enter into five
stages of treatment based on their current level of disorder.
First, a pretreatment stage prepares the client for
therapy and elicits a commitment to work toward the
various treatment goals. Orientation to specific goals
and treatment strategies, and commitment to work toward
goals addressed during this stage, are likely to be
important throughout all stages of treatment.

In Stage 1 of therapy, the primary focus is on stabilizing
the client and achieving behavioral control.
Out-of-control behaviors constitute those that are disordered
due to the severity of the disorder (e.g., as seen in
an actively psychotic client) or severity combined with
the complexity of multiple diagnoses (e.g., as seen in a
suicidal client who has BPD with comorbid panic disorder
and depression). Generally, the criteria for putting a
client in Stage 1 are based on level of current functioning,
together with the inability of the client to work on
any other goals before behavior and functioning come
under better control. As Mintz (1968) suggested in discussing
treatment of the suicidal client, all forms of

psychotherapy are ineffective with a dead client. In the
subsequent stages (2–4), the treatment goals are to replace
“quiet desperation” with nontraumatic emotional
experiencing (Stage 2); to achieve “ordinary” happiness
and unhappiness, and to reduce ongoing disorders
and problems in living (Stage 3); and to resolve a sense
of incompleteness and to achieve freedom (Stage 4). In
summary, the orientation of the treatment is first to get
action under control, then to help the client to feel better,
to resolve problems in living and residual disorder,
and to find freedom (and, for some, a sense of transcendence).
Most research to date has focused on the
severely or multiply disordered clients who enter treatment
at Stage 1. The construct of stages aids in treatment
planning and conceptualization with the client,
and in identifying the appropriate level of care needed.

Pretreatment: Orienting and Commitment

Specific tasks of orientation are twofold. First, client
and therapist must arrive at a mutually informed decision
to work together. Typically, the first one to four
sessions are presented to the client as opportunities for
client and therapist to explore this possibility. Diagnostic
interviewing, history taking, and formal behavioral
analyses of high-priority, targeted behaviors can
be woven into initial therapy sessions or be conducted
separately. Second, client and therapist must negotiate a
common set of expectancies to guide the initial steps of
therapy. Client and therapist discuss, outline, and agree
specifically on what they can expect from each other.
When necessary, the therapist attempts to modify the
client’s dysfunctional beliefs regarding the process of
therapy. Issues addressed include the rate and magnitude
of change that can reasonably be expected, the
goals of treatment and general treatment procedures,
and various myths the client may have about the process
of therapy in general. The dialectical/biosocial view of
BPD is also presented. Orientation covers several additional
points. First, DBT is presented as a supportive
therapy requiring a strong collaborative relationship
between client and therapist. DBT is not a suicide prevention
program, but a life enhancement program in
which client and therapist function as a team to create
a life worth living. Second, DBT is described as a
cognitive-behavioral therapy with a primary emphasis
on analyzing problematic behaviors and replacing them
with skillful behaviors, and on changing ineffective beliefs
and rigid thinking patterns. Third, the client is told
that DBT is a skills-oriented therapy, with special em



Borderline Personality Disorder

phasis on behavioral skills training. The commitment
and orienting strategies, balanced by validation strategies
described later, are the most important strategies
during this phase of treatment. The therapist places a
strong effort into getting the client to commit to not engaging
in suicidal or NSSI behaviors for some specified
period of time before allowing the client to leave the
session; it can be for 1 year, 6 months, until the next
session, or until tomorrow.

Stage 1: Attaining Basic Capacities

The primary focus of the first stage of therapy is attaining
behavioral control in order to build a life pattern
that is reasonably functional and stable. Furthermore,
DBT does not promote itself as a suicide prevention
program; instead, it focuses on “building a life worth
living.” Therefore, the primary treatment goal in DBT
and in Stage 1 specifically is to assist clients in building
a life they will experience as worth living. DBT attains
this goal by focusing the treatment on specific behavioral
targets agreed upon by both therapist and client.
Specific targets in order of importance are to reduce
life-threatening behaviors (e.g., suicide attempts, suicide
ideation, NSSI behaviors, homicidal threats and
behaviors), therapy-interfering behaviors (e.g., late to
session, missing sessions, not following treatment plan,
hostile attacks on the therapist), and quality-of-life–
interfering behaviors (e.g., substance abuse, eating disorder,
homelessness, serious Axis I disorders), and to
increase behavioral skills. These targets are approached
hierarchically and recursively as higher-priority behaviors
reappear in each session. However, this does not
mean that these behaviors must be addressed in this
specific order during a session; it means that, based on
the hierarchy, all relevant behavior must be addressed
at some point within the session. For example, if a client
is 30 minutes late to session (therapy-interfering behavior)
and has attempted suicide within the last week
(life-threatening behavior), the therapist may choose
to address the therapy-interfering behavior first, then
move on to address the life-threatening behaviors.

With severely dysfunctional and suicidal clients, significant
progress on Stage 1 targets may take up to 1
year or more. In addition to these therapy targets, the
goal of increasing dialectical behaviors is universal to
all modes of treatment. Dialectical thinking encourages
clients to see reality as complex and multifaceted, to
hold contradictory thoughts simultaneously and learn
to integrate them, and to be comfortable with incon


sistency and contradictions. For people with a BPD
diagnosis, who are extreme and dichotomous in their
thinking and behavior, this is a formidable task indeed.
A dialectical emphasis applies equally to a client’s patterns
of behavior because the client is encouraged to
integrate and balance emotional and overt behavioral
responses. In particular, dialectical tensions arise in
the areas of skills enhancement versus self-acceptance,
problem solving versus problem acceptance, and affect
regulation versus affect tolerance. Behavioral extremes,
whether emotional, cognitive, or overt responses, are
constantly confronted while more balanced responses
are taught.

Life-Threatening Behaviors

Keeping a client alive must, of course, be the first priority
in any psychotherapy. Thus, reducing suicide crisis
behaviors (any behaviors that place the client at high
and imminent risk for suicide or threaten to do so, including
credible suicide threats, planning, preparations,
obtaining lethal means, and high suicide intent) is the
highest priority in DBT. The target and its priority are
made explicit in DBT during orientation and throughout
treatment, simply because suicidal behavior and
the risk of suicide are of paramount concern for clients
with BPD. Similarly, any acute, intentional NSSI behaviors
share the top priority. The priority here is due
to the risk of suicidal and NSSI behavior as the single
best predictor of subsequent suicide. Similarly, DBT
also targets suicide ideation and client expectations
about the value and long-term consequences of suicidal
behavior, although these behaviors may not necessarily
be targeted directly.

Therapy-Interfering Behaviors

Keeping clients and therapists working together collaboratively
is the second explicitly targeted priority
in DBT. The chronic nature of most problems among
clients with BPD, including their high tendency to end
therapy prematurely and the likelihood of therapist
burnout and iatrogenic behaviors when treating BPD,
requires such explicit attention. Both client and therapist
behaviors that threaten the relationship or therapeutic
progress are addressed directly, immediately,
consistently, and constantly—and most importantly,
before rather than after either the therapist or the client
no longer wants to continue. Interfering behaviors of
the client, including those that actually interfere with


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

receiving the therapy (e.g., lateness to sessions, missed
sessions, lack of transportation to sessions, dissociating
in sessions) or with other clients benefiting from therapy
(in group or milieu settings; e.g., selling drugs to
other clients in the program), and those that burn out or
cross the personal limits of the therapist (e.g., repeated
crisis calls at 3:00 A.M., repeated verbal attacks on the
therapist) are treated within therapy sessions. Behaviors
of the therapist include any that are iatrogenic (e.g.,
inadvertently reinforcing dysfunctional behaviors), as
well as any that cause the client unnecessary distress
or make progress difficult (e.g., therapist arriving late
to sessions, missing sessions, not returning phone calls
within a reasonable time frame). These behaviors are
dealt with in therapy sessions, if brought up by either
the client or the therapist, and are also discussed during
the consultation/supervision meeting.

Quality-of-Life–Interfering Behaviors

The third target of Stage 1 addresses all other behaviors
that interfere with the client having a reasonable quality
of life. Typical behaviors in this category include serious
substance abuse, severe major depressive episodes,
severe eating disorders, high-risk and out-of-control
sexual behaviors, extreme financial difficulties (uncontrollable
spending or gambling, inability to handle
finances), criminal behaviors that are likely to lead to
incarceration, employment- or school-related dysfunctional
behaviors (a pattern of quitting jobs or school prematurely,
getting fired or failing in school, not engaging
in any productive activities), housing-related dysfunctional
behaviors (living with abusive people, not finding
stable housing), mental health–related patterns (going
in and out of hospitals, failure to take or abuse of necessary
medications), and health-related problems (failure
to treat serious medical disorders). The goal here is for
the client to achieve a stable lifestyle that meets reasonable
standards for safety and adequate functioning.

When necessary, DBT incorporates evidence-based
behavioral interventions to address specific quality-oflife–
interfering behaviors. Because DBT is a principlebased
treatment, it allows seamless integration of other
evidence-based protocols as long as they are compatible
with the basic assumptions and philosophy of DBT.
For example we have recently added to DBT a prolonged
exposure protocol to treat PTSD among highly
suicidal BPD clients (Harned, Korslund, Foa, & Linehan,
2012). Following Harned and colleagues’ (2012)
guidelines for client readiness and implementation of

the protocol within standard DBT, a pilot study was
conducted with 13 women diagnosed with comorbid
BPD and PTSD, and at high risk for suicide. Outcomes
showed 70% with reliable improvement in PTSD symptoms
and a 60% remission rate, results similar to PE
findings in the standard PTSD literature.

Behavioral Skills

The fourth target of Stage 1 is for the client to achieve
a reasonable capacity for acquiring and applying
skillful behaviors in the areas of distress tolerance,
emotion regulation, interpersonal effectiveness, selfmanagement,
and the capacity to respond with awareness
without being judgmental (“mindfulness” skills).
In our outpatient program, the primary responsibility
for skills training lies with the weekly DBT skills
group. The individual therapist monitors the acquisition
and use of skills over time, and aids the client in
applying skills to specific problem situations in his/her
own life. Additionally, it is the role of the individual
therapist, not the skills group leader, to provide skills
coaching to the client as needed when problems arise.

Stage 2: Quiet Desperation

Stage 1 of DBT takes a direct approach to managing
dysfunctional behavioral and regulating emotional patterns.
Although the connection between current behavior
and previous traumatic events (including those from
childhood) may be explored and noted, the focus of the
treatment is distinctly on analyzing the relationship
among current thoughts, feelings, and behaviors, and
on accepting and changing current patterns. The aim of
Stage 2 DBT is to reduce “quiet desperation,” which can
be defined as extreme emotional pain in the presence of
control of action (Linehan et al., 1999). A wide range of
emotional experiencing difficulties (e.g., avoidance of
emotions and emotion-related cues) are targeted in this
stage, with the goal of increasing the capacity for normative
emotional experiencing (i.e., the ability to experience
a full range of emotions without either severe
emotional escalation or behavioral dyscontrol). Stage 2
addresses four goals: remembering and accepting the
facts of earlier distressing and/or traumatic events; reducing
stigmatization and self-blame often associated
with traumatic social invalidation; reducing oscillating
denial and intrusive response syndromes; and resolving
dialectical tensions regarding placement of blame for
past difficulties.


Borderline Personality Disorder

Stage 3: Resolving Problems in Living
and Increasing Respect for Self

In the third stage, DBT targets the client’s unacceptable
unhappiness and problems in living. At this stage, the
client with BPD has either done the work necessary to
resolve problems in the prior two stages or was never
severely disordered enough to need it. Although problems
at this stage may still be serious, the individual is
functional in major domains of living. The goal here is
for the client to achieve a level of ordinary happiness
and unhappiness, as well as independent self-respect.
To this end, the client is helped to value, believe in,
trust, and validate him/herself. The targets here are
the abilities to evaluate one’s own behavior nondefensively,
to trust one’s own responses, and to hold on to
self-evaluations, independent of the opinions of others.
Ultimately, the therapist must pull back and persistently
reinforce the client’s independent attempts at selfvalidation,
self-care, and problem solving. Although
the goal is not for clients to become independent of all
people, it is important that they achieve sufficient selfreliance
to relate to and depend on others without selfinvalidating.


Stage 4: Attaining the Capacity for Freedom
and Sustained Contentment

The final stage of treatment in DBT targets the resolution
of a sense of incompleteness and the development
of a capacity for sustained contentment. The focus on
freedom encompasses the goal of freedom from the
need to have one’s wishes fulfilled, or one’s current life
or behavioral and emotional responses changed. Here
the goals are expanded awareness, spiritual fulfillment,
and the movement into experiencing flow. For clients at
Stage 4, insight-oriented psychotherapy, spiritual direction
or practices, or other organized experiential treatments
and/or life experiences may be of most benefit.

structuriNG treatMeNt:
fuNctioNs aND MoDes

Functions of Treatment

Standard DBT is structured around five essential functions:
(1) to enhance behavioral capabilities by expanding
the individual’s repertoire of skillful behavioral patterns;
(2) to improve the client’s motivation to change
by reducing reinforcement for dysfunctional behaviors

and high-probability responses (cognitions, emotions,
actions) that interfere with effective behaviors; (3) to
ensure that new behaviors generalize from the therapeutic
to the natural environment; (4) to enhance the
motivation and capabilities of the therapist, so that effective
treatment is rendered; and (5) to structure the
environment so that effective behaviors, rather than
dysfunctional behaviors, are reinforced.

Modes of Treatment: Who Does What
and When

Responsibility for performing functions and meeting
target goals of treatment in standard DBT is spread
across the various modes of treatment, with focus and
attention varying according to the mode of therapy.
The individual therapist (who is always the primary
therapist in DBT) attends to the order of targets and
is also, with the client, responsible for organizing the
treatment so that all goals are met. In skills training,
a different set of goals is targeted; during phone calls,
yet another hierarchy of targets takes precedence. In
the consultation/supervision mode, therapists’ behaviors
are the targets. Therapists engaging in more than
one mode of therapy (e.g., individual, group, and telephone
coaching) must stay cognizant of the functions
and order of targets specific to each mode, and switch
smoothly from one hierarchy to another as the modes
of treatment change.

Individual Therapy

DBT assumes that effective treatment must attend both
to client capabilities and behavioral skills deficits, and
to motivational and behavioral performance issues that
interfere with use of skillful responses (function 2). Although
there are many ways to effect these principles,
in DBT the individual therapist is responsible for the
assessment and problem solving of skill deficits and
motivational problems, and for organizing other modes
to address problems in each area.

Individual outpatient therapy sessions are scheduled
on a once-a-week basis for 50–90 minutes, although
twice-weekly sessions may be held as needed during
crisis periods or at the beginning of therapy. The priorities
of specific targets within individual therapy are the
same as the overall priorities of DBT discussed earlier.
Therapeutic focus within individual therapy sessions
is determined by the highest-priority treatment target
relevant at the moment. This ordering does not change


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

over the course of therapy; however, the relevance of a
target does change. Relevance is determined by either
the client’s most recent, day-to-day behavior (since the
last session) or by current behavior during the therapy
session. If satisfactory progress on one target goal has
been achieved or the behavior has never been a problem,
or if the behavior is currently not evident, then the
therapist shifts attention to another treatment target according
to the hierarchy. The consequence of this priority
allocation is that when high-risk suicidal behaviors
or intentional self-injury, therapy-interfering behaviors,
or serious quality-of-life–interfering behaviors occur,
at least part of the session agenda is devoted to each
of these topics. If these behaviors are not occurring
at the moment, then the topics to be discussed during
Stages 1, 3, and 4 are set by the client. The therapeutic
focus (within any topic area discussed) depends on
the stage of treatment, the skills targeted for improvement,
and any secondary targets. During Stage 1, for
example, any problem or topic area can be conceptualized
in terms of interpersonal issues and skills needed,
opportunities for emotion regulation, and/or a necessity
for distress tolerance. During Stage 3, regardless
of the topic, the therapist focuses on helping the client
decrease problems in living and achieve independent
self-respect, self-validation, and self-acceptance both
within the session and in everyday life. (These are,
of course, targets all through the treatment, but the
therapist pulls back further during Stage 3 and does
less work for the client than during the two preceding
stages.) During Stage 2, the major focus is on reducing
pervasive “quiet desperation,” as well as changing the
extreme emotions and psychological meanings associated
with traumatizing cues.

For highly dysfunctional clients, it is likely that early
treatment will necessarily focus on the upper part of
the hierarchy. For example, if suicidal or NSSI behavior
has occurred during the previous week, attention to it
takes precedence over attention to therapy-interfering
behavior. In turn, focusing on therapy-interfering behaviors
takes precedence over working on quality-oflife–
interfering behaviors. Although it is often possible
to work on more than one target (including those generated
by the client) in a given session, higher-priority
targets always take precedence, but all relevant targets
must be addressed adequately during the session.
Again, targets do not need to be addressed in sequential
order; they just have to be addressed during the session.
Determining the relevance of targeted behaviors is assisted
by the use of diary cards, filled out by the client

during at least the first two stages of therapy and brought
to weekly sessions. Failure to complete or to bring in a
card is considered a therapy-interfering behavior and
should be openly addressed as such. Diary cards record
daily instances of suicidal and NSSI behavior, urges to
self-harm or to engage in suicide behaviors (on a 0- to
5-point scale), “misery,” use of substances (licit and illicit),
and use of behavioral skills. Other targeted behaviors
(bulimic episodes, daily productive activities,
flashbacks, etc.) may also be recorded on the blank area
of the card. The therapist doing DBT must develop the
pattern of routinely reviewing the card at the beginning
of each session. The card acts as a road map for each
session; therefore, a session cannot begin until a diary
card has been completed. If the card indicates that a
life-threatening behavior has occurred, it is noted and
discussed. If high suicide or self-harm urges are recorded,
or there is a significant increase (e.g., an increase of
3 points or higher on the 0- to 5-point scale for urges)
over the course of the week, they are assessed to determine
whether the client is at risk for suicide. If a pattern
of substance abuse or dependence appears, it is treated
as a quality-of-life–interfering behavior.

Work on targeted behaviors involves a coordinated
array of treatment strategies, described later in this
chapter. Essentially, each session is a balance among
structured, as well as unstructured, problem solving
(including simple interpretive activities by the therapist)
and unstructured validation. The amount of the
therapist’s time allocated to each—problem solving
and validating—depends on (1) the urgency of the behaviors
needing change or problems to be solved, and

(2) the urgency of the client’s needs for validation, understanding,
and acceptance without any intimation
of change being needed. However, there should be an
overall balance in the session between change (problem
solving) and acceptance (validation) strategies. Unbalanced
attention to either side may result in a nondialectical
session, in addition to impeding client progress.
Skills Training

The necessity of crisis intervention and attention to
other primary targets makes skills acquisition within
individual psychotherapy very difficult. Thus, a separate
component of treatment directly targets the acquisition
of behavioral skills (function 1). In DBT this usually
takes the form of separate, weekly, 2- to 2½-hour
group skills training sessions that clients must attend,
ordinarily for a minimum of 6 months and preferably


Borderline Personality Disorder

for a year. Skills training can also be done individually,
although it is often more difficult to stay focused on
teaching new skills in individual than in group therapy.
After a client has gone through all skills modules twice
(i.e., for 1 year), remaining in skills training is a matter
of personal preference and need. Some DBT programs
have developed graduate groups for clients who have
acquired the skills but still need weekly consultation in
applying the skills effectively to everyday difficulties.
It is important to note that there is no research to date
on the effectiveness of graduate groups. In adolescent
programs, family members are usually invited. Some
programs include a separate friends and families skills
training group as well.

Each group typically has a leader and a co-leader.
Whereas the primary role of the leader is to teach the
skills, the co-leader focuses on managing group process
by keeping members both focused and attending to
the material being taught, as well as processing the information
(e.g., ensuring that everyone is on the correct
page, noticing when the leader’s invalidation has led
to a member shutting down, waking someone up, sitting
next to a member who is crying during group). We
have found that it is difficult to keep the group focused
and the leader on schedule for teaching the skills if the
leader attempts to manage both roles on his/her own.
Oftentimes, the co-leader role is more difficult to learn.

Skills training in DBT follows a psychoeducational
format. In contrast to individual therapy, in which the
agenda is determined primarily by the problem to be
solved, the skills training agenda is set by the skill to
be taught. As mentioned earlier, skills training also
uses a hierarchy of treatment targets to keep the group
focused: (1) therapy-destroying behaviors (e.g., using
drugs on premises, which could lead to the clinic being
shut down; property damage; threatening imminent suicide
or homicidal behavior to a fellow group member or
therapist); (2) increasing skills acquisition and strengthening;
and (3) decreasing therapy-interfering behaviors
(e.g., refusing to talk in a group setting, restless pacing
in the middle of sessions, attacking the therapist and/
or the therapy). However, therapy-interfering behaviors
are not given the attention in skills training that they
are given in the individual psychotherapy mode. If such
behaviors were a primary focus, there would never be
time for teaching behavioral skills. Generally, therapyinterfering
behaviors are put on an extinction schedule,
while a client is “dragged” through skills training and
simultaneously soothed. In DBT, all skills training clients
are required to be in concurrent individual psycho


therapy. Throughout group or individual skills training,
each client is urged to address other problematic behaviors
with his/her primary therapist; if a serious risk of
suicide develops, the skills training therapist refers the
problem to the primary therapist.

Although all of the strategies described below are
used in both individual psychotherapy and skills training,
the mix is decidedly different. Skills acquisition,
strengthening, and generalization strategies are the
predominant change strategies in skills training. In addition,
skills training is highly structured, much more
so than the individual psychotherapy component. Half
of each skills training session is devoted to reviewing
homework practice of the skills currently being taught,
and the other half is devoted to presenting and practicing
new skills. Except when interpersonal process issues
seriously threaten progress, the agenda and topics
for discussion in skills training are usually predetermined.


Four skills modules are taught on a rotating basis over
the course of 6 months. In standard DBT, mindfulness
skills are taught for 2 consecutive weeks at the beginning
of each of the subsequent modules. New members
join a group during either the 2 weeks of mindfulness
or the first 2 weeks of the subsequent module.

Mindfulness skills are viewed as central in DBT;
thus, they are labeled the “core” skills. These skills represent
a behavioral translation of meditation (including
Zen and contemplative prayer) practice and include observing,
describing, spontaneous participating, being
nonjudgmental, focusing awareness, and focusing on
effectiveness. Unlike standard behavioral and cognitive
therapies, which ordinarily focus on changing
distressing emotions and events, a major emphasis of
DBT is on learning to manage pain skillfully. Mindfulness
skills reflect the ability to experience and to observe
one’s thoughts, emotions, and behaviors without
evaluation, and without attempting to change or control
them. Distress tolerance skills comprise two types of
skills. First, crisis survival skills are used to regulate
behavior, in order to manage painful situations without
making them worse (e.g., without engaging in lifethreatening
behavior) until the problem can be solved.
Second, “accepting reality” skills are used to tolerate
the pain of problems that cannot be solved in either the
short-term future or that may have occurred in the past
and, therefore, cannot be changed ever.

Emotion regulation skills target the reduction of
emotional distress and include affect identification and
labeling, mindfulness of current emotions (i.e., expe



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

riencing nonjudgmentally), identifying obstacles to
changing emotions, increasing resilience, and acting
opposite to the emotion. Interpersonal effectiveness
skills teach effective methods for deciding on objectives
within conflict situations (either asking for something
or saying “no” to a request) and strategies that
maximize the chances of obtaining those objectives
without harming the relationship or sacrificing selfrespect.


It is important to highlight here one skill that is essential
in the DBT emotion regulation module: the
skill of opposite action. This emotion regulation skill
encourages clients to act opposite to their emotional
urge in order to reduce their emotional arousal. The
theoretical premise behind opposite action is that acting
in accordance with the action urge associated with
an emotion increases the likelihood that that emotion
will fire again (Linehan, Bohus, & Lynch, 2007). Clients
are taught that reversing expressive (e.g., facial expression,
posture, voice tone) and action components
of emotion responses is common to many treatments
that address emotional disorders and, in essence, can
be one of the main mechanisms of change in effective
psychotherapy. For example, effective treatments for
anxiety are based on principles of exposure and response
prevention that encourage active replacement
of an emotion-consistent behavior with an emotioninconsistent
behavior (e.g., Foa & Kozak, 1986). The
skill of opposite action expands this principle to be applicable
all emotions, not just to fear. It also provides
specific guidelines for how exactly to implement opposite
actions for each problematic emotion. Therefore,
if an emotion is not justified in the situation or is not
effective, opposite action involves (1) exposure to the
stimuli or cues evoking the emotion, (2) blocking of the
behavior prompted by the emotion’s action urge, and

(3) acting in a way that is opposite or inconsistent with
the emotional response (Linehan, 1993b). For example,
the action urge of fear is to avoid; therefore, the opposite
action is to fully approach the situation. For anger,
the action urge is to attack physically or emotionally,
clench fists, and to judge the situation. The opposite action
to anger therefore involves gently removing oneself
from the situation, unclenching the fists, and opening
the palms of hands, relaxing the shoulders, making
empathic statements, and actively working to generate
empathy for the person or situation with whom one is
angry (Linehan, 1993b, 2013).
The skill of opposite action is very similar to the
recommendation to change action tendencies in order

to change anxiety, which was proposed by Barlow in
1988. According to Barlow and colleagues (2004), negative
emotionality is a latent factor underlying depression
and anxiety disorders; therefore they proposed a
unified treatment protocol for mood and anxiety disorders.
Barlow and colleagues’ unified protocol suggests
that difficulties with negative emotions can be treated
through altering antecedent cognitive reappraisals (i.e.,
the probability of an event to happen and the likelihood
of a catastrophic outcome), preventing emotional
avoidance, and facilitating action tendencies that are
not associated with the emotion. For this last strategy,
they highlight that a crucial step is to prevent action
tendencies associated with the emotion and to facilitate
different action tendencies, encouraging approach
when emotions says avoidance. The examples given are
similar to opposite action (e.g., asking an individual
diagnosed with GAD to engage in nonperfect behavior;
encouraging someone with an anger problem to act
detached and passive; asking someone diagnosed with
depression to act active and not withdraw).

Self-management skills are taught in conjunction
with the other behavioral skills; however, there is not
a specific module allocated to these skills because
behavioral principles are inherent in all of DBT. Selfmanagement
skills include knowledge of the fundamental
principles of learning and behavior change,
and the ability to set realistic goals, to conduct one’s
own behavioral analysis, and to implement contingency
management plans.

Telephone Consultation

Telephone calls between sessions (or other extratherapeutic
contact when DBT is conducted in other settings;
e.g., inpatient units) are an integral part of DBT. Telephone
consultation calls also follow a target hierarchy:

(1) to provide emergency crisis intervention and simultaneously
break the link between suicidal behaviors
and therapist attention; (2) to provide coaching in skills
and promote skills generalization; and (3) to provide
a timely context for repairing the therapeutic relationship.
With respect to calls for skills coaching, the focus
of a phone call varies depending on the complexity and
severity of the problem to be solved and the amount of
time the therapist is willing to spend on the phone. It
is important to note that these calls are not considered
therapy sessions and should not be used as such. With
easy or already clear situations, in which it is reasonably
easy to determine what the client can or should do

Borderline Personality Disorder

in the situation, the focus is on helping the client use
behavioral skills (rather than dysfunctional behaviors)
to address the problem. Alternatively, with complex
problems, or with problems too severe for the client to
resolve soon, the focus is on ameliorating and tolerating
distress, and inhibiting dysfunctional problem-solving
behaviors until the next therapy session. In the latter
case, resolving the crisis is not the target of telephone
coaching calls.

With the exception of taking necessary steps to protect
the client’s life when he/she has threatened suicide,
all calls for help are handled as much alike as possible.
This is done to break the contingency between suicidal
and NSSI behaviors, and increased phone contact. To
do this, the therapist can do one of two things: refuse to
accept any calls (including suicide crisis calls), or insist
that the client who calls during suicidal crises also call
during other crises and problem situations. As Linehan
(1993b) notes, experts on suicidal behaviors uniformly
say that therapist availability is necessary with
suicidal clients. Thus, DBT chooses the latter course
and encourages (and at times insists) on calls during
nonsuicidal crisis periods. In DBT, calling the therapist
too infrequently, as well as too frequently, is considered
therapy-interfering behavior. Through orientation
to coaching calls during pretreatment the client learns
what to expect during the calls. For example, a therapist
may communicate to the client in session what he/she
will ask during the call: “What’s the problem? What
skills have you used? Where is your skills book? Go get
it, and let’s figure out what other skills you can use to
get through this situation.” It is important to highlight
that clients and therapists can easily fall into the trap of
considering the act of calling for phone consultation a
skill. Although asking for help may be a current target
of treatment, it is not considered a skill to be used when
the client is in distress. A therapists wants to reinforce
the client for effectively reaching out; however, he/she
does not want to reinforce the client who does not try
using actual skills to manage the problem at hand prior
to calling the therapist.

Additionally, the therapist is balancing the changefocused
strategies with validation throughout the call. It
is important that the therapist be aware of contingency
management principles that may be occurring during
the phone calls to avoid inadvertently reinforcing crisis
behaviors and to increase contact between sessions.

A skills trainer uses phone calls only to keep a client
in therapy (including, of course, when necessary,
to keep the client alive). All other problems, including

suicidal crises, are turned over to the primary therapist
as soon as possible. We have learned that this can be
one of the most difficult distinctions for group leaders
to uphold. Clients may call for a variety of reasons, and
it is the role of the group leader consistently to refer the
client back to the individual therapist.

The final priority for phone calls to individual therapists
is relationship repair. Clients with BPD often experience
delayed emotional reactions to interactions
that have occurred during therapy sessions. From a
DBT perspective, it is not reasonable to require clients
to wait up to a whole week before dealing with these
emotions, and it is appropriate for a client to call for a
brief “heart-to-heart” talk. In these situations, the role
of the therapist is to soothe and to reassure. In-depth
analyses should wait until the next session.

Consultation Team

DBT assumes that effective treatment of BPD must pay
as much attention to the therapist’s behavior and experience
in therapy as it does to the client’s. Treating clients
with BPD is enormously stressful, and staying within
the DBT therapeutic framework can be tremendously
difficult (function 4). Thus, an integral part of the therapy
is the treatment of the therapist. Every therapist is
required to be on a consultation team either with one
other person or with a group. DBT consultation meetings
are held weekly and attended by therapists currently
providing DBT to clients. At times, the clinical
setting may require that the team be part of an administrative
meeting due to time and space restraints. When
this occurs, it is important to set a specific agenda and
time limitations on each part of the meeting (administration,
DBT) to ensure that therapist consultation
issues are addressed. The roles of consultation are to
hold the therapist within the therapeutic framework and
to address problems that arise in the course of treatment
delivery. Thus, the fundamental target is increasing
adherence to DBT principles for each member of
the consultation group. The DBT consultation team
is viewed as an integral component of DBT; that is, it
is considered peer group therapy for the therapists, in
which each member is simultaneously a therapist to
other members and a client. The focus is on applying
DBT strategies to increase DBT-adherent behaviors
and decrease non-DBT behaviors.

There are three primary functions of consultation to
the therapist in DBT. First, a consultation team helps
to keep each individual therapist in the therapeutic


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

relationship. The role here is to cheerlead and to support
the therapist. Second, the supervisor or consultation
team balances the therapist in his/her interactions
with the client. In providing balance, consultants may
move close to the therapist, helping him/her maintain
a strong position. Or consultants may move back from
the therapist, requiring the therapist to move closer to
the client to maintain balance. Third, within programmatic
applications of DBT, the team provides the context
for the treatment.

Joining THe ConsUlTATion TeAM

Each team comprises therapists who are currently
treating a DBT client or are available to take on a DBT
client. The consultation team is a community of therapists
treating a community of clients. Prior to joining
the team, it is important that the therapist be completely
aware of his/her commitment. As with clients during
the pretreatment phase of DBT, therapists must make
a commitment to the team (see Table 10.2). The team
member conducting the commitment session will use
the same strategies and techniques used in a first session
with a DBT client (e.g., devil’s advocate, pros and
cons, troubleshooting). New therapists must commit
to doing the behaviors listed in Table 10.2), to working
actively toward increasing their own effectiveness
and adherence when applying DBT principles and to
being responsible for treatment and outcomes of all clients
treated by the team. For example, members of the
team are agreeing that if a client being treated by any
member of the team commits suicide, then all members
will say “Yes” when asked if they have ever had a client
commit suicide.

ConsUlTATion MeeTing forMAT

There are multiple ways to run a DBT team meeting. The
following is the way we conduct our meetings at the University
of Washington (although it is important to note
that even this format could change as needs of members
change). Each of our DBT teams has an identified team
leader. This person is typically the most experienced
DBT therapist on the team, and his/her role is to articulate
the DBT principles when necessary for overseeing
the fidelity of the treatment provided. Additionally, a
team may have an observer who rings a bell whenever
team members make judgmental comments (in content
or tone) about themselves, each other, or a client; stay
polarized without seeking synthesis; fall out of mindful


table 10.2. dbt Consultation team
Commitment session

1. To keep the agreements of the team, especially
remaining compassionate, mindful, and dialectical.
2. To be available to see a client in whatever role one has
joined the team for (e.g., individual therapist, group
skills trainer, clinical supervisor, pharmacotherapist).
3. To function as a therapist in the group (to the group) and
not just be a silent observer or a person that only speaks
about his or her own problems.
4. To treat team meetings in the same way one treats any
other group therapy session (i.e., attending the weekly
meetings [not double scheduling other events or clients],
on time, until the end, with pagers, PDAs, and phones
out of sight and off or, if necessarily on, on silent).
5. To come to team meetings adequately prepared.
6. To be willing to give clinical advice to people who have
more experience (especially when it’s hard to imagine
yourself as being able to offer anything useful).
7. To have the humility to admit your mistakes/difficulties
and the willingness to have the group help you solve
them.
8. To be nonjudgmental and compassionate of your
fellow clinicians and clients. To ring the bell of
nonjudgmentalness to remind yourself to not be
judgmental or unmindful, but not to ring it as a proxy
for criticizing someone. The bell is a reminder, not a
censor.
9. To properly assess the problem before giving solutions
(do unto others as you wish they would more often do
unto you).
10. To call out “Elephant in the room” when others are
ignoring or not seeing the elephant.
11. To be willing to go through a chain analysis even
though you were only 31 seconds late and you would
have been there on time if it were not for that traffic
light that always takes all day to change.
12. To participate in team by sharing the roles of Leader,
Observer, Note Taker or other tasks critical to team
functioning.
13. If you feel that the consult team is not being useful or
don’t like the way it is being run, then say something
about it rather than silently stewing in frustration.
14. To repair with the team in some way when team
meetings are missed, because the team is only as strong
as the weakest link. Therefore, the absence of any team
member is felt.
15. To carry on even when feeling burnt out, frustrated,
tired, overworked, underappreciated, hopeless,
ineffective (easier committed to than done, of course).

Borderline Personality Disorder

ness by doing two things at once; or jump in to solve a
problem before assessing the problem. The point of these
observations is not to lay blame but to focus the team’s
awareness on the behavior and move past it.

A team may begin with a mindfulness practice.
There are several functions of mindfulness on a team.
First, it helps members transition into the team by
participating fully and focusing on only one thing in
the moment, using a DBT mind-set. Second, it can
provide an opportunity for team members to enhance
their skills in leading and providing feedback about the
practice with other team members. Consultation team
agreements (see Table 10.3) have been developed to facilitate
a DBT frame and help to create a supportive environment
for managing client–therapist and therapist–
therapist difficulties. Therefore, a team may elect to
read one or all of the team agreements during the team
meeting. Most importantly, an agenda is set by the team
following the DBT hierarchy of targets, with a specific
focus on the needs of the therapist rather than the
problems of the clients. Our agenda uses the following
format; however, the following items can be prioritized
differently based on the needs of an individual team:

(1) the therapists’ need for consultation around clients’
suicidal crises or other life-threatening behaviors; (2)
therapy-interfering behaviors (including client absences
and dropouts, as well as therapist therapy-interfering
behaviors); (3) therapist team-interfering behaviors
and burnout; (4) severe or escalating deterioration in
quality-of-life behaviors; (5) reportage of good news
and therapists’ effective behaviors; (6) a summary of
the work of the previous skills group and graduate
group by group leaders; and (7) discussion of administrative
issues (requests to miss team or be out of town,
new client contacts; changes in skills trainers or group
time, format of consultation group, etc.). This agenda
spans the 1-hour consultation meeting. Although the
agenda may look impossibly long, therapists ordinarily
manage the time by being explicit about their need for
help and consultation from the team.
Ancillary Care

When problems in the client’s environment interfere
with functioning or progress, the therapist moves to the
case management strategies. There are three case management
strategies: the consultant-to-the-client strategy,
environmental intervention, and the consultation/
supervision team meeting (described earlier). Because
DBT is grounded in dialectics and avoids becoming

table 10.3. dbt Consultation team
agreements

1. Dialectical agreement: We agree to accept a dialectical
philosophy: There is no absolute truth. When caught
between two conflicting opinions, we agree to look for
the truth in both positions and to search for a synthesis
by asking questions such as “What is being left out?”
2. Consultation to the client agreement: We agree that the
primary goal of this group is to improve our own skills
as DBT therapists, and not serve as a go-between for
clients to each other. We agree to not treat clients or each
other as fragile. We agree to treat other group members
with the belief that others can speak on their own behalf.
3. Consistency agreement: Because change is a natural life
occurrence, we agree to accept diversity and change as
they naturally come about. This means that we do not
have to agree with each others’ positions about how to
respond to specific clients, nor do we have to tailor our
own behavior to be consistent with everyone else’s.
4. Observing limits agreement: We agree to observe our
own limits. As therapists and group members, we agree
to not judge or criticize other members for having
different limits from our own (e.g., too broad, too
narrow, “just right”).
5. Phenomenological empathy agreement: All things
being equal, we agree to search for nonpejorative or
phenomenologically empathic interpretations of our
clients’, our own, and other members’ behavior. We agree
to assume that we and our clients are trying our best
and want to improve. We agree to strive to see the world
through our clients’ eyes and through one another’s eyes.
We agree to practice a nonjudgmental stance with our
clients and with one another.
6. Fallibility agreement: We agree ahead of time that we
are each fallible and make mistakes. We agree that we
have probably either done whatever problematic things
we’re being accused of, or some part of it, so that we can
let go of assuming a defensive stance to prove our virtue
or competence. Because we are fallible, it is agreed that
we will inevitably violate all of these agreements, and
when this is done, we will rely on each other to point out
the polarity and move to a synthesis.
rigid, a therapist intervenes in the client’s environment
only under very specific conditions: (1) The client is
unable to act on his/her own behalf and outcome is extremely
important; (2) a key person in the environment
will only speak with someone who is in high power
(e.g., the therapist instead of the client); (3) when the
client’s or others’ lives are in imminent danger; (4)
when it is the humane thing to do and will cause no
harm; and (5) when the client is a minor.


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

ConsUlTATion‑To‑THe‑ClienT sTrATegy

The consultation-to-the-client strategy was developed
with three objectives in mind. First, clients must learn
how to manage their own lives and care for themselves
by interacting effectively with other people in the environment,
including health care professionals. The
consultation-to-the-client strategy emphasizes clients’
capacities and targets their ability to take care of themselves.
Second, this strategy was designed to decrease
instances of “splitting” between DBT therapists and
other people interacting with clients, which occurs
when different providers in a client’s network hold differing
opinions on how to treat the client. A fundamental
tenet of this strategy is that therapists do not tell
others, including other health care professionals, how
to treat the client. The therapist may suggest but may
not demand. What this means in practice is that the
therapist is not attached to others treating a client in a
specific way. By remaining in the role of a consultant to
the client, the therapist stays out of such arguments. Finally,
the consultation-to-the-client strategy promotes
respect for clients by imparting the message that they
are credible and capable of performing interventions on
their own behalf.

As mentioned previously, it is the responsibility of
the individual DBT therapist to coordinate and organize
care with ancillary treatment providers (function
5; e.g., case managers, pharmacotherapists).
The consultation-to-the-client strategy balances the
consultation-to-the-therapist strategy described earlier,
primarily by providing direct consultation to the client
in how to interact with other providers rather than
consulting with people in the client’s environment on
how to interact with the client. Except for special circumstances
listed earlier, DBT therapists do not discuss
clients with ancillary providers, or other providers
in the client’s environment, without the client present.
The therapist works with the client to problem-solve
difficulties he/she has with his/her network, leaving the
client to act as the intermediary between the therapist
and other professionals.

enVironMenTAl inTerVenTion

The bias in DBT is toward teaching the client how to
interact effectively with his/her environment. Thus, the
consultation-to-the-client strategy is the dominant case
management strategy and is used whenever possible.
There are times, however, when intervention by the

therapist is needed. In general, the environmental intervention
strategy is used over the consultation-to-theclient
strategy when substantial harm may befall the
client if the therapist does not intervene. The general
rule for environmental intervention is that when clients
lack abilities that they need to learn or that are impossible
to obtain, or are not reasonable or necessary, the
therapist may intervene.

Client Variables

DBT was developed to treat the multidiagnostic,
difficult-to-treat clients. Therefore, there are a number
of requisite client characteristics for Stage 1 DBT. Of
these, voluntary participation and a commitment to a
specified time period (e.g., 16 weeks, 6 months to 1 year)
are critical. The effective application of DBT requires a
strong interpersonal relationship between therapist and
client. The therapist must first work to become a major
reinforcer in the life of the client, then use the relationship
to promote change in the client. Continuing the
relationship can only be used as a positive contingency
when a client wants to be in treatment; thus, contingency
management is seriously compromised with
involuntary clients. Court-ordered treatment is acceptable,
if clients agree to remain in therapy even if the
order is rescinded. A client characteristic necessary for
group therapy is the ability to control overtly aggressive
behavior toward others. DBT was developed and evaluated
with perhaps the most severely disturbed portion
of the population with BPD; all clients accepted into
treatment had histories of multiple suicidal and NSSI
behaviors. However, the treatment has been designed
flexibly and is likely to be effective with less severely
disturbed clients.

Therapist Variables

In comparison to other aspects of therapy, the therapist
characteristics that facilitate DBT have received little
attention. However, evidence supports the assumption
that effective therapy for clients with BPD requires the
proficient balancing of acceptance and change strategies
(Shearin & Linehan, 1992). This research also
found that therapists’ nonpejorative perceptions of clients
were associated with less suicidal behavior.

Linehan (1993b) describes requisite therapist characteristics
in terms of three bipolar dimensions that must
be balanced in the conduct of therapy. The first dimen



Borderline Personality Disorder

sion represents the balance of an orientation of acceptance
with an orientation of change. The therapist must
be able to inhibit judgmental attitudes (often under very
trying circumstances) and to practice acceptance of the
client, of the self, and of the therapeutic process exactly
as these are in the current moment. Nevertheless,
the therapist remains cognizant that therapy implies
necessity to change, and he/she assumes responsibility
for directing the therapeutic influence. Second, the
therapist must balance unwavering centeredness with
compassionate flexibility. “Unwavering centeredness”
is the quality of believing in oneself, the therapy, and
the client. “Compassionate flexibility” is the ability
to take in relevant information about the client and to
modify one’s position accordingly by letting go of a
previously held position. In balancing these two dimensions,
the therapist must be able to observe his/her own
limits without becoming overly rigid. Finally, the DBT
therapist must be able to balance a high degree of nurturing
with benevolent demanding. “Nurturing” refers
to teaching, coaching, assisting, and strengthening the
client, whereas “benevolent demanding” requires the
therapist to recognize existing capabilities, to reinforce
adaptive behavior, and to refuse to “do” for the client
when the client can “do” for him/herself. Above all, the
ability to demand requires willingness to believe in the
client’s ability to change.

treatMeNt strateGies

“Treatment strategies” in DBT refer to the role and
focus of the therapist, as well as to a coordinated set
of procedures that function to achieve specific treatment
goals. Although DBT strategies usually comprise
a number of steps, use of a strategy does not necessarily
require the application of every step. It is considerably
more important that the therapist apply the intent of the
strategy than that he/she should inflexibly lead the client
through a series of prescribed maneuvers.

DBT employs five sets of treatment strategies to
achieve the previously described behavioral targets: (1)
dialectical strategies, (2) core strategies, (3) stylistic
strategies, (4) case management strategies (discussed
earlier), and (5) integrated strategies. DBT strategies
are illustrated in Figure 10.2. Within an individual session
and with a given client, certain strategies may be
used more than others, and all strategies may not be
necessary or appropriate. An abbreviated discussion


figUre 10.2. Treatment strategies in DBT. From Linehan
(1993b). Copyright 1993 by The Guilford Press. Reprinted
by permission.

of the first three types of DBT treatment strategies follows.


Dialectical Strategies

Dialectical strategies permeate the entire therapy, and
their use provides the rationale for adding the term
“dialectical” to the title of the therapy. There are three
types of dialectical strategies: those having to do with
how the therapist structures interactions; those pertaining
to how the therapist defines and teaches skillful behaviors;
and certain specific strategies used during the
conduct of treatment.

Dialectics of the Relationship:
Balancing Treatment Strategies

“Dialectical strategies” in the most general sense of
the term have to do with how the therapist balances
the dialectical tensions within the therapy relationship.
As noted earlier, the fundamental dialectic within any
psychotherapy, including that with a client who has
BPD, is that between acceptance of what is and efforts


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

to change what is. A dialectical therapeutic position is
one of constant attention to combining acceptance and
change, flexibility and stability, nurturing and challenging,
and focusing on capabilities and on limitations
and deficits. The goals are to bring out the opposites,
both in therapy and in the client’s life, and to provide
conditions for syntheses. The presumption is that
change may be facilitated by emphasizing acceptance,
and acceptance, by emphasizing change. The emphasis
on opposites sometimes takes place over time (i.e., over
the whole of an interaction), rather than simultaneously
or in each part of an interaction. Although many, if not
all, psychotherapies, including cognitive and behavioral
treatments, attend to these issues of balance, placing
the concept of balance at the center of the treatment
ensures that the therapist remains attentive to its importance.


Three primary characteristics are needed to maintain
a dialectical stance in the therapeutic relationship:
movement, speed, and flow. “Movement” refers to acting
with certainty, strength, and total commitment on
the part of the therapist. If the therapist only moves
halfheartedly, the client will only move halfheartedly.
“Speed” is of the essence and entails keeping the therapy
moving, so that it does not become rigid or stuck.
Finally, “flow” refers to being mindful of the momentto-
moment unfolding of a session and responding
smoothly, and with apparent effortlessness.

Teaching Dialectical Behavior Patterns

Dialectical thinking is emphasized throughout the entire
treatment. Not only does the therapist maintain a
dialectical stance in his/her treatment of the client but
he/she also focuses on teaching and modeling dialectical
thinking to the client. The therapist helps the client
move from an “either–or” position to a “both–and”
position, without invalidating the first idea or its polarity
when asserting the second. Behavioral extremes
and rigidity—whether cognitive, emotional, or overtly
behavioral—are signals that synthesis has not been
achieved; thus, they can be considered nondialectical.
Instead, a “middle path” similar to that advocated in
Buddhism is advocated and modeled. The important
thing in following the path to Enlightenment is to avoid
being caught and entangled in any extreme and always
follow the Middle Way (Kyokai, 1966). This emphasis
on balance is similar to the approach advocated in relapse
prevention models (e.g., Marlatt & Gordon, 1985)
for treating addictive behaviors.

Specific Dialectical Strategies

There are eight specific dialectical treatment strategies:

(1) entering and using paradox, (2) using metaphor, (3)
playing the devil’s advocate, (4) extending, (5) activating
the client’s “wise mind,” (6) making lemonade out
of lemons (turning negatives into positives), (7) allowing
natural change (and inconsistencies even within
the therapeutic milieu), and (8) assessing dialectically
by always asking the question “What is being left out
here?” Due to space limitations, a selection of these
strategies is included in the following sections. For a
complete review, the interested reader is referred to the
DBT treatment manual (Linehan, 1993a).
enTering THe PArADox

Entering the paradox is a powerful technique because
it contains the element of surprise. The therapist presents
the paradox without explaining it and highlights
the paradoxical contradictions within the behavior, the
therapeutic process, and reality in general. The essence
of the strategy is the therapist’s refusal to step in with
rational explanation; the client’s attempts at logic are
met with silence, a question, or a story designed to shed
a small amount of light on the puzzle to be solved. The
client is pushed to achieve understanding, to move toward
synthesis of the polarities, and to resolve the dilemma
him/herself. Linehan (1993b) has highlighted
a number of typical paradoxes and their corresponding
dialectical tensions encountered over the course of
therapy. Clients are free to choose their own behavior
but cannot stay in therapy if they do not work at changing
their behavior. They are taught to achieve greater
independence by becoming more skilled at asking for
help from others. Clients have a right to kill themselves,
but if they ever convince the therapist that suicide is
imminent, they may be locked up. Clients are not responsible
for being the way they are, but they are responsible
for what they become. In highlighting these
paradoxical realities, both client and therapist struggle
with confronting and letting go of rigid patterns of
thought, emotion, and behavior, so that more spontaneous
and flexible patterns may emerge.

Using MeTAPHor: PArABle, MyTH, AnAlogy,
AnD sToryTelling

The use of metaphor, stories, parables, and myth is
extremely important in DBT and provides alterna



Borderline Personality Disorder

tive means of teaching dialectical thinking. Stories
are usually more interesting, are easier to remember,
and encourage the search for other meanings of events
under scrutiny. Additionally, metaphors allow clients to
distance themselves from the problem. In general, the
idea of metaphor is to take something the client does
understand and use it as an analogy for something the
client does not understand. Furthermore, metaphors
and stories can be developed collaboratively over the
course of treatment. When therapist and client relate
to a metaphor, it can be a powerful tool to use throughout
the treatment, reminding the client what he/she is
working on. For example, changing behavior by learning
new skills can be compared to building a new hiking
trail in the woods. At first, the current trail is defined
and easy to navigate; however, it always leads to
a dead end (old dysfunctional behavior). To build a new
trail (skillful behaviors), the hiker must repeatedly go
through a new, undefined area until it becomes worn in.
This takes time, and the hiker moves slowly and deliberately,
clearing away the brush. Additionally, while the
new path is developing, the old path is slowly becoming
grown over. The therapist can return to this story each
time the client begins to struggle between trying new
skills and returning to old dysfunctional behavior.

PlAying DeVil’s ADVoCATe

The devil’s advocate technique is quite similar to the
argumentative approach used in rational–emotive and
cognitive restructuring therapies. With this strategy, the
therapist presents a propositional statement that is an
extreme version of one of the client’s own dysfunctional
beliefs, then plays the role of devil’s advocate to counter
the client’s attempts to disprove the extreme statement
or rule. For example, a client may state, “Because I’m
overweight, I’d be better off dead.” The therapist argues
in favor of the dysfunctional belief, perhaps by suggesting
that because this is true for the client, it must be true
for others as well; hence, all overweight people would
be better off dead. The therapist may continue along
these lines: “And since the definition of what constitutes
being overweight varies so much among people,
there must be an awful lot of people who would be considered
overweight by someone. That must mean they’d
all be better off dead!” Or “Gosh, I’m about 5 pounds
overweight. I guess that means I’d be better off dead,
too.” Any reservations the client proposes can be countered
by further exaggeration, until the self-defeating
nature of the belief becomes apparent. The devil’s ad


vocate technique is often used in the first several sessions
to elicit a strong commitment from the client and
in commitment sessions with new therapists joining the
DBT team. The therapist argues to the client that since
the therapy will be painful and difficult, it is not clear
how making such a commitment (and therefore being
accepted into treatment) could possibly be a good idea.
This usually has the effect of moving the client to take
the opposite position in favor of therapeutic change. To
employ this technique successfully, it is important that
the therapist’s argument seem reasonable enough to invite
counterargument, and that the delivery be credible,
made in a naive but offbeat manner.

exTenDing

The term “extending” has been borrowed from aikido,
a Japanese form of self-defense. In that context, extending
occurs when the student of aikido waits for a challenger’s
movements to reach their natural completion,
then extends a movement’s endpoint slightly further
than what would naturally occur, leaving the challenger
vulnerable and off balance. In DBT, extending occurs
when the therapist takes the severity or gravity of what
the client is communicating more seriously than the client
intends. This strategy is the emotional equivalent of
the devil’s advocate strategy. It is particularly effective
when the client is threatening dire consequences of an
event or problem to induce change in the environment.
Take the interaction with the following client, who
threatens suicide if an extra appointment time for the
next day is not scheduled. The following interchange
occurred after attempts to find a mutually acceptable
time failed.

client: I’ve got to see you tomorrow, or I’m sure I will

end up killing myself. I just can’t keep it together by

myself any longer.

tHeraPist: Hmm, I didn’t realize you were so upset!
We’ve got to do something immediately if you are so
distressed that you might kill yourself. What about
hospitalization? Maybe that is needed.

client: I’m not going to the hospital! Why won’t you
just give me an appointment?

tHeraPist: How can we discuss such a mundane topic

as session scheduling when your life is in danger?

How are you planning to kill yourself?

client: You know how. Why can’t you cancel some



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

one or move an appointment around? You could put
an appointment with one of your students off until
another time. I can’t stand it anymore!

tHeraPist: I’m really concerned about you. Do you
think I should call an ambulance?

The aspect of the communication that the therapist
takes seriously (suicide as a possible consequence of
not getting an appointment) is not the aspect (needing
an extra appointment the next day) that the client wants
taken seriously. The therapist takes the consequences
seriously and extends the seriousness even further. The
client wants the problem taken seriously, and indeed is
extending the seriousness of the problem.

MAking leMonADe oUT of leMons

Making lemonade out of lemons is similar to the notion
in psychodynamic therapy of utilizing a client’s resistances;
therapeutic problems are seen as opportunities
for the therapist to help the client. The strategy involves
taking something that is apparently problematic and
turning it into an asset. Problems become opportunities
to practice skills; suffering allows others to express
empathy; weaknesses become one’s strengths. To be
effective, this strategy requires a strong therapeutic relationship;
the client must believe that the therapist has
a deep compassion for his/her suffering. The danger in
using this strategy is that it is easily confused with the
invalidating refrain repeatedly heard by clients with
BPD. The therapist should avoid the tendency to oversimplify
a client’s problems, and refrain from implying
that the lemons in the client’s life are really lemonade.
While recognizing that the cloud is indeed black, the
therapist assists the client in finding the positive characteristics
of a situation—thus, the silver lining.

Core Strategies

Validation

Validation and problem-solving strategies, together
with dialectical strategies, make up the core of DBT and
form the heart of the treatment. Validation strategies
are the most obvious acceptance strategies, whereas
problem-solving strategies are the most obvious change
strategies. Both strategies are used in every interaction
with the client, although the relative frequency of each
depends on the particular client, the current situation,
and the vulnerabilities of that client. However, through


out an entire session, there should be an overall balance
between the acceptance and change strategies. We discuss
validation strategies in this section and problemsolving
strategies in the next.

Clients with BPD present themselves clinically as
people in extreme emotional pain. They plead, and at
times demand, that their therapists do something to
change this state of affairs. It is very tempting to focus
the energy of therapy on changing the client by modifying
irrational thoughts, assumptions, or schemas; critiquing
interpersonal behaviors or motives contributing
to interpersonal problems; giving medication to change
abnormal biology; and reducing emotional overreactivity
and intensity; and so on. In many respects, this focus
recapitulates the invalidating environment by confirming
the client’s worst fears: The client is the problem
and indeed cannot trust his/her own reactions to
events. Mistrust and invalidation of how one responds
to events, however, are extremely aversive and can elicit
intense fear, anger, and shame, or a combination of all
three. Thus, the entire focus of change-based therapy
can be aversive because the focus by necessity contributes
to and elicits self-invalidation. However, an entire
focus of acceptance-based therapy can also be invalidating
when it appears to the client that the therapist
does not take his/her problems seriously. Therefore,
once again, a dialectical stance focuses on a balance
between the two poles.

Validation (according to the Oxford English Dictionary;
Simpson & Weiner, 1989) refers to identifying
the validity of an object or making something valid.
It also encompasses activities such as corroborating,
substantiating, verifying, and authenticating. The act
of validating includes providing support from an authoritative
source about the truth or validity of something
(Merriam-Webster, 2006). Communicating that
something is valid implies that objective evidence and
reputable authority support or justify the response
given (Simpson & Weiner, 1989). These are precisely
the meanings associated with the term when used in the
context of psychotherapy in DBT.

The essence of validation is this: The therapist communicates
to the client that her [sic] responses make sense
and are understandable within her [sic] current life context
or situation. The therapist actively accepts the client
and communicates this acceptance to the client. The
therapist takes the client’s responses seriously and does
not discount or trivialize them. Validation strategies require
the therapist to search for, recognize, and reflect


Borderline Personality Disorder

to the client the validity inherent in her [sic] response
to events. With unruly children, parents have to catch
them while they’re good in order to reinforce their behavior;
similarly, the therapist has to uncover the validity
within the client’s response, sometimes amplify
it, and then reinforce it. (Linehan, 1993b, pp. 222–223,
original emphasis)

Two things are important to note here. First, “validation”
means the acknowledgment of that which is valid.
It does not mean “making” valid. Nor does it mean
validating that which is invalid. The therapist observes,
experiences, and affirms, but he/she does not create
validity. Second, “valid” and “scientific” are not synonyms.
Science may be one way to determine what
is valid, logical, sound in principle, and/or generally
accepted as authority or normative knowledge. However,
an authentic experience or apprehension of private
events (at least, when similar to the same experiences
of others or when in accord with other, more observable
events) is also a basis for claiming validity. Validation
can be considered at any one of six levels. Each level is
correspondingly more complete than the previous one,
and each depends on the previous levels. They are definitional
of DBT and are required in every interaction
with the client. These levels are described most fully in
Linehan (1997), and the following definitions are taken
from her discussion.

lisTening AnD oBserVing (V1)

Level 1 validation requires listening to and observing
what the client is saying, feeling, and doing, as well as a
corresponding active effort to understand what is being
said and observed. The essence of this step is that the
therapist is staying awake and interested in the client,
paying attention to what the client says and does in the
current moment. The therapist notices the nuances of
response in the interaction. Validation at Level 1 communicates
that the client per se, as well as the client’s
presence, words, and responses in the session have
“such force as to compel serious attention and [usually]
acceptance” (see earlier definitions of validation;
pp. 360–361)

ACCUrATe refleCTion (V2)

The second level of validation is the accurate reflection
back to the client of his/her own feelings, thoughts,
assumptions, and behaviors. The therapist conveys an
understanding of the client by hearing what the client

has said and seeing what the client does, and how he/
she responds. Validation at Level 2 sanctions, empowers,
or authenticates that the individual is who he/she
actually is (p. 362).

ArTiCUlATing THe UnVerBAlizeD (V3)

In Level 3 of validation, the therapist communicates
understanding of aspects of the client’s experience and
response to events that have not been communicated
directly by the client. The therapist “mind-reads” the
reason for the client’s behavior and figures out how the
client feels and what he/she is wishing for, thinking, or
doing just by knowing what has happened to the client.
The therapist can make the link between precipitating
event and behavior without being given any information
about the behavior itself. The therapist can also
articulate emotions and meanings the client has not expressed
(p. 364).

VAliDATing in TerMs of PAsT leArning
or BiologiCAl DysfUnCTion (V4)

At Level 4, behavior is validated in terms of its causes.
Validation here is based on the notion that all behavior
is caused by events occurring in time; thus, in principle,
it is understandable. The therapist justifies the
client’s behavior by showing that it is caused by past
events. Even though information may not be available
to determine all the relevant causes, the client’s feelings,
thoughts, and actions make perfect sense in the
context of the client’s current experience, physiology,
and life to date. At a minimum, what “is” can always
be justified in terms of sufficient causes; that is, what
is “should be,” in that whatever was necessary for it to
occur had to have happened (p. 367).

VAliDATion in TerMs of PresenT ConTexT
or norMATiVe fUnCTioning (V5)

At Level 5, the therapist communicates that behavior
is justifiable, reasonable, well grounded, meaningful,
and/or efficacious in terms of current events, normative
biological functioning, and/or the client’s ultimate life
goals. The therapist looks for and reflects the wisdom
or validity of the client’s response and communicates
that the response is understandable. The therapist finds
the relevant facts in the current environment that support
the client’s behavior. The therapist is not blinded
by the dysfunctionality of some of the client’s response


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

patterns to those aspects of a response pattern that may
be either reasonable or appropriate to the context. Thus,
the therapist searches the client’s responses for their inherent
reasonableness (as well as commenting on the
inherent dysfunctionality of much of the response, if
necessary) (pp. 370–371).

rADiCAl genUineness (V6)

In Level 6, the task is to recognize the client as he/
she is, seeing and responding to his/her strengths and
capacities, while keeping a firm empathic understanding
of his/her actual difficulties and incapacities. The
therapist believes in the client and his/her capacity to
change and move toward ultimate life goals just as the
therapist may believe in a friend or family member.
The client is responded to as a person of equal status,
due equal respect. Validation at the highest level is the
validation of the individual as “is.” The therapist sees
more than the role, more than a “client” or “disorder.”
Level 6 validation is the opposite of treating the client
in a condescending manner or as overly fragile. It is
responding to the individual as capable of effective and
reasonable behavior rather than assuming that he/she
is an invalid. Whereas Levels 1–5 represent sequential
steps in validation of a kind, Level 6 represents change
in both level and kind (p. 377).

Cheerleading strategies constitute another form of
validation and are the principal strategies for combating
the active passivity and tendencies toward hopelessness
in clients with BPD. In cheerleading, therapists
communicate the belief that clients are doing
their best and validate clients’ ability to eventually
overcome their difficulties (a type of validation that,
if not handled carefully, can simultaneously invalidate
clients’ perceptions of their helplessness). In addition,
therapists express a belief in the therapy relationship,
offer reassurance, and highlight any evidence of improvement.
Within DBT, cheerleading is used in every
therapeutic interaction. Although active cheerleading
should be reduced as clients learn to trust and to validate
themselves, cheerleading strategies always remain
an essential ingredient of a strong therapeutic alliance.

Finally, functional validation, another form of validation
used regularly in DBT, is a form of nonverbal
or behavioral validation that at times may be more effective
than verbal validation. For example, a therapist
drops a 50-pound block on the client’s foot. It would
be considered invalidating for the therapist simply to

respond verbally, saying, “Wow, I can see that really
hurts! You must be in a lot of pain.” Functional validation
would entail the therapist removing the block from
the client’s foot.

Problem Solving

We have previously discussed how clients with BPD
typically experience therapies with a primary focus on
change as invalidating. However, therapies that focus
exclusively on validation can prove equally problematic.
Exhortations to accept one’s current situation offer
little solace to an individual who experiences life as
painfully unendurable. Within DBT, problem-solving
strategies are the core change strategies, designed to
foster an active problem-solving style. For clients with
BPD, however, the application of these strategies is
fraught with difficulties. The therapist must keep in
mind that in clients with BPD the process will be more
difficult than that with many other client populations.
In work with clients who have BPD, the need for sympathetic
understanding and interventions aimed at enhancing
current positive mood can be extremely important.
The validation strategies just described, as well as
the irreverent communication strategy described later,
can be tremendously useful here. Within DBT, problem
solving is a two-stage process that concentrates first on
understanding and accepting a selected problem, then
generating alternative solutions. The first stage involves

(1) behavioral analysis, (2) insight into recurrent behavioral
context patterns, and (3) giving the client didactic
information about principles of behaviors, norms,
and so on. The second stage specifically targets change
through (4) analysis of possible solutions to problems,
(5) orienting the client to therapeutic procedures likely
to bring about desired changes, and (6) strategies designed
to elicit and strengthen commitment to these
procedures. The following sections describe in more
detail some of these procedures.
Behavioral Analysis

Behavioral analysis is one of the most important strategies
in DBT. It is also the most difficult. The purpose
of a behavioral analysis is first to select a problem, then
to determine empirically what is causing it, what is preventing
its resolution, and what aids are available for
solving it. Behavioral analysis addresses four primary
questions:


Borderline Personality Disorder

1. Are ineffective behaviors being reinforced, are
effective behaviors followed by aversive outcomes,
or are rewarding outcomes delayed?
2. Does the client have the requisite behavioral
skills to regulate his/her emotions, respond skillfully
to conflict, and manage his/her own behavior?
3. Are there patterns of avoidance, or are effective
behaviors inhibited by unwarranted fears or
guilt?
4. Is the client unaware of the contingencies operating
in his/her environment, or are effective
behaviors inhibited by faulty beliefs or assumptions?
Answers to these questions guide the therapist in the
selection of appropriate treatment procedures, such as
contingency management, behavioral skills training,
exposure, or cognitive modification. Thus, the value
of an analysis lies in helping the therapist assess and
understand a problem fully enough to guide effective
therapeutic response. The first step in conducting a behavioral
analysis is to help the client identify the problem
to be analyzed and describe it in behavioral terms.
Identifying the problem can be the most difficult task
for the therapist, and if not done accurately and specifically,
can lead therapist and client astray. Problem definition
usually evolves from a discussion of the previous
week’s events, often in the context of reviewing diary
cards. The assumption of facts not in evidence is perhaps
the most common mistake at this point. An identified
problem is further assessed with a chain analysis—
an exhaustive, blow-by-blow description of the chain of
events leading up to and following the behavior. In a
chain analysis, the therapist constructs a general road
map of how the client arrives at dysfunctional responses,
including where the road actually starts (highlights
vulnerability factors and prompting events), and notes
possible alternative adaptive pathways or junctions
along the way. Additional goals are to identify events
that automatically elicit maladaptive behavior, behavioral
deficits that are instrumental in maintaining problematic
responses, and environmental and behavioral
events that may be interfering with more appropriate
behaviors. The overall goal is to determine the function
of the behavior (i.e., the problem the behavior was
instrumental in solving).

Chain analysis always begins with a specific environmental
event. Pinpointing such an event may be dif


ficult because clients are frequently unable to identify
anything in the environment that set off the problematic
response. Nevertheless, it is important to obtain a
description of the events co-occurring with the onset
of the problem. The therapist then attempts to identify
both environmental and behavioral events for each subsequent
link in the chain. Here the therapist must play
the part of a very keen observer, thinking in terms of
very small chunks of behavior, and repeatedly identifying
what the client was thinking, feeling, and doing,
and what was occurring in the environment from moment
to moment. The therapist asks the client, “What
happened next?” or “How did you get from there to
there?” Although, from the client’s point of view, such
links may be self-evident, the therapist must be careful
not to make assumptions. For example, a client who
had attempted suicide once stated that she decided to
kill herself because her life was too painful for her to
live any longer. From the client’s point of view, this was
an adequate explanation for her suicide attempt. For
the therapist, however, taking one’s life because life is
too painful was only one solution. One could decide
life is too painful, then decide to change one’s life.
Or one could believe that death might be even more
painful and decide to tolerate life despite its pain. In
this instance, careful questioning revealed that the client
actually assumed she would be happier dead than
alive. Challenging this assumption, then, became a key
to ending her persistent suicide attempts. It is equally
important to pinpoint exactly what consequences are
maintaining the problematic response. Similarly, the
therapist should also search for consequences that serve
to weaken the problem behavior. As with antecedent
events, the therapist probes for both environmental
and behavioral consequences, obtaining detailed descriptions
of the client’s emotions, somatic sensations,
actions, thoughts, and assumptions. A rudimentary
knowledge of the rules of learning and principles of reinforcement
is crucial.

The final step in behavioral analysis is to construct
and test hypotheses about events that are relevant to
generating and maintaining the problem behavior. The
biosocial theory of BPD suggests several factors of
primary importance. For example, DBT focuses most
closely on intense or aversive emotional states; the
amelioration of negative affect is always suspected as
being among the primary motivational variables for
dysfunctional behavior in BPD. The theory also suggests
that typical behavioral patterns, such as deficits


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

in dialectical thinking or behavioral skills, are likely
to be instrumental in producing and maintaining problematic
responses.

Solution Analysis

Once the problem has been identified and analyzed,
problem solving proceeds with an active attempt at
finding and identifying alternative solutions. DBT posits
that there are five responses to any one problem: (1)
Solve the problem; (2) change the emotional reaction
to the problem; (3) tolerate the problem; (4) stay miserable,
or (5) make things worse. These five options are
presented as needed prior to problem solving to ensure
that therapist and client are consistently working toward
the same goal.

At times, solutions are discussed throughout the behavioral
analysis, and pointing to these alternative solutions
may be all that is required, rather than waiting
until the behavioral analysis is completed. The therapist
may ask, “What do you think you could have done differently
here?” Throughout this process, the therapist is
actively modeling effective problem solving and solution
generation, with a heavier emphasis on modeling
and guiding the client early on in treatment. At other
times, a more complete solution analysis is necessary.
Here the task is to “brainstorm” or generate as many alternative
solutions as possible. Solutions should then be
evaluated in terms of the various outcomes expected.
The final step in solution analysis is to choose a solution
that will somehow be effective. Throughout the
evaluation, the therapist guides the client in choosing a
particular behavioral solution. Here, it is preferable that
the therapist pay particular attention to long-term over
short-term gain, and that chosen solutions render maximum
benefit to the client rather than benefit to others.

Problem‑Solving Procedures

DBT employs four problem-solving procedures taken
directly from the cognitive and behavioral treatment
literature. These four—skills training, contingency
procedures, exposure, and cognitive modification—are
viewed as primary vehicles of change throughout DBT,
since they influence the direction that client changes
take from session to session. Although they are discussed
as distinct procedures by Linehan (1993b), it
is not clear that they can in fact be differentiated in
every case in clinical practice. The same therapeutic
sequence may be effective because it teaches the client

new skills (skills training), provides a consequence that
influences the probability of preceding client behaviors
occurring again (contingency procedures), provides
nonreinforced exposure to cues associated previously
but not currently with threat (exposure procedures), or
changes the client’s dysfunctional assumptions or schematic
processing of events (cognitive modification). In
contrast to many cognitive and behavioral treatment
programs in the literature, these procedures (with some
exceptions noted below) are employed in an unstructured
manner, interwoven throughout all therapeutic
dialogue. Thus, the therapist must be well aware of the
principles governing the effectiveness of each procedure
in order to use it strategically. The exceptions are
in skills training, where skills training procedures predominate.


Skills Training

An emphasis on skills building is pervasive throughout
DBT. In both individual and group therapy, the therapist
insists at every opportunity that the client actively
engage in the acquisition and practice of behavioral
skills. The term “skills” is used synonymously with
“ability” and includes, in its broadest sense, cognitive,
emotional, and overt behavioral skills, as well as their
integration, which is necessary for effective performance.
Skills training is called for when a solution requires
skills not currently in the individual’s behavioral
repertoire, or when the individual has the component
behaviors but cannot integrate and use them effectively.
Skills training in DBT incorporates three types of procedures:
(1) skills acquisition (modeling, instructing,
advising); (2) skills strengthening (encouraging in vivo
and within-session practice, role playing, feedback);
and (3) skills generalization (phone calls to work on
applying skills; taping therapy sessions to listen to between
sessions; homework assignments).

Contingency Procedures

Every response within an interpersonal interaction is
potentially a reinforcement, a punishment, or a withholding
or removal of reinforcement. Contingency
management requires therapists to organize their behavior
strategically, so client behaviors that represent
progress are reinforced, while unskillful or maladaptive
behaviors are extinguished. or punished. Natural
over arbitrary consequences are preferred. An important
contingency in DBT is the therapist’s interpersonal


Borderline Personality Disorder

behavior with the client, which is contingent on alliance.


Effective contingency management requires that
the therapist orient the client to the principles of learning.
The therapist must attend to the client’s behaviors
and use the principles of shaping to reinforce those
behaviors that represent progress toward DBT targets.
Equally important is that the therapist take care not to
reinforce behaviors targeted for extinction. In theory,
this may seem obvious, but in practice, it can be quite
difficult. The problematic behaviors of clients with
BPD are often quite effective in obtaining reinforcing
outcomes or in stopping painful events. Indeed,
the very behaviors targeted for extinction have been
intermittently reinforced by mental health professionals,
family members, and friends. Contingency management
at times requires the use of aversive consequences,
similar to “setting limits” in other treatment
modalities. Three guidelines are important when using
aversive consequences. First, punishment should “fit
the crime,” and a client should have some way of terminating
its application. For example, in DBT, a detailed
behavioral analysis follows a suicidal or NSSI act; such
an analysis is an aversive procedure for most clients.
Once it has been completed, however, a client’s ability
to pursue other topics is restored. Second, it is crucial
that therapists use punishment with great care, in low
doses, and very briefly, and that a positive interpersonal
atmosphere be restored following any client improvement.
Third, punishment should be just strong enough
to work. Although the ultimate punishment is termination
of therapy, a preferable fallback strategy is putting
clients on “vacations from therapy.” This approach is
considered when all other contingencies have failed, or
when a situation is so serious that a therapist’s therapeutic
or personal limits have been crossed. When utilizing
this strategy, the therapist clearly identifies what
behaviors must be changed and clarifies that once the
conditions have been met, the client can return. The
therapist maintains intermittent contact by phone or
letter, and provides a referral or backup while the client
is on vacation. (In colloquial terms, the therapist kicks
the client out, then pines for his/her return.)

Observing limits constitutes a special case of contingency
management involving the application of
problem-solving strategies to client behaviors that
threaten or cross a therapist’s personal limits. Such
behaviors interfere with the therapist’s ability or willingness
to conduct the therapy. Therapists must take
responsibility for monitoring their own personal limits

and for clearly communicating them to clients. Therapists
who do not do this eventually burn out, terminate
therapy, or otherwise harm their clients. DBT favors
natural over arbitrary limits. Thus, limits vary among
therapists, over time and over circumstances. Limits
should also be presented as for the good of the therapist,
not for the good of the client. What the client argues
is in his/her best interests may not ultimately be
good for the therapists.

Cognitive Modification

The fundamental message given to clients in DBT is
that cognitive distortions are just as likely to be caused
by emotional arousal as to be the cause of the arousal
in the first place. The overall message is that, for the
most part, the source of a client’s distress is extremely
stressful life events rather than a distortion of benign
events. Cognitive restructuring procedures, such as
those advocated by Beck, Brown, Berchick, Stewart,
and Steer (1990) and Ellis (1973), are used and taught
in DBT, although they do not hold a dominant place. In
contrast, contingency clarification strategies described
earlier are used relentlessly, highlighting contingent relationships
operating in the here and now.

Exposure

All of the change procedures in DBT can be reconceptualized
as exposure strategies. The principles of exposure
used in DBT have been developed for anxiety
disorders (see Foa & Kozak, 1986) and expanded in
DBT to address all problematic emotions. These strategies
work by reconditioning dysfunctional associations
that develop between stimuli (e.g., an aversive stimulus,
hospitalization, may become associated with a positive
stimulus, being nurtured; a client may later work to
be hospitalized) or between a response and a stimulus
(e.g., an adaptive response, expression of emotions, is
met with an aversive consequence, rejection by a loved
one; a client may work to suppress emotions). As noted
earlier, the DBT therapist conducts a chain analysis of
the eliciting cue, the problem behavior (including emotions),
and the consequences of the behavior. Working
within a behavior therapy framework, the therapist
operates according to three guidelines for exposure in
DBT: (1) Exposure to the cue that precedes the problem
behavior must be nonreinforced (e.g., if a client is fearful
that discussing suicidal behavior will lead to his/her
being rejected, the therapist must not reinforce the cli



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

ent’s shame by ostracizing him/her); (2) dysfunctional
responses are blocked in the order of the primary and
secondary targets of treatment (e.g., suicidal or NSSI
behavior related to shame is blocked by getting the client’s
cooperation in throwing away hoarded medications);
and (3) actions opposite to the dysfunctional behavior
are reinforced (e.g., the therapist reinforces the
client for talking about painful, shame-related suicidal
behavior).

Formal and informal exposure procedures involve
first orienting the client to the techniques and to the
fact that exposure to cues is often experienced as painful
or frightening. Thus, the therapist does not remove
the cue to emotional arousal, and at the same time he/
she blocks both the action tendencies (including escape
responses) and the expressive tendencies associated
with the problem emotion. In addition, a crucial step of
exposure procedures is teaching the client some means
of titrating or ending exposure when emotions become
unendurable. The therapist and client collaborate in developing
positive, adaptive ways for the client to end
exposure voluntarily, preferably after some reduction in
the problem emotion has occurred.

Stylistic Strategies

DBT balances two quite different styles of communication
that refer to how the therapist executes other treatment
strategies. The first, reciprocal communication, is
similar to the communication style advocated in CCT.
The second, irreverent communication, is quite similar
to the style advocated by Whitaker (1975) in his writings
on strategic therapy. Reciprocal communication
strategies are designed to reduce a perceived power
differential by making the therapist more vulnerable to
the client. In addition, they serve as a model for appropriate
but equal interactions within an important
interpersonal relationship. Irreverent communication is
usually riskier than reciprocity. However, it can facilitate
problem solving or produce a breakthrough after
long periods when progress has seemed thwarted. To
be used effectively, irreverent communication must balance
reciprocal communication, and the two must be
woven into a single stylistic fabric. Without such balancing,
neither strategy represents DBT.

Reciprocal Communication

Responsiveness, self-disclosure, warm engagement,
and genuineness are the basic guidelines of reciprocal

communication. Responsiveness requires attending to
the client in a mindful (attentive) manner and taking
the client’s agenda and wishes seriously. However, this
does not mean that the therapist gives priority to the
client’s agenda over the treatment hierarchy. It refers to
the therapist validating the importance of the client’s
agenda openly. It is a friendly, affectionate style reflecting
warmth and engagement in the therapeutic interaction.
Self-involving self-disclosure is the therapist’s
immediate, personal reactions to the client and his/her
behavior. This strategy is used frequently throughout
DBT. For example, a therapist whose client complained
about his coolness said, “When you demand warmth
from me, it pushes me away and makes it harder to be
warm.” Similarly, when a client repeatedly failed to fill
out diary cards but nevertheless pleaded with her therapist
to help her, the therapist responded, “You keep asking
me for help, but you won’t do the things I believe
are necessary to help you. I feel frustrated because I
want to help you, but I feel that you won’t let me.” Such
statements serve both to validate and to challenge. They
constitute both an instance of contingency management
because therapist statements about the client are typically
experienced as either reinforcing or punishing,
and an instance of contingency clarification because
the client’s attention is directed to the consequences of
his/her interpersonal behavior.

Self-disclosure of professional or personal information
is used to validate and model coping and normative
responses. The key point here is that a therapist should
only use personal examples in which he/she has successfully
mastered the problem at hand. This may seem
like an obvious point, but it is very easy to fall into this
pit by trying actively to validate the client’s dilemma.
For example, when working with a client whose goal is
to wake up early each morning to exercise, but who is
having difficulty getting out of bed, the therapist may
attempt to validate the behavior as normative by stating,
“Yeah, I struggle with getting up every morning, too,
even though I tell myself every night that I am going to
exercise in the morning.” However, this self-disclosure
is only useful to the client if the therapist continues by
stating what skillful behavior he/she uses to get up each
morning and exercise successfully.

Irreverent Communication

Irreverent communication is used to push the client
“off balance,” get the client’s attention, present an alternative
viewpoint, or shift affective response. It is a


Borderline Personality Disorder

highly useful strategy when the client is immovable, or
when therapist and client are “stuck.” It has an “offbeat”
flavor and uses logic to weave a web the client
cannot escape. Although it is responsive to the client,
irreverent communication is almost never the response
the client expects. For irreverence to be effective it must
be both genuine (vs. sarcastic or judgmental) and come
from a place of compassion and warmth toward the client.
Otherwise, the client may become even more rigid.
When using irreverence the therapist highlights some
unintended aspect of the client’s communication or “reframes”
it in an unorthodox manner. For example, if
the client says, “I am going to kill myself,” the therapist
might say, “I thought you agreed not to drop out of therapy.”
Irreverent communication has a matter-of-fact, almost
deadpan style that is in sharp contrast to the warm
responsiveness of reciprocal communication. Humor, a
certain naiveté, and guilelessness are also characteristic
of the style. A confrontational tone is also irreverent,
communicating “bullshit” to responses other than the
targeted adaptive response. For example, the therapist
might say, “Are you out of your mind?” or “You weren’t
for a minute actually believing I would think that was
a good idea, were you?” The irreverent therapist also
calls the client’s bluff. For the client who says, “I’m
quitting therapy,” the therapist might respond, “Would
you like a referral?” The trick here is to time the bluff
carefully, with the simultaneous provision of a safety
net; it is important to leave the client a way out.

case stuDy

Background

At the initial meeting, “Cindy,” a 30-year-old, white,
married woman with no children, was living in a
middle-class suburban area with her husband. She had
a college education and had successfully completed almost
2 years of medical school. Cindy was referred to
one of us (M. M. L.) by her psychiatrist of 1½ years,
who was no longer willing to provide more than pharmacotherapy
following a recent hospitalization for a
near-lethal suicide attempt. In the 2 years prior to referral,
Cindy had been hospitalized at least 10 times (once
for 6 months) for psychiatric treatment of suicidal ideation;
had engaged in numerous instances of both NSSI
behavior and suicide attempts, including at least 10 instances
of drinking Clorox bleach, multiple deep cuts,
and burns; and had had three medically severe or near


ly lethal suicide attempts, including cutting an artery in
her neck. At the time of referral, Cindy met DSM-III-R
(American Psychiatric Association, 1987) and Gunderson’s
(1984) criteria for BPD. She was also taking a variety
of psychotropic drugs. Until age 27, Cindy was
able to function well in work and school settings, and
the marriage was reasonably satisfactory to both partners,
although her husband complained about Cindy’s
excessive anger. When Cindy was in the second year
of medical school, a classmate she knew only slightly
committed suicide. Cindy stated that when she heard
about the suicide, she immediately decided to kill herself
also, but had very little insight into what about the
situation actually elicited her inclination to kill herself.
Within weeks she left medical school and became severely
depressed and actively suicidal. Although Cindy
self-presented as a person with few psychological
problems before the classmate’s suicide, further questioning
revealed a history of severe anorexia nervosa,
bulimia nervosa, and alcohol and prescription medication
abuse, originating at the age of 14 years. Indeed,
she had met her husband at an Alcoholics Anonymous
(AA) meeting while attending college. Nevertheless,
until the student’s suicide in medical school, Cindy had
been successful at maintaining an overall appearance
of relative competence.

Treatment

At the initial meeting, Cindy was accompanied by her
husband, who stated that he and Cindy’s family considered
his wife too lethally suicidal to be out of a hospital
setting. Consequently, he and Cindy’s family were seriously
contemplating the viability of finding long-term
outpatient care. However, Cindy stated a strong preference
for inpatient treatment, although no therapist in
the local area other than M. M. L. appeared willing to
take her into outpatient treatment. The therapist agreed
to accept Cindy into therapy, contingent on the client’s
stated commitment to work toward behavioral change
and to stay in treatment for at least 1 year. (It was later
pointed out repeatedly that this also meant the client
had agreed not to commit suicide.) Thus, the therapist
began the crucial first step of establishing a strong
therapeutic alliance by agreeing to accept the client despite
the fact that no one else was willing to do so. She
pointed out, however, that acceptance into therapy did
not come without a cost. In this manner, the therapist
communicated acceptance of the client exactly as she
was in the current moment, while concomitantly mak



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

ing clear that Cindy’s commitment toward change was
the foundation of the therapeutic alliance. At the fourth
therapy session, Cindy reported that she felt she could
no longer keep herself alive. When reminded of her previous
commitment to stay alive for 1 year of therapy,
Cindy replied that things had changed and she could
not help herself. Subsequent to this session, almost
every individual session for the next 6 months revolved
around the topic of whether (and how) to stay alive
versus committing suicide. Cindy began coming to sessions
wearing mirrored sunglasses and would slump in
her chair or ask to sit on the floor. Questions from the
therapist were often met with a minimal comment or
long silences. In response to the therapist’s attempts to
discuss prior self-injurious behavior, Cindy would become
angry and withdraw (slowing down the pace of
therapy considerably). The client also presented with
marked dissociative reactions, which would often occur
during therapy sessions. During these reactions, Cindy
would appear unable to concentrate or hear much of
what was being said. When queried by the therapist,
Cindy would describe her experience as feeling “spacey”
and distant. The client stated that she felt she could
no longer engage in many activities, such as driving,
working, or attending school. Overall, the client viewed
herself as incompetent in all areas.

The use of diary cards, which Cindy filled out weekly
(or at the beginning of the session, if she forgot),
assisted the therapist in carefully monitoring Cindy’s
daily experiences of suicidal ideation, misery, and
urges to harm herself, as well as actual suicide attempts
and NSSI behaviors. Behavioral analyses that attempted
to identify the sequence of events leading up to and
following Cindy’s suicidal behavior soon became an
important focus of therapy. At every point the therapist
conceptualized self-injurious behavior as to be expected,
given the strength of the urge (but considered
it ultimately beatable), and pointed out repeatedly that
if the client committed suicide, therapy would be over,
so they had better work really hard now, while Cindy
was alive.

Over the course of several months, the behavioral
analyses began to identify a frequently recurring behavioral
pattern that preceded suicidal behaviors. For
Cindy, the chain of events would often begin with an
interpersonal encounter (almost always with her husband),
which culminated in her feeling threatened,
criticized, or unloved. These feelings were often followed
by urges either to self-mutilate or to kill herself,
depending somewhat on the covarying levels of hope


lessness, anger, and sadness. Decisions to self-mutilate
and/or to attempt suicide were often accompanied by
the thought, “I’ll show you.” At other times, hopelessness
and a desire to end the pain permanently seemed
predominant. Both are examples of emotional vulnerability.
Following the conscious decision to self-mutilate
or to attempt suicide, Cindy would then immediately
dissociate and at some later point cut or burn herself,
usually while in a state of “automatic pilot.” Consequently,
Cindy often had difficulty remembering specifics
of the actual acts. At one point, Cindy burned her
leg so badly (and then injected it with dirt to convince
the doctor that he should give her more attention) that
reconstructive surgery was required. Behavioral analyses
also revealed that dissociation during sessions usually
occurred following Cindy’s perception of the therapist’s
disapproval or invalidation, especially when the
therapist appeared to suggest that change was possible.
The therapist targeted in-session dissociation by immediately
addressing it as it occurred.

By several months into therapy, an apparently longstanding
pattern of suicidal behaviors leading to inpatient
admission was apparent. Cindy would report intense
suicidal ideation, express doubts that she could
resist the urge to kill herself, and request admission to
her preferred hospital; or, without warning, she would
cut or burn herself severely and require hospitalization
for medical treatment. Attempts to induce Cindy
to stay out of the hospital or to leave the hospital before
she was ready typically resulted in an escalation of
suicidality, followed by her pharmacotherapist’s (a psychiatrist)
insistence on her admission or the hospital’s
agreement to extend her stay. Observation of this behavioral
pattern led the therapist to hypothesize that the
hospitalization itself was reinforcing suicidal behavior;
consequently, she attempted to change the contingencies
for suicidal behaviors. Using didactic and contingency
clarification strategies, the therapist attempted
to help Cindy understand how hospitalization might
be strengthening the very behavior they were working
to eliminate. This issue became a focal point of disagreement
within the therapy, with Cindy viewing the
therapist’s position as unsympathetic and lacking understanding
of her phenomenal experience. In Cindy’s
opinion, the intensity of her emotional pain rendered
the probability of suicide so high that hospitalization
was necessary to guarantee her safety. She would buttress
her position by citing frequently her difficulties
with dissociative reactions, which she reported as extremely
aversive and which, in her opinion, made her


Borderline Personality Disorder

unable to function much of the time. From the therapist’s
perspective, the deleterious long-term risk of suicide
created by repeated hospitalization in response to
suicidal behavior was greater than the short-term risk
of suicide if hospitalization stays were reduced. These
differences in opinion led to frequent disagreements
within sessions. It gradually became clear that Cindy
viewed any explanations of her behavior as influenced
by reinforcement as a direct attack; she implied that
if hospitalization was reinforcing her suicidal behavior,
then the therapist must believe that the purpose
of her suicidality was for admission into the hospital.
This was obviously not the case (at least some of the
time), but all attempts to explain reinforcement theory
in any other terms failed. The therapist compensated
somewhat for insisting on the possibility that she (the
therapist) was correct by doing three things. First, she
repeatedly validated the client’s experience of almost
unendurable pain. Second, she made certain to address
the client’s dissociative behavior repeatedly, explaining
it as an automatic reaction to intensely painful affect
(or the threat of it). Third, she frequently addressed
the quality of the relationship between Cindy and herself
to strengthen the relationship and maintain Cindy
in therapy, even though to do so was a source of even
more emotional pain. By the fifth month, the therapist
became concerned that the current treatment regimen
was going to have the unintended consequence of killing
the client (via suicide). At this point, the therapist’s
limits for effective treatment were crossed; therefore,
she decided to employ the consultation-to-the-client
strategy to address Cindy’s hospitalizations. The firstchoice
strategy would have been to get Cindy to negotiate
a new treatment plan with her preferred hospital
and admitting psychiatrist. Cindy refused to go along,
however, because she disagreed with the wisdom of
changing her current unlimited access to the inpatient
unit. The therapist was able to get Cindy to agree to
a consultation meeting with all of her treatment providers,
and, with some tenacity, the therapist actually
got Cindy to make all the calls to set up the meeting
(including inviting her insurance monitor, who was coordinating
payment for treatment).

At the case conference, the therapist presented her
hypothesis that contingent hospitalization was reinforcing
Cindy’s suicidal behavior. She also assisted Cindy
in making the case that she (the therapist) was wrong.
Using reciprocal communication and contingency
management, the therapist stated that she simply could
not conduct a therapy she thought might kill the client

(and she had to go along with what she thought was
best even if she were wrong—“to do otherwise would
be unethical”), and she requested that a new system of
contingencies be agreed upon to disrupt the functional
relationship between Cindy’s suicidal behavior and hospitalization.
Therefore, a plan was developed wherein
the client was not required to be suicidal to gain hospital
admittance. Under this new set of contingencies,
Cindy could elect, at will, to enter the hospital for a
stay of up to 3 days, at the end of which time she would
always be discharged. If she convinced people that she
was too suicidal for discharge, she would be transferred
to her least-preferred hospital for safety. Suicidal and
NSSI behaviors would no longer be grounds for admission
except to a medical unit, when required. Although
there was some disagreement as to the functional relationship
between suicidal behavior and hospitalization,
this system was agreed upon. Following this meeting,
Cindy’s husband announced that he was no longer able
to live with or tolerate his wife’s suicidal behavior, and
that the constant threat of finding her dead had led to
his decision to file for divorce. The focus of therapy
then shifted to helping Cindy grieve over this event and
find a suitable living arrangement. Cindy alternated between
fury that her husband would desert her in her
hour of need (or “illness,” as she put it) and despair that
she could ever cope alone. She decided that “getting
her feelings out” was the only useful therapy. This led
to many tearful sessions, with the therapist simultaneously
validating the pain; focusing on Cindy’s experiencing
the affect in the moment, without escalating or
blocking it; and cheerleading Cindy’s ability to manage
without going back into the hospital. Due to Cindy’s
high level of dysfunctionality, she and her therapist decided
that she would enter a residential treatment facility
for a 3-month period. The facility had a coping skills
orientation and provided group but not individual therapy.
Cindy saw her therapist once a week and talked to
her several times a week during this period. With some
coaching, Cindy looked for and found a roommate to
live with and returned to her own home at the end of 3
months (the ninth month of therapy). Over the course
of treatment, the therapist used a number of strategies
to treat Cindy’s suicidal, NSSI, and therapy-interfering
behaviors. In-depth behavioral chain and solution
analysis helped the therapist (and sometimes the client)
gain insight into the factors influencing current suicidal
behavior. For Cindy, as for most clients, performing
these analyses was quite difficult because the process
usually generated intense feelings of shame, guilt, or


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

anger. Thus, behavioral analysis also functioned as an
exposure strategy, encouraging the client to observe
and experience painful affect. It additionally served as
a cognitive strategy in helping to change Cindy’s expectancies
concerning the advantages and disadvantages
of suicidal behavior, especially as the therapist repeatedly
made statements such as “How do you think you
would feel if I got angry at you and then threatened suicide
if you didn’t change?” Finally, behavioral analysis
served as contingency management, in that the client’s
ability to pursue topics of interest in therapy sessions
was made contingent on the successful completion of
chain and solution analysis.

Cindy presented early in therapy with exceedingly
strong perceptions as to her needs and desires, and with
a concomitant willingness to engage in extremely lethal
suicidal behavior. As previously mentioned, several of
these acts were serious attempts to end her life, whereas
others functioned as attempts to gain attention and care
from significant others. This client also presented with
an extreme sensitivity to any attempts at obvious change
procedures, which she typically interpreted as communicating
a message about her incompetence and unworthiness.
Although Cindy initially committed herself to
attending weekly group skills training for the first year
of therapy, her attendance at group meetings was quite
erratic, and she generally tended either to miss entire
sessions (but never more than three in a row) or to leave
during the break. Cindy answered the therapist’s attempts
to address this issue by stating that she could
not drive at night due to night blindness. Although considered
a therapy-interfering behavior and frequently
addressed over the course of therapy, missing skills
training was not a major focus of treatment due to the
continuing presence of higher-priority suicidal behavior.
The therapist’s efforts to engage the client in active
skills acquisition during individual therapy sessions
were also somewhat limited and were always preceded
by obtaining Cindy’s verbal commitment to problem
solving. The stylistic strategy of irreverent communication
was of value to the therapeutic process. The therapist’s
irreverence often served to “shake up” the client,
resulting in a loosening of dichotomous thinking and
maladaptive cognitions. The result of this was Cindy’s
increased willingness to explore new and adaptive behavioral
solutions. Finally, relationship strategies were
heavily employed as tools to strengthen the therapeutic
alliance and to keep it noncontingent on suicidal and/
or dissociative behaviors. Included here were betweensession
therapist-initiated telephone calls to check in,

the therapist routinely giving out phone numbers when
she was traveling, and sending the client postcards
when she was out of town.

By the 12th month of therapy, Cindy’s suicidal and
self-injurious behavior, as well as urges to engage in
such behavior, receded. In addition, her hospital stays
were reduced markedly, with none occurring after the
eighth month. While living at home with a roommate,
Cindy was readmitted to medical school. Part of the reason
for returning to school was to turn her life around,
so that she could try to regain her husband’s love and attention,
or at least his friendship. As the therapy continued
to focus on changing the contingencies of suicidal
behavior, reducing both emotional pain and inhibition,
and tolerating distress, a further focus on maintaining
sobriety and reasonable food intake was added. During
the first months of living in her home without her husband,
Cindy had several alcoholic binges, and her food
intake dropped precipitously. These behaviors became
immediate targets. The therapist’s strong attention to
these behaviors also communicated to Cindy that the
therapist would take her problems seriously even if she
were not suicidal. Therapy focused as well on expanding
her social network. As with suicidal behaviors, attention
to these targets served as a pathway to treating
associated problems. As crisis situations decreased
in frequency, greater attention was paid to analyzing
family patterns, including experiences of neglect and
invalidation, that might have led to Cindy’s problems
in later life. Cindy did not report a history of sexual or
physical abuse. Thus, the explicit goal of Stage 2 was
to understand Cindy’s history and its relationship to her
current problems.

In other cases, especially when there has been sexual
and/or physical abuse in childhood, movement to Stage
2 before Stage 1 targets have been mastered is likely
to result in retrogression to previously problematic behaviors.
For example, Terry, another client treated by
the same therapist (M. M. L.), had been quite seriously
abused physically by her mother throughout childhood
and sexually abused by her father, beginning at age 5.
The sexual advances were nonviolent at first but became
physically abusive at approximately age 12. Prior
to this therapy, Terry had not disclosed the incidents of
abuse to anyone.

After successful negotiation of Stage 1 targets, the
therapist proceeded to expose Terry to trauma-related
cues by simply having her begin to disclose details of
the abuse. These exposure sessions were intertwined
with work on current problems in Terry’s life. Follow



Borderline Personality Disorder

ing one exposure session focused on the sexual abuse,
Terry reverted to some of her previously problematic
behaviors, evidenced by withdrawal and silence in
sessions, suicidal ideation, and medication noncompliance.
The appearance of such behavior marked the
necessity of stopping Stage 2 discussions of previous
sexual abuse to address Stage 1 targets recursively.
Three sessions were devoted to a behavioral analysis
of Terry’s current suicidal, therapy-interfering, and
quality-of-life–interfering behaviors; these were eventually
linked both to fears about how the therapist would
view her childhood emotional responses to her father,
and to holiday visits with her father that precipitated
conflicts over how Terry should be feeling about him in
the present. This two-steps-forward, one-step-back approach
is common to therapy for clients with BPD, and
in particular may mark the transition between Stage 1
and Stage 2.

As previously mentioned, Stage 3 targets the client’s
self-respect, regardless of the opinions of others. Betty,
who was also in treatment with the same therapist (M.

M. L.), had successfully negotiated Stages 1 and 2, and
had become a highly competent nurse with training
and supervisory responsibilities. Therapy with Betty
was then focused on maintaining her self-esteem in the
face of very powerful significant others (e.g., her supervisor)
who constantly invalidated her. Components of
the treatment included the therapist’s noting and highlighting
Betty’s tendency to modify her self-opinion in
accordance with that of others, persistent attempts to
extract from Betty self-validation and self-soothing,
and imagery exercises wherein Betty imagined and
verbalized herself standing up to powerful others.
Much of the therapy focus was on Betty’s interpersonal
behavior within the therapy session, with attention to
relating this behavior to her interactions with other important
people. Thus, treatment at that point was very
similar to the functional-analytic psychotherapy regimen
developed by Kohlenberg and Tsai (1991). Overall,
this third stage of therapy involved the movement to a
more egalitarian relationship between the client and the
therapist, in which emphasis was placed on the client’s
standing up for her own opinions and defending her
own actions. This approach required that the therapist
both reinforce the client’s assertions, and step back and
refrain from validating and nurturing the client in the
manner characteristic of Stages 1 and 2. In addition,
therapy sessions were reduced to every other week, and
issues surrounding eventual termination were periodically
discussed.
Stage 4 of DBT targets the sense of incompleteness
that can preclude the experience of joy and freedom.
Sally started Stage 1 treatment with the same therapist

(M. M. L.) 15 years ago. Stage 1 lasted 2 years; this was
followed by a break of 1 year, after which treatment
resumed for several years of bimonthly sessions leading
to monthly sessions, and currently comprising four
or five sessions a year. Sally has been married for 30
years to an irregularly employed husband who, though
devoted and loyal, is quite invalidating of her. Although
apparently brilliant, he is usually dismissed from jobs
for his interpersonal insensitivity. She has been employed
full-time at the same place for years, working
with children. The son Sally felt closest to died in a
plane accident 2 years ago; her mother died last year,
and her father is very ill. Despite having a stable marriage,
working in a stable and quite fulfilling job, having
raised two well-adjusted sons, and still being athletic,
life feels meaningless to Sally. In the past she was
very active in spiritual activities; following meditation
retreats or extended periods of daily meditation, she
would report contentment and some sense of joy. Since
her son died, Sally has let go of most of her spiritual
activities. Following a 2-year focus on grieving, she is
now ready for Stage 4. Treatment planning is focused
on actively practicing and keeping track of progress in
radical acceptance (or “letting go of ego,” in Zen terminology),
either alone or with group support.
traNscriPts

The following (composite) transcripts represent actual
examples of the process of therapy occurring over several
sessions with different clients. These particular dialogues
between therapist and client have been chosen
to provide the reader with comprehensive examples of
the application of a wide range of DBT treatment strategies.
The session targets in the following transcript
were orienting and commitment. The strategies used
were validation, problem solving (insight, orienting,
and commitment), dialectical (devil’s advocate), and
integrated (relationship enhancement).

Obtaining the client’s commitment is a crucial first
step in beginning therapy with clients who have BPD.
As illustrated in the following transcript, the dialectical
technique of devil’s advocate can be highly effective
when used as a commitment strategy. In this first therapy
session, the therapist’s ultimate goal was to obtain
the client’s commitment to therapy, as well as a com



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

mitment to eliminate suicidal behavior. She began by
orienting the client to the purpose of this initial session.

tHeraPist: So are you a little nervous about me?
client: Yeah, I guess I am.
tHeraPist: Well, that’s understandable. For the next

50 minutes or so, we have this opportunity to get to
know each other and see if we want to work together.
So what I’d like to do is talk a little bit about the
program and how you got here. So tell me, what do
you want out of therapy with me, and what are you
doing here?

client: I want to get better.

tHeraPist: Well, what’s wrong with you?

client: I’m a mess. (Laughs.)

tHeraPist: How so?

client: Umm, I don’t know. I just can’t even cope with

everyday life right now. And I can’t even .. . I’m just a
mess. I don’t know how to deal with anything.

tHeraPist: So what does that mean exactly?

client: Umm, well, everything I try these days just
seems overwhelming. I couldn’t keep up on my job,
and now I’m on medical leave. Plus everyone’s sick
of me being in the hospital so much. And I think my
psychiatrist wants to send me away because of all my
self-harming.

tHeraPist: How often do you self-harm?

client: Maybe once or twice a month. I use my lighter

or cigarettes, sometimes a razor blade.

tHeraPist: Do you have scars all over?

client: (Nods yes.)

tHeraPist: Your psychiatrist tells me you’ve also

drunk Clorox. Why didn’t you mention that?

client: I guess it didn’t enter my mind.

tHeraPist: Do things just not enter your mind very

often?

client: I don’t really know. Maybe.

tHeraPist: So maybe with you I’m going to have to be

a very good guesser.

client: Hmm.

tHeraPist: Unfortunately, though, I’m not the greatest
guesser. So we’ll have to teach you how to have
things come to mind. So what is it exactly that you
want out of therapy with me? To quit harming yourself,
quit trying to kill yourself, or both?

client: Both. I’m sick of it.

tHeraPist: And is there anything else you want help
with?

client: Um, well, I don’t know how to handle money,
and I don’t know how to handle relationships. I don’t
have friends; they don’t connect with me very often.
I’m a former alcoholic and a recovering anorexic/bulimic.
I still have a tendency toward that.

tHeraPist: Do you think maybe some of what is going
on with you is that you’ve replaced your alcoholic
and anorexic behaviors with self-harm behaviors?

client: I don’t know. I haven’t thought about it that
way. I just feel that I don’t know how to handle
myself, and—you know, and I guess work through
stuff, and that is obviously getting to me because if it
wasn’t, I wouldn’t be trying to kill myself.

tHeraPist: So from your perspective, one problem is
that you don’t know how to do things. A lot of things.

client: Yeah, and a lot of it is, I do know how, but for
some reason I don’t do it anyway.

tHeraPist: Um hmm.

client: You know, I mean I know I need to save
money, and I know that I need to budget myself, and
I do every single month, but every single month I get
in debt. But, um, you know, it’s really hard for me.
You know, it’s like sometimes I know it, or I know I
shouldn’t eat something and I do it anyway.

tHeraPist: So it sounds like part of the problem is you
actually know how to do things; you just don’t know
how to get yourself to do the things you know how
to do.

client: Exactly.

tHeraPist: Does it seem like maybe your emotions are
in control—that you are a person who does things
when you’re in the mood?

client: Yes. Everything’s done by the mood.

tHeraPist: So you’re a moody person.

client: Yes. I won’t clean the house for 2 months, and
then I’ll get in the mood to clean. Then I’ll clean it
immaculately and keep it that way for 3 weeks—I
mean, just immaculate—and then when I’m in the
mood I go back to being a mess again.

tHeraPist: So one of the tasks for you and me would
be to figure out a way to get your behavior and what
you do less hooked up with how you feel?

client: Right.


Borderline Personality Disorder

The therapist used insight to highlight for the client
the observed interrelationship between the client’s
emotions and her behavior. She then began the process
of shaping a commitment through the dialectical strategy
of devil’s advocate.

tHeraPist: That, of course, is going to be hell to do,
don’t you think? Why would you want to do that? It
sounds so painful.

client: Well, I want to do it because it’s so inconsistent.
It’s worse, you know, because when I’m .. . I
know that, like with budgeting money or whatever,
I know I need to do it, and then when I don’t do it, it
makes me even more upset.

tHeraPist: Why would you ever want to do something
you’re not in the mood for?

client: Because I’ve got to. Because I can’t survive
that way if I don’t.

tHeraPist: Sounds like a pretty easy life to me.

client: Yeah, but I can’t afford to live if I just spend
my money on fun and stupid, frivolous things that

I ...
tHeraPist: Well, I guess maybe you should have some
limits and not be too off the wall, but in general, I
mean, why clean the house if you’re not in the mood?

client: Because it pisses me off when it’s a mess. And
I can’t find things, like I’ve lost bills before and then I
end up not paying them. And now I’ve got collection
agencies on my back. I can’t deal with all this, and I
end up self-harming and going into the hospital. And
then I just want to end it all. But it still doesn’t seem
to matter because if I’m not in the mood to clean it,
I won’t.

tHeraPist: So the fact that it makes horrible things
happen in your life so far hasn’t been enough of a
motivation to get you to do things against your
mood, right?

client: Well, obviously not (laughs) because it’s not
happening.

tHeraPist: Doesn’t that tell you, though? This is going
to be a big problem, don’t you think? This isn’t going
to be something simple. It’s not like you’re going
to walk in here and I’m going to say, “OK, magic
wand,” and then all of a sudden you’re going to want
to do things that you’re not in the mood for.

client: Yeah.

tHeraPist: Yeah, so it seems to me that if you’re not

in the mood for things, if you’re kind of mooddependent,
that’s a very tough thing to crack. As a
matter of fact, I think it’s one of the hardest problems
there is to deal with.

client: Yeah, great.

tHeraPist: I think we could deal with it, but I think it’s
going to be hell. The real question is whether you’re
willing to go through hell to get where you want to
get or not. Now I figure that’s the question.

client: Well, if it’s going to make me happier, yeah.

tHeraPist: Are you sure?

client: Yeah, I’ve been going through this since I was
11 years old. I’m sick of this shit. I mean, excuse my
language, but I really am, and I’m backed up against
the wall. Either I need to do this or I need to die.
Those are my two choices.

tHeraPist: Well, why not die?

client: Well, if it comes down to it, I will.

tHeraPist: Um hmm, but why not now?

client: Because, this is my last hope. Because if I’ve
got one last hope left, why not take it?

tHeraPist: So, in other words, all things being equal,
you’d rather live than die, if you can pull this off.

client: If I can pull it off, yeah.

tHeraPist: OK, that’s good; that’s going to be your
strength. We’re going to play to that. You’re going to
have to remember that when it gets tough. But now
I want to tell you about this program and how I feel
about you harming yourself, and then we’ll see if you
still want to do this.

As illustrated by the foregoing segment, the therapist’s
relentless use of the devil’s advocate strategy successfully
“got a foot in the door” and achieved an initial
client commitment. The therapist then “upped the ante”
with a brief explanation of the program and its goals.

tHeraPist: Now the most important thing to understand
is that we are not a suicide prevention program;
that’s not our job. But we are a life enhancement program.
The way we look at it, living a miserable life
is no achievement. If we decide to work together, I’m
going to help you try to improve your life, so that it’s
so good that you don’t want to die or hurt yourself.
You should also know that I look at suicidal behavior,
including drinking Clorox, as problem-solving behavior.
I think of alcoholism the same way. The only


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

difference is that cutting, burning, unfortunately—it
works. If it didn’t work, nobody would do it more
than once. But it only works in the short term, not the
long term. So to quit cutting, trying to hurt yourself,
is going to be exactly like quitting alcohol. Do you
think this is going to be hard?

client: Stopping drinking wasn’t all that hard.

tHeraPist: Well, in my experience, giving up selfharm
behavior is usually very hard. It will require
both of us working, but you will have to work harder.
And like I told you when we talked briefly, if you
commit to this, it’s for 1 year—individual therapy
with me once a week, and group skills training once
a week. So the question is, are you willing to commit
for 1 year?

client: I said I’m sick of this stuff. That’s why I’m
here.

tHeraPist: So you’ve agreed to not drop out of therapy
for a year, right?

client: Right.

tHeraPist: And do you realize that if you don’t drop
out for a year, that really does, if you think about it,
rule out suicide for a year?

client: Logically, yeah.

tHeraPist: So we need to be absolutely clear about
this because this therapy won’t work if you knock
yourself off. The most fundamental mood-related
goal we have to work on is that, no matter what your
mood is, you won’t kill yourself or try to.

client: All right.

tHeraPist: So that’s what I see as number one
priority—not our only one but number one—that
we will work on that. And getting you to agree—
meaningfully, of course—and actually follow
through on staying alive and not harming yourself
and not attempting suicide, no matter what your
mood is. Now the question is whether you agree to
that.

client: Yes, I agree to that.

The therapist, having successfully obtained the client’s
commitment to work on suicidal behavior again
employed the strategy of devil’s advocate to reinforce
the strength of the commitment.

tHeraPist: Why would you agree to that?

client: I don’t know. (Laughs.)

tHeraPist: I mean, wouldn’t you rather be in a therapy
where, if you wanted to kill yourself, you could?
client: I don’t know. I mean, I never really thought
about it that way.

tHeraPist: Hmm.

client: I don’t want to .. . I want to be able to get to
the point where I could feel like I’m not being forced
into living.

tHeraPist: So are you agreeing with me because
you’re feeling forced into agreeing?
client: You keep asking me all these questions.

tHeraPist: What do you think?

client: I don’t know what I think right now, honestly.

A necessary and important skill for the DBT therapist
is the ability to sense when a client has been pushed
to his/her limits, as well as the concomitant skill of
being willing and able to step back and at least temporarily
refrain from further pressuring the client. In
these instances, continued pressure from the therapist
is likely to boomerang and have the opposite effect of
what the therapist intends. Here the therapist noticed
the client’s confusion and sensed that further pushing
was likely to result in the client’s reducing the strength
of her commitment. Consequently, the therapist stepped
back and moved in with validation.

tHeraPist: So you’re feeling pushed up against the
wall a little bit, by me?
client: No, not really. (Starts to cry.)

tHeraPist: What just happened just now?

client: (pause) I don’t know. I mean, I don’t think I
really want to kill myself. I think I just feel like I
have to. I don’t think it’s really even a mood thing. I
just think it’s when I feel like there’s no other choice.
I just say, “Well, you know there’s no other choice,
so do it.” You know. And so right now, I don’t see
any ray of hope. I’m going to therapy, which I guess
is good. I mean, I know it’s good, but I don’t see anything
any better than it was the day I tried to kill
myself.

tHeraPist: Well, that’s probably true. Maybe it isn’t
any better. I mean, trying to kill yourself doesn’t
usually solve problems. Although it actually did do
one thing for you.

client: It got me in therapy.

tHeraPist: Yeah. So my asking you all these questions


Borderline Personality Disorder

makes you start to cry. You look like you must be
feeling pretty bad.
client: Just overwhelmed, I guess the word is.

tHeraPist: That’s part of the reason we’re having this
conversation, to try to structure our relationship so
that it’s very clear for both of us. And that way, at
least, we’ll cut down on how much you get overwhelmed
by not knowing what’s going on with me.
OK?

client: Um hmm.

tHeraPist: And so I just want to be clear on what our
number one goal is, and how hard this is because if
you want to back out, now’s the time. Because I’m
going to take you seriously if you say, “Yes, I want
to do it.”

client: I don’t want to back out.

tHeraPist: OK. Good. Now I just want to say that this
seems like a good idea right now. You’re in kind of
an energized mood today, getting started on a new
program. But in 5 hours, it might not seem like such
a good idea. It’s kind of like it’s easy to commit to
a diet after a big meal, but it’s much harder when
you’re hungry. But we’re going to work on how to
make it keep sounding like a good idea. It’ll be hell,
but I have confidence. I think we can be successful
working together.

Note how the therapist ended the session by preparing
the client for the difficulties she was likely to
experience in keeping her commitment and working
in therapy. Cheerleading and relationship enhancement
laid the foundation for a strong therapeutic alliance.
The following session occurred approximately 4
months into therapy. The session target was suicidal behavior.
The therapist used validation, problem solving
(contingency clarification, didactic information, behavioral
analysis, and solution analysis), stylistic (irreverent
communication), dialectical (metaphor, making
lemonade out of lemons), and skills training (distress
tolerance) strategies.

The therapist reviewed the client’s diary card and
noted a recent, intentional self-injury, in which the client
opened up a previously self-inflicted wound following
her physician’s refusal to provide pain medication.
The therapist began by proceeding with a behavioral
analysis.

tHeraPist: OK. Now you were in here last week telling
me you were never going to hurt yourself again

because this was so ridiculous, you couldn’t stand it,
you couldn’t hurt yourself any more. So let’s figure
out how that broke down on Sunday, so we can learn
something from it. OK. So when did you start having
urges to hurt yourself?

client: My foot began to hurt on Wednesday. I started
to have a lot of pain.

tHeraPist: It hadn’t hurt before that?

client: No.

tHeraPist: So the nerves were dead before that or
something, huh? So you started having a lot of pain.
Now when did you start having the pain, and when
did the urge to harm yourself come?

client: At the same time.

tHeraPist: They just come at the identical moment?

client: Just about.

The specification of an initial prompting environmental
event is always the first step in conducting a
behavioral chain analysis. Here the therapist began by
directly inquiring when the urges toward suicide and
NSSI began. Note also the therapist’s use of irreverent
communication early in the session.

tHeraPist: So how is it that feeling pain sets off an
urge to self-harm? Do you know how that goes? How
you get from one to the other?

client: I don’t know. Maybe it wasn’t until Thursday,
but I asked my nurse. I go, “Look, I’m in a lot of
pain, you know. I’m throwing up my food because
the pain is so bad.” And the nurse tried. She called
the doctor and told him I was in a lot of pain, and
asked if he’d give me some painkillers. But no! So I
kept asking, and the answer kept being no, and I got
madder and madder and madder. So I felt like I had
to show somebody that it hurt because they didn’t
believe me.

tHeraPist: So let’s figure this out. So is it that you’re
assuming that if someone believed it hurt as bad as
you said it does, they would actually give you the
painkillers?

client: Yes.

tHeraPist: OK. That’s where the faulty thinking is.
That’s the problem. You see, it’s entirely possible
that people know how bad the pain is but still aren’t
giving you medication.

client: I believe firmly, and I even wrote it in my


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

journal, that if I’d gotten pain medication when I really
needed it, I wouldn’t have even thought of selfharming.


The therapist proceeded by obtaining a description
of the events co-occurring with the onset of the problem.
It was not completely clear what about not getting
pain medication set off self-harm. In the following
segment, the therapist used the dialectical strategy
of metaphor to analyze what factors might have been
important. Notice that the example is presented as an
experiment in which different scenarios are given and
responses elicited.

tHeraPist: Now let me ask you something—you’ve
got to imagine this, OK? Let’s imagine that you and
I are on a raft together out in the middle of the ocean.
Our boat has sunk and we’re on the raft. And when
the boat sank, your leg got cut really badly. And together
we’ve wrapped it up as well as we can. But we
don’t have any pain medicine. And we’re on this raft
together and your leg really hurts, and you ask me
for pain medicine, and I say no. Do you think you
would then have an urge to hurt yourself and make
it worse?

client: No, it would be a different situation.

tHeraPist: OK, but if I did have the pain medication
and I said no because we had to save it, what do you
think?

client: If that were logical to me, I’d go along with it
and wouldn’t want to hurt myself.
tHeraPist: What if I said no because I didn’t want you
to be a drug addict?

client: I’d want to hurt myself.

tHeraPist: OK. So we’ve got this clear. The pain is not
what’s setting off the desire to self-harm. It’s someone
not giving you something to help, when you feel
they could if they wanted to.

client: Yes.

The therapist used contingency clarification to point
out the effects of others’ responses on the client’s own
behavior. In the following segment, the therapist again
employed contingency clarification in a continued effort
to highlight for the client the communication function
of NSSI.

tHeraPist: So, in other words, hurting yourself is
communication behavior, OK? So what we have to

do is figure out a way for the communication behavior
to quit working.

client: Why?

tHeraPist: Because you’re not going to stop doing it
until it quits working. It’s like trying to talk to someone;
if there’s no one in the room, you eventually quit
trying to talk to them. It’s like when a phone goes
dead, you quit talking.

client: I tried three nights in a row in a perfectly assertive
way and just clearly stated I was in a lot of
pain.

tHeraPist: You know, I think I’ll switch chairs with
you. You’re not hearing what I’m saying.

client: And they kept saying, “No,” and then some
little light came on in my head.

tHeraPist: I’m considering switching chairs with you.

client: And it was like, “Here, now can you tell that
it hurts a lot?”

tHeraPist: I’m thinking of switching chairs with you.

client: Why?

tHeraPist: Because if you were sitting over here, I
think you would see that no matter how bad the pain
is, hurting yourself to get pain medication is not a
reasonable response. The hospital staff may not have
been reasonable either. It may be that they should
have given you pain medicine. But we don’t have
to say they were wrong in order to say that hurting
yourself was not the appropriate response.

client: No, I don’t think it was the appropriate response.


tHeraPist: Good. So what we’ve got to do is figure
out a way to get it so that the response doesn’t come
in, even if you don’t get pain medicine. So far, it has
worked very effectively as communication. And the
only way to stop it is to get it to not work anymore.
Of course, it would be good to get other things to
work. What you’re arguing is “Well, OK, if I’m not
going to get it this way, then I should get it another
way.”

client: I tried this time!

tHeraPist: Yes, I know you did, I know you did.

client: A lady down the hallway from me was getting
treatment for her diabetes, and it got real bad, and
they gave her pain medication.

tHeraPist: Now we’re not on the same wavelength in
this conversation.


Borderline Personality Disorder

client: Yes, we are. What wavelength are you on?

tHeraPist: I’m on the wavelength that it may have
been reasonable for you to get pain medicine,
and I certainly understand your wanting it. But
I’m also saying that no matter what’s going on,
hurting yourself is something we don’t want to
happen. You’re functioning like if I agreed with
you that you should get pain medication, I would
think this was OK.

client: Hmm?

tHeraPist: You’re talking about whether they should
have given you pain medication or not. I’m not talking
about that. Even if they should have, we’ve got to
figure out how you could have gotten through without
hurting yourself.

As illustrated by the foregoing exchange, a client
with BPD often wants to remain focused on the crisis at
hand. This poses a formidable challenge for the therapist,
who must necessarily engage in a back-and-forth
dance between validating the client’s pain and pushing
for behavioral change. This segment also illustrates
how validation does not necessarily imply agreement.
Although the therapist validated the client’s perception
that the nurse’s refusal to provide pain medication
may have been unreasonable, she remained steadfast
in maintaining the inappropriateness of the client’s response.


client: I tried some of those distress tolerance things
and they didn’t work.

tHeraPist: OK. Don’t worry, we’ll figure out a way. I
want to know everything you tried. But first I want
to be sure I have the picture clear. Did the urges start
building after Wednesday and get worse over time?

client: Yeah. They started growing with the pain.

tHeraPist: With the pain. OK. But also they started
growing with their continued refusal to give you pain
medicine. So you were thinking that if you hurt yourself,
they would somehow give you pain medicine?

client: Yeah. ’Cause if they wouldn’t listen to me,
then I could show them.

tHeraPist: OK, so you were thinking, “If they won’t
listen to me, I’ll show them.” And when did that idea
first hit? Was that on Wednesday?

client: Yeah.

tHeraPist: OK. Well, we’ve got to figure out a way
for you to tolerate bad things without harming your


self. So let’s figure out all the things you tried, and
then we have to figure out some other things because
those didn’t work. So what was the first thing you
tried?

At this juncture the behavioral analysis remained
incomplete, and it would normally have been premature
to move to the stage of solution analysis. However,
in the therapist’s judgment, it was more critical at this
point to reinforce the client’s attempts at distress tolerance
by responding to the client’s communication that
she had attempted behavioral skills.

client: I thought that if I just continued to be assertive
about it that the appropriate measures would be
taken.

tHeraPist: OK, but that didn’t work. So why didn’t
you harm yourself right then?
client: I didn’t want to.

tHeraPist: Why didn’t you want to?

client: I didn’t want to make it worse.

tHeraPist: So you were thinking about pros and
cons—that if I make it worse, I’ll feel worse?

client: Yeah.

One aspect of DBT skills training stresses the usefulness
of evaluating the pros and cons of tolerating
distress as a crisis survival strategy. Here the therapist
employed the dialectical strategy of turning lemons
into lemonade by highlighting for the client how she
did, in fact, use behavioral skills. Note in the following
response how the therapist immediately reinforced the
client’s efforts with praise.

tHeraPist: That’s good thinking. That’s when you’re
thinking about the advantages and disadvantages of
doing it. OK, so at that point the advantages of making
it worse were outweighed by the disadvantages.
OK. So you keep up the good fight here. Now what
else did you try?

client: I tried talking about it with other clients.

tHeraPist: And what did they have to say?

client: They said I should get pain medication.

tHeraPist: Right. But did they say you should cut
yourself or hurt yourself if you didn’t get it?

client: No. And I tried to get my mind off my pain by
playing music and using mindfulness. I tried to read
and do crossword puzzles.


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

tHeraPist: Um hmm. Did you ever try radical acceptance?


client: What’s that?

tHeraPist: It’s where you sort of let go and accept the
fact that you’re not going to get the pain medication.
And you just give yourself up to that situation. You
just accept that it ain’t going to happen, that you’re
going to have to cope in some other way.

client: Which I did yesterday. I needed a little Ativan
to get me there, but I got there.

tHeraPist: Yesterday?

client: Yeah. I took a nap. When I woke up I basically
said, “Hey, they’re not going to change, so you’ve
just got to deal with this the best that you can.”

tHeraPist: And did that acceptance help some?

client: I’m still quite angry about what I believe is
discrimination against borderline personalities. I’m
still very angry about that.

tHeraPist: OK. That’s fine. Did it help, though, to ac


cept?

client: Um hmm.

tHeraPist: That’s good. That’s great. That’s a great
skill, a great thing to practice. When push comes
to shove, when you’re really at the limit, when it’s
the worst it can be, radical acceptance is the skill to
practice.

client: That’s AA.

During a solution analysis, it is often necessary that
the therapist facilitate the process by helping the client
“brainstorm,” or by making direct suggestions for
handling future crises. Here the therapist suggested a
solution that is also taught in the DBT skills training
module on distress tolerance. The notion of radical acceptance
stresses the idea that acceptance of one’s pain
is a necessary prerequisite for ending emotional suffering.


tHeraPist: OK. Now let’s go back to how you gave in
to the urge. Because you really managed to battle all
the way till then, right? OK. Usually, with you, we
can assume that something else happened. So let’s
figure out Sunday and see if there wasn’t an interpersonal
situation that day that made you feel criticized,
unloved, or unacceptable.

client: Well, on Saturday I was so pissed off and I

went to an AA meeting. And it got on my brain how
alcohol would steal away my pain. I went looking
all around the neighborhood for an open store. I was
going to go get drunk. That’s how much my pain was
influencing me. But I couldn’t find a store that was
open, so I went back to the hospital.

tHeraPist: So you got the idea of getting alcohol to
cure it, and you couldn’t find any, so you went back
to the hospital. You were in a lot of pain, and then
what happened?

client: I told the nurse, “I’ve been sober almost 10
years and this is the first urge I’ve had to drink;
that’s how bad my pain is.” And that wasn’t listened
to.

tHeraPist: So you figured that should have done it?

client: Yeah.

tHeraPist: Yeah. ’Cause that’s a high-level communication,
that’s like a suicide threat. Very good,
though. I want you to know, that’s better than a suicide
threat because that means you had reduced the
severity of your threats.

The response above was very irreverent, in that most
clients would not expect their therapists to view making
a threat as a sign of therapeutic progress. The therapeutic
utility of irreverence often lies in its “shock” value,
which may temporarily loosen a client’s maladaptive
beliefs and assumptions, and open the client up to the
possibility of other response solutions.

client: And I just told her how I was feeling about it,
and I thought that would do it. And the doctor still
wouldn’t budge.

tHeraPist: So what did she do? Did she say she would
call?

client: She called.

tHeraPist: OK. And then what happened?

client: She came back. She was really sweet, and she
just said, “I’m really sorry, but the doctor said no.”

tHeraPist: Then did you feel anger?

client: I don’t know if I was really angry, but I was
hurt.

tHeraPist: Oh, really? Oh, that’s pretty interesting.
OK. So you were hurt .. .

client: Because I ended up hugging my teddy bear
and just crying for a while.


Borderline Personality Disorder

tHeraPist: Before or after you decided to hurt yourself?


client: Before.

tHeraPist: OK. So you didn’t decide right away to
hurt yourself. You were thinking about it. But when
did you decide to do it?

client: Later on Saturday.

tHeraPist: When?

client: After I got sick of crying.

tHeraPist: So you laid in bed and cried, feeling uncared
about and hurt, abandoned probably, and unlovable,
like you weren’t worth helping?

client: Yes.

tHeraPist: That’s a really adaptive response. That’s
what I’m going to try to teach you. Except that
you’ve already done it without my teaching it to you.
So how did you get from crying, feeling unloved and
not cared about, and you cry and sob—how did you
get from there to deciding to hurt yourself, instead of
like going to sleep?

client: Because then I got angry. And I said, “Fuck
this shit, I’ll show him.”

tHeraPist: Now did you quit crying before you got
angry, or did getting angry make you stop crying?
client: I think getting angry made me stop crying.

tHeraPist: So you kind of got more energized. So you
must have been ruminating while you were lying
there, thinking. What were you thinking about?

client: For a long time I was just wanting somebody
to come care about me.

tHeraPist: Um hmm. Perfectly reasonable feelings.
Makes complete sense. Now maybe there you could
have done something different. What would have
happened if you had asked the nurse to come in and
talk to you, hold your hand?

An overall goal of behavioral analysis is the construction
of a general road map of how the client arrives
at dysfunctional responses, with notation of possible
alternative pathways. Here the therapist was searching
for junctures in the map where possible alternative responses
were available to the client.

client: They don’t have time to do that.

tHeraPist: They don’t? Do you think that would have
helped?

client: I don’t know. She couldn’t help me.

tHeraPist: She could have made you feel cared about.
That would have been a caring thing to do.

client: Yeah, but I don’t think it would have helped.

tHeraPist: What would have helped?

client: Getting pain medication.

tHeraPist: I thought you’d say that. You have a onetrack
mind. Now listen, we’ve got to figure out something
else to help you because it can’t be that nothing
else can help. That can’t be the way the world works
for you. There’s got to be more than one way to get
everywhere because we all run into boulders on the
path. Life is like walking on a path, you know, and
we all run into boulders. It’s got to be that there are
other paths to places. And for you, it really isn’t the
pain in your ankle that’s the problem; it’s the feeling
of not being cared about. And probably a feeling
that has something to do with anger, or a feeling that
other people don’t respect you—a feeling of being
invalidated.

client: Yes.

tHeraPist: So I think it’s not actually the pain in your
ankle that’s the problem. Because if you were out on
that raft with me, you would have been able to handle
the pain if I hadn’t had any medicine, right? So it’s
really not the pain; it’s the sense of being invalidated
and the sense of not being cared about. That’s my
guess. Do you think that’s correct?

client: Yes.

tHeraPist: See, the question is, is there any other way
for you to feel validated and cared about, other than
them giving it to you?

client: No.

tHeraPist: Now is this a definite, like “I’m not going
to let there be any other way,” or is it more open, like
“I can’t think of another way, but I’m open to the
possibility?”

client: I don’t think there’s another way.

tHeraPist: Does that mean you’re not even open to
learning another way?

client: Like what?

tHeraPist: I don’t know. We have to figure it out. See,
what I think is happening is that when you’re in a
lot of pain and you feel either not cared about or not
taken seriously, invalidated, that’s what sets you up
to hurt yourself, and also to want to die. The problem


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

that we have to solve is how to be in a situation that
you feel is unjust without having to harm yourself to
solve it. Are you open to that?

client: Yeah.

As illustrated here, behavioral analysis is often an
excruciating and laborious process for client and therapist
alike. The therapist often feels demoralized and is
tempted to abandon the effort, which may be likened to
trying to find a pair of footprints hidden beneath layers
of fallen leaves; the footprints are there, but it may
take much raking and gathering of leaves before they
are uncovered. With repeated analyses, however, the
client learns that the therapist will not “back down.”
Such persistence on the part of the therapist eventually
extinguishes a client’s refusal to attempt new and adaptive
problem-solving behaviors. As clients increasingly
acquire new behavioral skills, more adaptive attempts
at problem resolution eventually become discernible.

In the following session (approximately 10 months
into therapy), the client arrived wearing mirrored sunglasses
(again) and was angry because collection agencies
were persistent in pressuring her for payment on
delinquent accounts. In addition, her therapist had been
out of town for a week. The session targets were emotion
regulation and interpersonal effectiveness. Dialectical
(metaphor), validation (cheerleading), problem solving
(contingency clarification, contingency management),
stylistic (reciprocal communication, irreverent
communication), and integrated (relationship enhancement)
strategies were used. In this first segment, the
therapist used cheerleading, contingency clarification,
and the contingency management strategy of shaping
to get the client to remove her sunglasses and work on
expressing her anger.

tHeraPist: It’s not a catastrophe that the collector did
this to you, and it’s not a catastrophe to be mad at
the collector. It’s made your life a lot harder, but you
can handle this. You can cope with this. This is not
more than you can cope with. You’re a really strong
woman; you’ve got it inside you. But you’ve got to do
it. You’ve got to use it. I’m willing to help you, but I
can’t do it alone. You have to work with me.

client: How?

tHeraPist: Well, by taking off your sunglasses, for
starters.

The therapist began the exchange by attempting to
normalize the issue (“It’s not a catastrophe”), validat


ing the client (“It’s made your life a lot harder”), and
cheerleading (“You can handle this. You can cope..
..You’re a really strong woman”). The therapist then
moved to contingency clarification by pointing out that
provision of the therapist’s assistance was contingent
on the client’s willingness to work. She immediately
followed this by requesting a response well within the
client’s behavioral repertoire.

client: I knew you’d say that.

tHeraPist: And I knew you knew I’d say that.

client: Sunglasses are your biggest bitch, I think.

tHeraPist: Well, how would you like to look at yourself
talking to someone else? (long pause) They
make it difficult for me. And I figure they make it
harder for you. I think you do better when you’re not
wearing those sunglasses. It’s like a step; you always
do better when you go forward. And when you do,
you feel better. I’ve noticed that. (long pause) So
that’s what you should do; you should take off your
sunglasses, and then we should problem-solve on
how to cope when you can’t get angry. There’s nothing
freakish about that. Something has happened in
your life that has made it so that you’re afraid to be
angry, and we just have to deal with that, you and
me. It’s just a problem to be solved. It’s not a catastrophe;
it’s not the worst thing anyone ever did. It’s
just a problem that you have, and that’s what you and
I do. We solve problems; we’re a problem-solving
team. (pause)

client: (Removes sunglasses.) All right.

tHeraPist: Thank you. That’s a big step, I know, for
you.

The therapist’s use of reciprocal communication
informed the client of her feelings regarding the sunglasses.
Note the matter-of-fact attitude taken by the
therapist and her continued attempt to normalize the
issue (i.e., “There’s nothing freakish about that .. . it’s
not the worst thing anyone ever did”). Also note the
framing of the issue as a problem to be solved, as well
as the therapist’s use of the relationship strategy to enhance
the therapeutic alliance. The therapist also made
a point of validating the client by letting her know that
she realized this was difficult.

tHeraPist: Now, c’mon, I want you to find it inside
yourself. I know you’ve got it; I know you can do it.
You can’t give up. You can’t let your feet slip. Keep


Borderline Personality Disorder

going. Just express directly to me how you feel. That
you’re angry at yourself, that you’re angry at the collection
agency, and that you’re damn angry with me.
(long pause)

client: (barely audible) I’m angry at you, at myself,
and the collection agency.

The therapist continued to rely on cheerleading and

praise as she continued the shaping process in an at


tempt to get the client to express her anger directly.

tHeraPist: Good, did that kill you? (long pause)
That’s great. Is that hard? (long pause) It was, wasn’t
it? Now say it with a little vigor. Can’t you say it with
a little energy?

client: (Shakes her head no.)

tHeraPist: Yes, you can. I know you’ve got it in you. I
have a good feel for what your strengths are. I don’t
know how I’ve got this good feel, but I do. And I
know you can do it and you need to do it, and you
need to say it with some energy. Express how angry
you are. You don’t have to yell and scream or throw
things. Just say it aloud—“I’m angry!” (long pause)
You can scream, of course, if you want; you can say,
“I’m angry!”

client: That’s it. That’s all I can do.

tHeraPist: Listen, you have to take the risk. You’re
not going to get past this or through this. You have to
take the risk. You are like a person mountain climbing
and we’ve come to this crevasse and it’s very
deep, but we can’t go back because there’s an avalanche,
and the only way to go forward is for you to
jump over this crevasse. You’ve got to do it. Tell me
how mad you are, in a way that I can understand how
you really feel.

client: (long pause) I can’t do any of it.

tHeraPist: That is bullshit.

client: You want me to get angry at you, don’t you?

tHeraPist: I don’t care who you get angry at. I think
you already are angry. I just want you to express it.
I’m not going to ask you to do anything more today,
by the way. I figure the only thing today you have to
do is say “I’m angry,” in a voice that sounds angry,
and I figure you’re capable of that. And I might be
angry if you don’t do it. I don’t think I will be, but I
might. That’s OK. I can be angry, you can be angry,
we can be angry sometimes, and it isn’t going to kill
either one of us.

Cheerleading and metaphor were unsuccessful in
moving the client to express her anger more forcefully.
Consequently, the therapist switched to irreverent communication
in an attempt to get the client to “jump
track.” Also note how the therapist communicated to
the client the potential negative consequences of her
continued refusal to express her anger (i.e., “.. . I might
be angry .. .”). In this manner, the therapist used the relationship
as a contingency in order to promote change
in the client.

tHeraPist: OK, so how angry are you? On a scale of
1 to 100, how angry would you say you are? At 100,
you’re ready to kill. You’re so enraged, you’d go to
war if you could.

client: (barely audible) Maybe 100.

tHeraPist: Really?

client: They know my situation.

tHeraPist: Um hmm.

client: They’re persistent.

tHeraPist: Um hmm. (pause) Who’s the safest to be
angry at? Yourself, me, or the collection agency?

client: Collection agency.

tHeraPist: OK, then, tell me how angry you are. You

don’t have to make it sound like 100. Try to make it

sound like 50.

client: They really pissed me off! (said in a loud,
angry voice)

tHeraPist: Well, damn right. They piss me off, too.

As illustrated by the foregoing exchange, a primary
difficulty in working with clients who have BPD is
their not uncommon tendency to refuse to engage in
behavioral work. Thus, it is absolutely necessary that
the therapist maintain persistence and not give up in
the face of a client’s “I can’t” statements. In situations
like these, the use of irreverent communication often
succeeds in producing a breakthrough and gaining client
compliance.

PostveNtioN By liNehaN

After completing the writing of Cindy’s case history for
publication in this Handbook, 14 months into therapy,
Cindy died of a prescription drug overdose plus alcohol.
I (M. M. L.) considered dropping the case history
and replacing it with a more successful case. However,


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

in Cindy’s honor, and because I think much can be
learned from both failed and successful therapy, I decided
to leave the case in. The immediate precipitant
for Cindy’s overdose was a call to her estranged husband,
during which she discovered that another woman
was living with him. As Cindy told me during a phone
call the next morning, her unverbalized hope that they
might someday get back together, or at least be close
friends, had been shattered. She phoned again that evening
in tears, stating that she had just drunk half a fifth
of liquor. Such drinking incidents had occurred several
times before, and the phone call was spent “remoralizing”
Cindy, offering hope, problem-solving how she
could indeed live without her husband, and using crisis
intervention techniques to get her through the evening,
until her appointment the following day. Cindy’s roommate
was home and agreed to talk with her, watch a TV
movie together, and go to bed (plans on which the roommate
did follow through). Cindy stated that although
she felt suicidal, she would stop drinking and would not
do anything self-destructive before her appointment.
She was instructed to call me back later that evening if
she wanted to talk again. The next day, when Cindy did
not arrive for her appointment, I called her home, just
as her roommate discovered Cindy dead, still in bed
from the night before. At this point, I was faced with
a number of tasks. I called to inform other therapists
who had been treating the client, and spoke with a legal
consultant to review the limits of confidentiality when
a client has died. Once the family (Cindy’s parents and
estranged husband) were alerted, I called each to offer
my condolences. The next day, as the senior therapist
and supervisor on the treatment team, I called a meeting
of the treatment team to discuss and process the
suicide. It was especially important to notify the individual
therapists of the remaining members of Cindy’s
skills training group. Group members were notified of
the suicide by their individual psychotherapists. Within
minutes of the beginning of the next group session,
however, two members became seriously suicidal, and
one of them had to be briefly hospitalized. (By the third
week following the suicide, however, both had regained
their forward momentum.) A third group member took
this occasion to quit DBT and switch to another therapy,
saying that this proved the treatment did not work.
In the days and weeks following the suicide, I attended
the funeral and met with Cindy’s roommate and with
her parents.

What can we learn from this suicide? First, it is important
to note that even when a treatment protocol is

followed almost to the letter, it may not save a client.
Even an effective treatment can fail in the end. In this
case, DBT failed. This does not mean that the progress
made was unimportant or not real. Had this “slippery
spot over the abyss” been negotiated safely, perhaps the
client would have been able to develop, finally, a life of
quality. Risk is not eliminated, however, just because
an individual makes substantial progress. In this case, I
did not believe during the last phone call that the client
was at higher than ordinary risk for imminent suicide.
In contrast to many previous phone calls and therapy
sessions in which the client had cried that she might not
be able to hold on, during the last call the client made
plans for the evening, agreed to stop drinking and not
to do anything suicidal or self-destructive, and seemed
to me (and to the roommate) to be in better spirits following
the phone call. Her roommate was home and
available. Thus, I did not take extraordinary measures
that evening to prevent suicide. Indeed, the problem behavior
focused on during the call was the drinking. I
brought up the topic of suicide while conducting a risk
assessment.

Second, could I have known? Only (perhaps) if I
had paid more attention to the precipitant and less to
the affect expressed at the end of the phone call. In reviewing
notes about the client, I saw that each previous
nonlethal self-injury was a result of intense anger
at her husband. Each previous near-lethal attempt was
a result of the client’s belief that the relationship with
her husband had irrevocably ended. Although the client
could tolerate losing her husband, she could not tolerate
losing all hope for a reconciliation at some point, even
many years hence. Had I linked these two ideas (complete
loss of hope and suicide attempt), I might have
been able to work out a better plan for a reemergence
of the crisis later in the evening. I definitely would have
handled the situation differently. “Oh that woman’s obviously
a floozy, we will figure out a way to get him
back! I’m sure of it,” I would have said. The value of
both conducting thorough behavioral assessments and
organizing them into a coherent pattern is highlighted
in this case. In this sense, I provided DBT almost to the
letter but not all the way.

Third, when all is said and done, an individual with
BPD must ultimately be able and willing to tolerate
the almost unimaginable pain of his/her life until the
therapy has a chance to make a permanent difference.
Ultimately, the therapist cannot save the client; only the
client can do that. Even if mistakes are made, the client
must nonetheless persevere. In this case, the DBT


Borderline Personality Disorder

protocol of “no lethal drugs for lethal people” was violated,
even though the client had a past history of nearlethal
overdoses. Why was the protocol not enforced?
There were two primary reasons. First, the client came
into therapy with a strong belief that the medication
regimen she was on was essential to her survival. Any
attempt on my part to manage her medications would
have been met by very strong resistance. Although the
drugs were dispensed in small doses, the only safe alternative
would have been to have the person living
with her (her husband at first, then her roommate) manage
her medications, which the client also resisted. In
addition, some professionals disagree with the “no lethal
drugs” protocol of DBT because they believe that
psychotropic medications are a treatment of choice for
suicidal clients. In the face of professional and client
resistance I relented. The second reason was that behavioral
analyses indicated that her preferred lethal behavior
was cutting; thus, I allowed myself a false sense
of safety in thinking that her use of drugs to commit
suicide was not likely.

Fourth, a group member’s suicide is extraordinarily
stressful for clients with BPD who are in group therapy.
Although it is easy to believe that alliances are not
strong in a psychoeducational behavioral skills group,
this has universally not been our experience. The suicide
of one member is a catastrophic event and can lead
to contagious suicide and NSSI behavior, and therapy
dropouts. Thus, extreme care is needed in the conduct
of group meetings for some time following a suicide.
Similar care is needed with the treatment team, where
the thread of hope that maintains therapists in the face
of a daunting task is also strained. It is important that
the personal reactions of therapists, as well as a period
of mourning and grieving, be shared and accepted.
Fears of legal responsibility, never far from the surface,
must be confronted directly; legal counsel should be
sought as necessary; and, in time, a careful review of
the case and the therapy must be conducted, if only to
improve treatment in the future.

aCknowledgMents

The writing of this chapter was supported by National Institute
of Mental Health Grant No. MH34486 to Marsha

M. Linehan. Parts of this chapter are drawn from Linehan
(1993b), Linehan and Koerner (1992), Koerner and Linehan
(1992), and Linehan (1997). The quotations from Linehan
(1997) in the section on validation are reprinted with the permission
of the American Psychological Association. Finally,
this chapter is a revision of the same chapter in the previous
edition of this book, with contributions made by previous
authors Bryan M. Cochran, Constance A. Kehrer, and Liz
Dexter Mazza.

referenCes

Adler, G. (1981). The borderline–narcissistic personality disorder
continuum. American Journal of Psychiatry, 138,
46–50.

Adler, G. (1993). The psychotherapy of core borderline psychopathology.
American Journal of Psychotherapy, 47,
194–206.

Adler, G., & Buie, D. H. (1979). Aloneness and borderline
psychopathology: The possible relevance of child development
issues. International Journal of Psychoanalytic
Psychotherapy, 60, 83–96.

American Psychiatric Association. (1987). Diagnostic and
statistical manual of mental disorders (3rd ed., text
rev.).Washington, DC: Author.

American Psychiatric Association. (2000). Diagnostic and
statistical manual of mental disorders (4th ed., text rev.).
Washington, DC: Author.

American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and
statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.). Arlington,
VA: Author.

Aviram, R. B., Brodsky, B. S., & Stanley, B. (2006). Borderline
personality disorder, stigma, and treatment implications.
Harvard Review of Psychiatry, 14, 249–256.

Barlow, D. H. (1988). Anxiety and its disorders: The nature
and treatment of anxiety and panic. New York: Guilford
Press.

Barlow, D. H., Allen, L. B., & Choate, M. L. (2004). Toward a
unified treatment for emotional disorders. Behavior Therapy,
35, 205–230.

Barnoski, R. (2002). Preliminary findings for the Juvenile
Rehabilitation Administration’s Dialectic Behavior
Therapy Program (Document No. 02-07-1203). Olympia:
Washington State Institute for Public Policy.

Bateman, A., & Fonagy, P. (1999). Effectiveness of partial
hospitalization in the treatment of borderline personality
disorder: A randomized controlled trial. American Journal
of Psychiatry, 156, 1563–1569.

Bateman, A., & Fonagy, P. (2001). Treatment of borderline
personality disorder with psychoanalytically oriented partial
hospitalization: An 18-month follow-up. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 158, 36–42.

Bateman, A. W., & Fonagy, P. (2004). Mentalization-based
treatment of BPD. Journal of Personality Disorders, 18,
36–51.

Bateman, A., & Fonagy, P. (2008). Eight-year follow-up
of patients treated for borderline personality disorder:
Mentalization-based treatment versus treatment as usual.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 165(5), 631–638.


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

Bateman, A., & Fonagy, P (2009). Randomized controlled
trial of outpatient mentalization-based treatment versus
structured clinical management for borderline personality
disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 166(12),
1355–1364.

Beck, A. T., Brown, G., Berchick, R. J., Stewart, B. L., &
Steer, R. A. (1990). Relationship between hopelessness
and ultimate suicide: A replication with psychiatric outpatients.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 147, 190–195.

Beck, A. T., & Freeman, A. (1990). Cognitive therapy of personality
disorders. New York: Guilford Press.

Bedics, J. D., Atkins, D. C., Comtois, K. A., & Linehan, M.

M. (2012). Treatment differences in the therapeutic relationship
and introject during a 2-year randomized controlled
trial of dialectical behavior therapy versus nonbehavioral
psychotherapy experts for borderline personality
disorder. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,
80(1), 66–77.
Benjamin, L. S. (1996). Interpersonal diagnosis and treatment
of personality disorders (2nd ed.). New York: Guilford
Press.

Blum, N., Pfohl, B., St. John, D., Monahan, P., & Black, D. W.
(2002). STEPPS: A cognitive-behavioral systems-based
group treatment for outpatients with borderline personality
disorder—a preliminary report. Comprehensive Psychiatry,
43, 301–310.

Blum, N., John, D. S., Pfohl, B., Stuart, S., McCormick, B.,
Allen, J., et al. (2008). Systems Training for Emotional
Predictability and Problem Solving (STEPPS) for outpatients
with borderline personality disorder: A randomized
controlled trial and 1-year follow-up. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 165(4), 468–478.

Bohus, M., Haaf, B., Simms, T., Limberger, M. F., Schmahl,
C., Unckel, C., et al. (2004). Effectiveness of inpatient dialectical
behavioral therapy for borderline personality disorder:
a controlled trial. Behaviour Research and Therapy,
42, 487–499.

Bohus, M., Limberger, M. F., Chapman, A. L., Kuhler, T.,
Stieglitz, R., & Frank, U. (2007). Psychometric properties
of the Borderline Symptom List (BSL). Psychopathology,
40, 126–132.

Bohus, M., Limberger, M. F., Frank, U., Sender, I., Gratwohl,
T., & Stieglitz, R. D. (2001). Development of the borderline
symptom list. Psychotherapies, Psychosomatik, Medizinische
Psychologie, 51, 201–211.

Bohus, M., Dyer, A. S., Priebe, K., Krüger, A., Kleindienst,
N., Schmahl, C., et al. (2013). Dialectical behaviour therapy
for post-traumatic stress disorder after childhood sexual
abuse in patients with and without borderline personality
disorder: a randomised controlled trial. Psychotherapy
and Psychosomatics, 82(4), 221–233.

Bos, E. H., van Wel, E. B., Appelo, M. T., & Verbraak, M. J.
(2010). A randomized controlled trial of a Dutch version
of systems training for emotional predictability and prob


lem solving for borderline personality disorder. Journal of
Nervous and Mental Disorders, 198(4), 299–304.

Bos, E. H., van Wel, E. B., Appelo, M. T., & Verbraak, M.

J. (2011). Effectiveness of Systems Training for Emotional
Predictability and Problem Solving (STEPPS) for
borderline personality problems in a “real-world” sample:
Moderation by diagnosis or severity? Psychotherapy and
Psychosomatics, 80, 173–181.
Bradley, R. G., & Follingstad, D. (2003).Group therapy for
incarcerated women who experienced interpersonal violence:
A pilot study. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 16(4),
337–340.

Bradley, R., Zittel, C. C., & Westen, D. (2005). The borderline
personality diagnosis in adolescents: Gender differences
and subtypes. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry,
46, 1006–1019.

Brent, D. A., Johnson, B. A., Perper, J., Connolly, J., Bridge,
J., Bartle, S., et al. (1994). Personality disorder, personality
traits, impulsive violence, and completed suicide in
adolescents. Journal of the American Academy of Child
and Adolescent Psychiatry, 33, 1080–1086.

Brown, G. K., Newman, C. F., Charlesworth, S. E., Crits-
Christoph, P., & Beck, A. T. (2004). An open clinical trial
of cognitive therapy for borderline personality disorder.
Journal of Personality Disorders, 18, 257–271.

Buie, D. H., & Adler, G. (1982). Definitive treatment of the
borderline personality. International Journal of Psychoanalytic
Psychotherapy, 9, 51–87.

Carter, G. L., Willcox, C. H., Lewin, T. J., Conrad, A. M.,
& Bendit, N. (2010). Hunter DBT project: A randomized
controlled trial of dialectical behaviour therapy in women
with borderline personality disorder. Australian and New
Zealand Journal of Psychiatry, 44, 162–173.

Cavanaugh, M. M., Solomon, P. L., & Gelles, R. J. (2011).
The dialectical psychoeducational workshop (DPEW) for
males at risk for intimate partner violence: A pilot randomized
controlled trial. Journal of Experimental Criminology,
7(3), 275–291.

Chesin, M. S., Jeglic, E. L., & Stanley, B. (2010). Pathways
to high-lethality suicide attempts in individuals with borderline
personality disorder. Archives of Suicide Research,
14, 342–362.

Cisler, J. M., Olatunji, B. O., Feldner, M. T., & Forsyth, J. P.
(2010). Emotion regulation and the anxiety disorders: An
integrative review. Journal of Psychopathology and Behavioral
Assessment, 32, 68–82.

Clarkin, J. F., Levy, K. N., Lenzenweger, M. F., & Kernberg,

O. F. (2007). Evaluating three treatments for borderline
personality disorder: A multiwave study. American Journal
of Psychiatry, 164, 922–928.
Conklin, C. Z., & Westen, D. (2005). Borderline personality
disorder in clinical practice. American Journal of Psychiatry,
162(5), 867–875.

Cottraux, J., Note, I. D., Milliery, M., Genouihlac, V., Yao, S.


Borderline Personality Disorder

N., Note, B., et al. (2009). Cognitive therapy versus Rogerian
supportive therapy in borderline personality disorder.
Psychotheray and Psychosomatics, 78, 307–316.

Courbasson, C., Nishikawa, Y., & Dixon, L. (2012). Outcome
of dialectical behaviour therapy for concurrent eating and
substance use disorders. Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy,
19(5), 434–449.

Crowell, S. E., Beauchaine, T. P., & Linehan, M. M. (2009).
A biosocial developmental model of borderline personality:
Elaborating and extending Linehan’s theory. Psychological
Bulletin, 135, 495–510.

Davison, G. C., & Neale, J. M. (1994). Abnormal psychology
(6th ed.). New York: Wiley.

Dimeff, L. A., McDavid, J., & Linehan, M. M. (1999). Pharmacotherapy
for borderline personality disorder: A review
of the literature and recommendations for treatment.
Journal of Clinical Psychology in Medical Settings, 6,
113–138.

Doering, S., Horz, .S, Fischer-Kern, M., Schuster, P., Benecke,
C., Buchheim, A., et al. (2010). Transference-focused psychotherapy
v. treatment by community psychotherapists
for borderline personality disorder: Randomised controlled
trial. British Journal of Psychiatry, 196, 389–395.

Ellis, A. (1973). Humanistic psychotherapy: The rational–
emotive approach. New York: Julian Press.

Etkin, A., & Wager, T. D. (2007). Functional neuroimaging
of anxiety: A meta-analysis of emotional processing in
PTSD, social anxiety disorder, and specific phobia. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 164, 1476–1488.

Evershed, S., Tennant, A., Boomer, D., Rees, A., Barkham,
M., & Watson, A. (2003). Practice-based outcomes of
dialectical behaviour therapy (DBT) targeting anger and
violence, with male forensic patients: A pragmatic and
non-contemporaneous comparison. Criminal Behaviour
and Mental Health, 13(3), 198–213.

Farrell, J. M., Shaw, I. A., & Webber, M. A. (2009). A
schema-focused approach to group psychotherapy for outpatients
with borderline personality disorder: A randomized
controlled trial. Journal of Behavior Therapy and
Experimental Psychiatry, 40, 317–328.

Feigenbaum, J. D., Fonagy, P., Pilling, S., Jones, A., Wildgoose,
A., & Bebbington, P. E. (2012). A real-world study
of the effectiveness of DBT in the UK National Health
Service. British Journal of Clinical Psychology, 51(2),
121–141.

Feldman, G., Harley, R., Kerrigan, M., Jacobo, M., & Fava,

M. (2009). Change in emotional processing during a dialectical
behavior therapy-based skills group for major depressive
disorder. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 47
(4), 316–321.
Foa, E. B., & Kozak, M. J. (1986). Emotional processing of
fear: Exposure to corrective information. Psychological
Bulletin, 99, 20–35.

Fossati, A., Madeddu, F., & Maffei, C. (1999). Borderline

personality disorder and childhood sexual abuse: A metaanalytic
study. Journal of Personality Disorders, 13,
268–280.

Giesen-Bloo, J., Van Dyck, R., Spinhoven, P., van Tilburg,
W., Dirksen, C., van Asselt, T., et al. (2006). Outpatient
psychotherapy for borderline personality disorder: Randomized
trial of schema-focused therapy vs. transferencefocused
psychotherapy. Archives of General Psychiatry,
63, 649–658.

Goldberg, C. (1980). The utilization and limitations of paradoxical
intervention in group psychotherapy. International
Journal of Group Psychotherapy, 30, 287–297.

Gunderson, J. G. (1984). Borderline personality disorder.
Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press.

Harley, R., Sprich, S., Safren, S., Jacobo, M., & Fava, M.
(2008). Adaptation of dialectical behavior therapy skills
training group for treatment-resistant depression. Journal
of Nervous and Mental Disease, 196(2), 136–143.

Harned, M. S., Chapman, A. L., Dexter-Mazza, E. T., Murray,
A., Comtois, K. A., & Linehan, M. M. (2008). Treating
co-occurring Axis I disorders in recurrently suicidal
women with borderline personality disorder: A 2-year randomized
trial of dialectical behavior therapy versus community
treatment by experts. Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 76(6), 1068–1075.

Harned, M. S., Rizvi, S. L., & Linehan, M. M. (2010). Impact
of co-occurring posttraumatic stress disorder on suicidal
women with borderline personality disorder. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 167(10), 1210–1217.

Harned, M. S., Korslund, K. E., Foa, E. B., & Linehan, M.

M. (2012). Treating PTSD in suicidal and self-injuring
women with borderline personality disorder: Development
and preliminary evaluation of a dialectical behavior
therapy prolonged exposure protocol. Behaviour Research
and Therapy, 50, 381–386.
Herman, J. L. (1986). Histories of violence in an outpatient
population: An exploratory study. American Journal of
Orthopsychiatry, 56, 137–141.

Herman, J. L., Perry, J. C., & van der Kolk, B. A. (1989).
Childhood trauma in borderline personality disorder.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 146, 490–495.

Hill, D. M., Craighead, L. W., & Safer, D. L. (2011). Appetitefocused
dialectical behavior therapy for the treatment of
binge eating with purging: A preliminary trial. International
Journal of Eating Disorders, 44(3), 249–261.

Hirvikoski, T., Waaler, E., Alfredsson, J., Pihlgren, C., Holmström,
A., Johnson, A., et al. (2011). Reduced ADHD
symptoms in adults with ADHD after structured skills
training group: Results from a randomized controlled
trial. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 49(3), 175–185.

Hollandsworth, J. G. (1990). The physiology of psychological
disorders. New York: Plenum Press.
Isometsa, E. T., Henriksson, M. M., Aro, H. M., Heikkinen,

M. E., Kuoppasalmi, K. I., & Lonnqvist, J. K. (1994). Sui

CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

cide in major depression. American Journal of Psychiatry,
151, 530–536.

Katz, L. Y., Cox, B. J., Gunasekara, S., & Miller, A. L. (2004)
Feasibility of dialectical behavior therapy for suicidal adolescent
inpatients. Journal of the American Academy of
Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 43, 276–282.

Kegan, R. (1982). The evolving self: Problem and process in
human development. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.

Kellogg, S. H., & Young, J. E. (2006). Schema therapy for
borderline personality disorder. Journal of Clinical Psychology,
62, 445–458.

Kernberg, O. F. (1984). Severe personality disorders: Psychotherapeutic
strategies. New Haven, CT: Yale University
Press.

Kernberg, O. F., Selzer, M. A., Koenigsberg, H. W., Carr, A.
C., & Appelbaum, A. H. (1989). Psychodynamic psychotherapy
of borderline patients. New York: Basic Books.

Keuthen, N. J., Rothbaum, B. O, Fama, J., Altenburger, E.,
Falkenstein, M. J., Sprich, S. E., et al. (2012). DBT-enhanced
cognitive-behavioral treatment for trichotillomania:
A randomized controlled trial. Journal of Behavioral
Addictions, 1(3), 106–114.

Kleindienst, N., Krumm, B., & Bohus M. (2011). Is
transference-focused psychotherapy really efficacious for
borderline personality disorder? British Journal of Psychiatry,
98(2), 156–157.

Koerner, K., & Linehan, M. M. (1992). Integrative therapy
for borderline personality disorder: Dialectical behavior
therapy. In J. C. Norcross & M. R. Goldfried (Eds.),
Handbook of psychotherapy integration (pp. 433–459).
New York: Basic Books.

Kohlenberg, R. J., & Tsai, M. (1991). Functioned analytic
psychotherapy: Creating intense and curative therapeutic
relationships. New York: Plenum Press.

Koons, C. R., Chapman, A. L., Betts, B. B., O’Rourke, B.,
Morse, N., & Robins, C. J. (2006). Dialectical behavior
therapy adapted for the vocational rehabilitation of significantly
disabled mentally ill adults. Cognitive and Behavioral
Practice, 13, 146–156.

Koons, C. R., Robins, C. J., Tweed, J. L., Lynch, T. R., Gonzalez,
A. M., Morse, J. Q., et al. (2001). Efficacy of dialectical
behavior therapy in women veterans with borderline
personality disorder. Behavior Therapy, 32, 371–390.

Kring, A. M., & Bachorowski, J. A. (1999). Emotions and
psychopathology. Cognition and Emotion, 13, 575–599.

Kring, A. M. & Sloan, D. M. (2010). Emotion regulation and
psychopathology: A transdiagnostic approach to etiology
and treatment. New York: Guilford Press.

Kring, A. M. & Werner, K. H. (2004). Emotion regulation
and psychopathology. In P. Philippot & R. S. Feldman
(Eds.), The regulation of emotion (pp. 359–408). Mahwah,
NJ: Erlbaum.

Kyokai, B. D. (1966). The teachings of Buddha. Japan: Bukkyo
Dendo Kyokai.

Lequesne, E. R., & Hersh, R. G. (2004). Disclosure of a diagnosis
of borderline personality disorder. Journal of Psychiatric
Practice, 10, 170–176.

Levy, K. N., & Scala, J. W. (2012). Transference, transference
interpretations, and transference-focused psychotherapies.
Psychotherapy, 49(3), 391–403.

Lieb, K., Völlm, B., Rücker, G., Timmer, A., & Stoffers, J. M.
(2010). Pharmacotherapy for borderline personality disorder:
Cochrane Systematic Review of randomised trials.
British Journal of Psychiatry, 196, 4–12.

Lieb, K., Zanarini, M., Linehan, M. M., & Bohus, M. (2004).
Seminar section: Borderline personality disorder. Lancet,
364, 453–461.

Linehan, M. M. (1987). Dialectical behavior therapy for borderline
personality disorder: Theory and method. Bulletin
of the Menninger Clinic, 51, 261–276.

Linehan, M. M. (1993a). Cognitive-behavioral treatment
of borderline personality disorder. New York: Guilford
Press.

Linehan, M. M. (1993b). Skills training manual for treating
borderline personality disorder. New York: Guilford
Press.

Linehan, M. M. (1997). Validation and psychotherapy. In A.
Bohank & L. Greenberg (Eds.), Empathy reconsidered:
New directions in psychotherapy (pp. 353–392). Washington,
DC: American Psychological Association.

Linehan, M. M. (in press). Skills training manual for treating
borderline personality disorder (2nd ed.). New York:
Guilford Press.

Linehan, M. M., Armstrong, H. E., Suarez, A., Allmon, D.,
& Heard, H. L. (1991). Cognitive-behavioral treatment of
chronically parasuicidal borderline patients. Archives of
General Psychiatry, 48, 1060–1064.

Linehan, M. M., Bohus, M., & Lynch, T. R. (2007). Dialectical
behavior therapy for pervasive emotion dysregulation:
Theoretical and practical underpinnings. In J. J. Gross
(Ed.), Handbook of emotion regulation (pp. 581–605).
New York: Guilford Press.

Linehan, M. M., Comtois, K. A., Murray, A., Brown, M. Z.,
Gallop, R. J., Heard, H. L., et al. (2006). Two-year randomized
trial + follow-up of dialectical behavior therapy
vs. therapy by experts for suicidal behaviors and borderline
personality disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry,
63, 757–766.

Linehan, M. M., Dimeff, L. A., Reynolds, S. K., Comtois,
K., Shaw-Welch, S., Heagerty, P., et al. (2002). Dialectical
behavior therapy versus comprehensive validation plus 12step
for the treatment of opioid dependent women meeting
criteria for borderline personality disorder. Drug and Alcohol
Dependence, 67, 13–26.

Linehan, M. M., & Heard, H. L. (1993). Impact of treatment
accessibility on clinical course of parasuicidal patients: In
reply to R. E. Hoffman [Letter to the editor]. Archives of
General Psychiatry, 50, 157–158.

Linehan, M. M., Heard, H. L., & Armstrong, H. E. (1993).


Borderline Personality Disorder

Naturalistic follow-up of a behavioral treatment for chronically
parasuicidal borderline patients. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 50, 971–974.

Linehan, M. M., & Koerner, K. (1992). A behavioral theory
of borderline personality disorder. In J. Paris (Ed.), Borderline
personality disorder: Etiology and treatment
(pp. 103–121). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric
Association.

Linehan, M. M., McDavid, J. D., Brown, M. Z., Sayrs, J. H., &
Gallop, R. J. (2008). Olanzapine plus dialectical behavior
therapy for women with high irritability who meet criteria
for borderline personality disorder: A double-blind,
placebo-controlled pilot study. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry,
69(6), 999–1005.

Linehan, M. M., Rizvi, S. L., Shaw-Welch, S., & Page, B.
(2000). Psychiatric aspects of suicidal behaviour: Personality
disorders. In K. Hawton & K. van Heeringen (Eds.),
International handbook of suicide and attempted suicide
(147–178). Sussex, UK: Wiley.

Linehan, M. M., Schmidt, H., III, Dimeff, L. A., Craft, J. C.,
Kanter, J., & Comtois, K. A. (1999). Dialectical behavior
therapy for patients with borderline personality disorder
and drug-dependence. American Journal of Addiction, 8,
279–292.

Linehan, M. M., Tutek, D. A., Heard, H. L., & Armstrong,

H. E. (1994). Interpersonal outcome of cognitive behavioral
treatment for chronically suicidal borderline patients.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 151, 1771–1776.
Livesley, J. W., Jang, K. L., & Vernon, P. A. (1998). Phenotypic
and genetic structure of traits delineating personality
disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry, 55 , 941–948.

Loranger, A. W. (1995). International Personality Disorder
Examination (IPDE) manual. White Plains, NY: Cornell
Medical Center.

Lynch, T. R., Cheavens, J. S., Cukrowicz, K. C., Thorp, S. R.,
Bronner, L., & Beyer, J. (2007). Treatment of older adults
with co-morbid personality disorder and depression: A
dialectical behavior therapy approach. International Journal
of Geriatric Psychiatry, 22, 131–143.

Lynch, T. R., Morse, J. Q., Mendelson, T., & Robins, C. J.
(2003). Dialectical behavior therapy for depressed older
adults: A randomized pilot study. American Journal of
Geriatric Psychiatry, 11, 33–45.

Marlatt, G. A., & Gordon, J. R. (1985). Relapse prevention:
Maintenance strategies in the treatment of addictive behaviors.
New York: Guilford Press.

McDonell, M. G., Tarantino, J., Dubose, A. P., Matestic, P.,
Steinmetz, K., Galbreath, H., et al. (2010). A pilot evaluation
of dialectical behavioural therapy in adolescent longterm
inpatient care. Child and Adolescent Mental Health,
15(4),193–196.

McMain, S., Korman, L. M., & Dimeff, L. A. (2001). Dialectical
behavior therapy and the treatment of emotion dysregulation.
Journal of Clinical Psychology, 57(2), 183–
196.

McMain, S. F., Links, P. S., Gnam, W. H., Guimond, T.,
Cardish, R. J., Korman, L., et al. (2009). A randomized
clinical trial of dialectical behavior therapy versus general
psychiatric management for borderline personality disorder.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 166, 1365–1374.

Mennin, D. S. (2004). Emotion regulation therapy for generalized
anxiety disorder. Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy,
11, 17–29.

Mennin, D. S., Heimberg, R. G., Turk, C. L., & Fresco, D.

M. (2005). Preliminary evidence for an emotion dysregulation
model of generalized anxiety disorder. Behaviour
Research and Therapy, 43, 1281–1310.
Merriam-Webster, Inc. (2006). Merriam-Webster online dictionary.
Available online at www.m-w.com.
Merriam-Webster’s New Universal Unabridged Dictionary.
(1983). Cleveland, OH: Dorset & Baber.
Mintz, R. S. (1968). Psychotherapy of the suicidal patient. In

H. L. P. Resnick (Ed.), Suicidal behaviors: Diagnoses and
management (pp. 271–296). Boston: Little, Brown.
Nadort, M., Arntz, A., Giesen-Bloo, J., Eikelenboom, M.,
Spinhoven, P., van Asselt, T., et al. (2009). Implementation
of outpatient schema therapy for borderline personality
disorder with versus without crisis support by the therapist
outside office hours: A randomized trial. Behaviour
Research and Therapy, 47, 961–973.

Neacsiu, A. D., Eberle, J. E., Kramer, R., Weismann, T., &
Linehan, M. M. (2013). A treatment mechanism for emotion
dysregulation across mood and anxiety disorders: A
randomized controlled trial. Manuscript under review.

Neacsiu, A. D., Rizvi, S. L., & Linehan, M. M. (2010). Dialectical
behavior therapy skills use as a mediator and outcome
of treatment for borderline personality disorder. Behaviour
Research and Therapy, 48(9), 832–839.

Nisenbaum, R., Links, P. S., Eynan, R., & Heisel, M. J.
(2010). Variability and predictors of negative mood intensity
in patients with borderline personality disorder and
recurrent suicidal behavior: Multilevel analyses applied to
experience sampling methodology. Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 119(2), 433–439.

Nose, M., Cipriani, A., Biancosino, B., Grassi, L., & Barbui,

C. (2006). Efficacy of pharmacotherapy against core traits
of borderline personality disorder: Meta-analysis of randomized
controlled trials. International Clinical Psychopharmacology,
21, 345–353.
Paris, J. (2005). Borderline personality disorder. Canadian
Medical Association Journal, 172, 1579–1583.

Peng, K., & Nisbett, R. E. (1999). Culture, dialectics, and
reasoning about contradiction. American Psychologist,
54, 741–754.

Pistorello, J., Fruzzetti, A. E., MacLane, C., Gallop, R., &
Iverson, K. M. (2012). Dialectical behavior therapy (DBT)
applied to college students: A randomized clinical trial.
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 80(6),
982–984.

Pretzer, J. (1990). Borderline personality disorder. In A. Free



CLINICAL HANDBOOK OF PSYCHOLOGICAL DISORDERS

man, L. Pretzer, B. Fleming, & K. M. Simon (Eds.), Clinical
applications of cognitive therapy (pp. 181–202). New
York: Plenum Press.

Rakfeldt, J. (2005). Dialectical behavior therapy with transitional
youth: Preliminary findings. Best Practices in Mental
Health, 1(2), 61–76.

Rathus, J. H., & Miller, A. L. (2002). Dialectical behavior
therapy adapted for suicidal adolescents. Suicide and Life-
Threatening Behavior, 32, 146–157.

Reiser, D. E., & Levenson, H. (1984). Abuses of the borderline
diagnosis: A clinical problem with teaching opportunities.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 141, 1528–1532.

Roepke, S., Schröder-Abé, M., Schütz, A., Jacob, G., Dams,
A., Vater, A., et al. (2011). Dialectic behavioural therapy
has an impact on self-concept clarity and facets of selfesteem
in women with borderline personality disorder.
Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy, 18(2), 148–158.

Safer, D., Robinson, A., & Jo, B. (2010). Outcome from a randomized
controlled trial of group therapy for binge eating
disorder: Comparing dialectical behavior therapy adapted
for binge eating to an active comparison group therapy.
Behavior Therapy, 41, 106–120.

Safer, D. L., & Joyce, E. E. (2011). Does rapid response to
two group psychotherapies for binge eating disorder predict
abstinence? Behaviour Research and Therapy,49(5),
339–345.

Safer, D. L., Telch, C. F., & Agras, W. S. (2001). Dialectical
behavior therapy for bulimia nervosa. American Journal
of Psychiatry, 158, 632–634.

Salbach-Andrae, H., Bohnekamp, I., Bierbaum, T., Schneider,
N., Thurn, C., Stiglmayr, C., et al. (2009). Dialektisch
behaviorale therapie (DBT) und kognitiv behaviorale
therapie (CBT) für Jugendliche mit Anorexia und Bulimia
nervosa im Vergleich [Dialectical behavior therapy and
cognitive behavior therapy for anorexia and bulimia nervosa
among adolescents: A randomized, controlled trial
with a waiting control group]. Kindheit und Entwicklung
[Childhood and Development], 18(3), 180–190.

Shearin, E. N., & Linehan, M. M. (1992). Patient–therapist
ratings and relationship to progress in dialectical behavior
therapy for borderline personality disorder. Behavior
Therapy, 23, 730–741.

Siever, L. J., & Davis, K. L. (1991). A psychobiological perspective
on the personality disorders. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 148, 1647–1658.

Silk, K. R., Lee, S., Hill, E. M., & Lohr, N. E. (1995). Borderline
personality disorder symptoms and severity of sexual
abuse. American Journal of Psychiatry, 152, 1059–1064.

Simpson, J. A., & Weiner, E. S. (1989). Oxford English Dictionary
(2nd ed.) [Online]. Retrieved December 17, 2000,
from www.oed.com.

Soler, J., Pascual, J. C., Campins, J., Barrachina, J., Puigdemont,
D., Alvarez, E., et al. (2005). Double-blind,
placebo-controlled study of dialectical behavior thera


py plus olanzapine for borderline personality disorder.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 162(6), 1221–1224. Erratum
in American Journal of Psychiatry, 165(6), 777.

Soler, J., Pascual, J. C., Tiana, T., Cebria, A., Barrachina, J.,
Campins, M. J., et al. (2009). Dialectical behaviour therapy
skills training compared to standard group therapy in
borderline personality disorder: A 3-month randomised
controlled clinical trial. Behaviour Research and Therapy,
47, 353–358.

Soloff, P. H., & Chiapetta, L. (2012). Subtyping borderline
personality disorder by suicidal behavior. Journal of Personality
Disorders, 26(3), 468–480.

Soloff, P. H., Lis, J. A., Kelly, T., Cornelius, J., & Ulrich, R.
(1994). Risk factors for suicidal behavior in borderline
personality disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 151,
1316–1323.

Stein, D. J., Simeon, D., Frenkel, M., Islam, M. N., & Hollander,
E. (1995). An open trial of valproate in borderline
personality disorder. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 56,
506–510.

Telch, C. F., Agras, W. S., & Linehan, M. M. (2001). Dialectical
behavior therapy for binge eating disorder: A promising
new treatment. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 69, 1061–1065.

Thorberg, F. A., & Lyvers, M. (2006). Negative mood regulation
(NMR) expectancies, mood, and affect intensity
among clients in substance disorder treatment facilities.
Addictive Behaviors, 31(5), 811–820.

Trupin, E. W., Stewart, D. G., Beach, B., & Boesky, L. (2002).
Effectiveness of a dialectical behaviour therapy program
for incarcerated female juvenile offenders. Child and Adolescent
Mental Health, 7(3), 121–127.

Turner, R. M. (2000). Naturalistic evaluation of dialectical
behavioral therapy-oriented treatment for borderline personality
disorder. Cognitive and Behavioral Practice, 7,
413–419.

van Asselt, D. I., Dirksen, C. D., Giesen-Bloo, J. H., van
Dyck, R., Spinhoven, P., van Tilburg, W., et al. (2008).
Out-patient psychotherapy for borderline personality disorder:
Cost-effectiveness of schema-focused therapy v.
transference-focused psychotherapy. British Journal of
Psychiatry, 192, 450–457.

Van den Bosch, L., Verheul, R., Schippers, G. M., & van den
Brink, W. (2002). Dialectical behavior therapy of borderline
patients with and without substance use problems:
Implementation and long-term effects. Addictive Behaviors,
2, 911–923.

Van Dijk, S., Jeffrey, J., & Katz, M. R. (2013). A randomized,
controlled, pilot study of dialectical behavior therapy
skills in a psychoeducational group for individuals with
bipolar disorder. Journal of Affective Disorders, 145(3),
386–393.

Verheul, R., van den Bosch, L. M. C., Koeter, M. W. J., de
Ridder, M. A. J., Stijnen, T., & van den Brink, W. (2003).


Borderline Personality Disorder

Dialectical behaviour therapy for women with borderline
personality disorder: 12-month, randomised clinical trial
in The Netherlands. British Journal of Psychiatry, 182,
135–140.

Waltz, J., Dimeff, L. A., Koerner, K., Linehan, M. M., Taylor,
L., & Miller, C. (2009). Feasibility of using video to
teach a dialectical behavior therapy skill to clients with
borderline personality disorder. Cognitive and Behavioral
Practice, 16(2), 214–222.

Wasser, T., Tyler, R., McIlhaney, K., Taplin, R., & Henderson,
L. (2008). Effectiveness of dialectical behavior therapy
(DBT) versus standard therapeutic milieu (STM) in a
cohort of adolescents receiving residential treatment. Best
Practices in Mental Health, 4(2), 114–125.

Weinberg, I., Gunderson, J. G., Hennen, J., & Cutter, C. J., Jr.
(2006). Manual assisted cognitive treatment for deliberate
self-harm in borderline personality disorder patients.
Journal of Personality Disorders, 20, 482–492.

Wells, H. (1972). Alienation and dialectical logic. Kansas
Journal of Sociology, 3, 7–32.

Whitaker, C. A. (1975). Psychotherapy of the absurd: With
a special emphasis on the psychotherapy of aggression.
Family Process, 14, 1–16.

Wolf, M., Ebner-Priemer, U., Schramm, E., Domsalla, M.,

Hautzinger, M., & Bohus, M. (2011). Maximizing skills
acquisition in dialectical behavioral therapy with a CDROM-
based self-help program: Results from a pilot study.
Psychopathology, 44(2), 133–135.

Young, J. E., Klosko, J. S., & Weishaar, M. E. (2003). Schema
therapy: A practitioner’s guide. New York: Guilford Press.

Zanarini, M. C. (2003). Zanarini Rating Scale for Borderline
Personality Disorder (ZAN-BPD): A continuous measure
of DSM-IV borderline psychopathology. Journal of Personality
Disorders, 17, 233–242.

Zanarini, M. C., Frankenburg, F. R., & Parachini, E. A.
(2004). A preliminary, randomized trial of fluoxetine,
olanzapine, and the olanzapine–fluoxetine combination
in women with borderline personality disorder. Journal of
Clinical Psychiatry, 65, 903–907.

Zanarini, M. C., Frankenburg, F. R., Sickel, A. E., & Yong, L.
(1996). The Diagnostic Interview for DSM-IV Personality
Disorders. Belmont, MA: McLean Hospital, Laboratory
for the Study of Adult Development.

Zanarini, M. C., Vujanovic, A., Parachini, E., Boulanger, J.,
Frankenburg, F., & Hennen, J. (2003). A screening measure
for BPD: The McLean Screening Instrument for Borderline
Personality Disorder. Journal of Personality Disorders,
17, 568–573.


CHaPter 11

Bipolar Disorder

DaviD J. Miklowitz

our goal in this book is to present creative and important psychological treatments with
empirical support. This chapter on bipolar disorder by David J. Miklowitz presents his
innovative approach called family‑focused treatment (ffT), a treatment with substantial
existing evidence for efficacy. Based on years of systematic research on psychological
factors contributing to the onset and maintenance of bipolar disorder, this sophisticated
family therapy approach targets the most important psychosocial factors linked to the
disorder and associated with poor outcome (e.g., appropriate psychoeducation, communication
enhancement training, and problem‑solving skills training). This chapter, and
especially the very useful case study, also illustrates an essential linkage between psychological
and pharmacological approaches in the successful treatment of this very severe
form of psychopathology.—D. H. B.

Bipolar disorder is one of the oldest and most reliably
recognized psychiatric disorders. Our thinking about
this disorder has evolved over the last 100 years, but
the original descriptions (Kraepelin, 1921) of “manic–
depressive insanity” greatly resemble our current conceptualizations.
This chapter begins with a review of
basic information about the disorder, its diagnosis, its
longitudinal course, and drug treatment. This information
about the illness is interesting in its own right,
but it also provides the rationale for using psychosocial
treatment as an adjunct to pharmacotherapy. The majority
of the chapter describes a focused, time-limited,
outpatient psychosocial treatment—family-focused
treatment (FFT)—that comprises three interrelated
modules: psychoeducation, communication enhancement
training (CET), and problem-solving skills training
(Miklowitz, 2008b; Miklowitz & Goldstein, 1997).
It is designed for patients who have had a recent episode
of mania or depression.

the DiaGNosis of BiPolar DisorDer

DSM‑5 Criteria

The core characteristic of bipolar disorder is extreme
affective dysregulation, or mood states that swing from
extremely low (depression) to extremely high (mania).
Patients in a manic episode have euphoric, elevated
mood or irritable mood; behavioral activation (e.g., increased
goal-directed activity, excessive involvement in
high-risk activities, decreased need for sleep, increased
talkativeness or pressure of speech); and altered cognitive
functioning (grandiose delusions or inflated selfworth,
flight of ideas or racing thoughts, distractibility)—
typically for more than 1 week. For the diagnosis
of a manic episode, there must be evidence that the person’s
psychosocial functioning (marital, occupational,
or social) is disrupted, that hospitalization is required,
or that psychotic features (e.g., grandiose delusions) are

462


Bipolar Disorder

present (see the fifth edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders [DSM-5; American
Psychiatric Association, 2013]).

A patient in a hypomanic episode shows many of the
same symptoms, but the duration is typically shorter
(i.e., 4 days or more). Hypomanic symptoms also do not
bring about severe impairment in social or occupational
functioning and are not associated with the need for
hospitalization or with psychosis. However, the symptoms
must reflect a real change in a person’s ordinary
behavior—one that is observable by others. The distinction
between mania and hypomania, which is really
one of degree rather than type of illness, is difficult for
clinicians to make reliably. Often the degree to which
the behavioral activation affects a patient’s functioning
is underestimated by the patient, who can see nothing
but good in his/her behavior. A theme of this chapter is
the value of including significant others (i.e., parents,
spouses/partners, and siblings) in patients’ assessment
and treatment.

In previous editions of the DSM, patients could be
diagnosed with bipolar I disorder on the basis of a single
“mixed” episode, in which the criteria for a major
depressive episode and a manic episode are met nearly
every day for 1 or more weeks. This definition has
caused considerable confusion among clinicians, who
may ignore the requirement that episodes of both poles
be syndromal and use the mixed designation to describe
patients with a variety of co-occurring subsyndromal
depressive and hypomanic or manic symptoms (Frank,
2011). One large-scale population study found that
“mixed hypomania” is particularly common among
women with bipolar I or II disorder (Suppes et al.,
2005). These considerations have relevance for prognosis
as well as diagnosis. Patients with major depressive
disorder (MDD) who have two or more co-occurring
manic symptoms have more similarity to patients with
bipolar depression than to patients with MDD without
manic symptoms on features such as age at onset, family
history of bipolar disorder, functional impairment,
suicide attempts, and long-term conversion to bipolar
I disorder (e.g., Sato, Bottlender, Schröter, & Möller,
2003; Fiedorowicz et al., 2011).

In DSM-5 the mixed episode criteria are a much
broader course specifier in manic, depressive, or hypomanic
episodes. The specifier with mixed features
is applied when three or more subthreshold symptoms
from the opposite pole occur during a mood episode.
However, there are unanswered questions about
the treatment implications of this definition, such as

whether depression with subthreshold mixed symptoms
should be treated with mood stabilizers in conjunction
with antidepressants (First, 2010).

DSM-5 proceeds with the diagnosis of bipolar disorder
somewhat differently than earlier DSM systems.
First, the diagnostician determines whether the patient
satisfies the cross-sectional criteria for a manic episode.
If he/she does meet these criteria, the diagnosis of bipolar
I disorder is applied. If the patient currently meets
DSM-5 criteria for a major depressive episode, he/she
is diagnosed as having bipolar disorder only if there is
a past history of manic, mixed, or hypomanic episodes;
otherwise, the diagnosis is likely to be MDD or another
mood disorder, such as persistent depressive disorder.
If the patient is in remission, there must be evidence
of prior manic or mixed episodes. One implication of
this rather complicated set of diagnostic rules is that
a single manic (and in DSM-IV, a single mixed) episode,
even in the absence of documentable depression,
is enough to warrant the bipolar I diagnosis. The key
word here is “documentable,” because patients often
underreport their depression histories and reveal them
only upon careful questioning.

How Has the Diagnosis of Bipolar
Disorder Changed?

Every version of the DSM has brought changes in the
way we think about bipolar disorder, and modifications
are likely to continue as new editions are published. One
consistent area of controversy has been the proposal to
use separate criteria for child- and adolescent-onset bipolar
illness. Manic and hypomanic episodes among
children appear to be shorter than those in adults, with
more polarity switches and longer subthreshold mixed
states (Birmaher et al., 2009). Previously, DSM-IV
(American Psychiatric Association, 1994) used the
same criteria to diagnose mania in adults and children,
despite the clear developmental differences in presentation
(Leibenluft, Charney, Towbin, Bhangoo, & Pine,
2003). However, DSM-5 includes a new category, disruptive
mood dysregulation disorder, to characterize
children with frequent and explosive temper outbursts
and persistent irritability. The investigators who proposed
this category believe it will reduce false-positive
diagnoses of bipolar disorder in children (e.g., Leibenluft,
2011), although not all agreed with this new disorder
(e.g., Axelson, Birmaher, Findling, et al., 2011).

DSM-5 distinguishes between bipolar I and bipolar
II disorders. In the former, patients have fully syndro



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

mal manic episodes, but in bipolar II, patients must
have had at least one major depressive episode and one
hypomanic episode (in this chapter, the term “bipolar
disorder” refers either to bipolar I or bipolar II disorder
as defined in DSM-5, unless otherwise specified).
DSM-5 also includes a course descriptor, “rapid cycling,”
which appears to characterize between 13 and
20% of patients (Calabrese, Fatemi, Kujawa, & Woyshville,
1996). Rapid cycling is applied when patients
have had four or more discrete major depressive, manic,
or hypomanic episodes in a single year. The confusion
in applying this course descriptor lies in the fact that it
is difficult to tell when one episode has ended and another
begins: If a patient quickly switches from mania
to depression in a 48-hour period (what some refer to
as “ultrarapid cycling”), is this truly a new episode or
just a different presentation of the same episode (perhaps
with mixed features)? Rapid cycling appears to
be a transient state of the disorder and not a lifelong
phenomenon (Coryell, Endicott, & Keller, 1992).

Finally, DSM-5 deals with the thorny problem of
patients with depression who develop manic or hypomanic
episodes that are brought on by antidepressants
or other activating drugs. Because of the effects
of antidepressants on the serotonin, norepinephrine,
and dopamine systems, there is the potential for these
drugs to induce activation, particularly in a patient who
is already biologically vulnerable to mood swings. If a
patient has never had a manic episode but then develops
one after taking an antidepressant, the likely diagnosis
is a substance-induced mood disorder. The diagnosis
of bipolar disorder is only then considered if the symptoms
of mania preceded the antidepressant (a difficult
historical distinction), or if the mania symptoms continue
for at least a month after the antidepressant is
withdrawn. Similar diagnostic considerations apply to
patients who abuse drugs (e.g., cocaine, amphetamine)
that are “psychotomimetics” and can induce manic-like
states.

Epidemiology, Comorbidity,
and Differential Diagnosis

Across studies, cultures, and age groups, bipolar I and
bipolar II disorders affect at least 2% of the population.
The National Comorbidity Survey Replication (NCS-
R), an epidemiological study of 9,282 U.S. adults using
a lay-administrator structured diagnostic interview, reported
lifetime prevalence rates of 1.0% for bipolar I
disorder, 1.1% for bipolar II disorder, and 2.4% for sub


threshold bipolar illness (e.g., bipolar disorder not otherwise
specified or cyclothymic disorder; Merikangas
et al., 2007). In the international World Health Organization
World Mental Health Survey Initiative, a study
of 61,392 adults in 11 countries that used the same diagnostic
instrument, lower lifetime prevalence rates were
reported: 0.6% for bipolar I disorder, 0.4% for bipolar
II disorder, and 1.4% for subthreshold bipolar disorder
(Merikangas et al., 2011).

In a community sample of adolescents (ages 13–18),
2.5% met lifetime DSM-IV criteria for bipolar I or
II disorder, with the prevalence increasing with age
(Merikangas et al., 2012). Interestingly, 1.7% of adolescents
met DSM-IV criteria for a manic episode without
depression. Finally, in a meta-analysis of 12 studies
across the world involving a total of 16,222 youth
between ages 7 and 21, the rate of bipolar disorder was
1.8%, and did not differ across countries (Van Meter,
Moreira, & Youngstrom, 2011).

Bipolar disorder virtually always co-occurs with
other conditions, some of which become the focus of
immediate treatment. The disorders with which bipolar
disorder is comorbid have the common underpinning of
affective dysregulation. When 1-year prevalence rates
were considered in the NCS-R, the highest correlations
were observed between mania/hypomania and anxiety
disorders (62.9%), followed by behavior disorders
(attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder [ADHD] and
oppositional defiant disorder; 44.8%) and substance use
disorders (36.8%) (Merikangas et al., 2007).

Some studies have found that patients with pediatric
onset have more comorbid disorders than patients with
adult onset patients (Leverich et al., 2007). The comorbidity
of bipolar disorder and ADHD in children is between
60 and 90%, even when overlapping symptoms
are not considered (Kim & Miklowitz, 2002). Risk for
substance use disorders is five times greater in adolescents
with bipolar disorder than in healthy adolescents
(Wilens et al., 2004). Comorbidity with anxiety disorders
is approximately 44% (Masi et al., 2012; Sala et
al., 2010). Interestingly, anxiety disorders are often first
diagnosed in children of parents with bipolar disorder
and may represent the first signs of major mood illness
(Henin et al., 2005).

The distinction between bipolar disorder and personality
disorders is especially difficult. Notably, the
hallmark of borderline personality disorder is affective
instability. Akiskal (1996) has argued that what is
commonly seen by clinicians as personality pathology
is actually undertreated subsyndromal mood disorder.


Bipolar Disorder

When studies of the overlap of bipolar disorder and
personality disorders are done, the estimates of comorbidity
are actually quite conservative. For example,
George, Miklowitz, Richards, Simoneau, and Taylor
(2003) found that only 29% of patients with bipolar
disorder meet the diagnostic criteria for personality
disorders during a period of remission. Furthermore,
the comorbid personality disorder diagnosis was not
always borderline personality disorder and was often
a disorder from cluster C (e.g., avoidant or dependent
personality disorder).

The boundaries between bipolar and unipolar illness
are sometimes difficult to draw. Depressions in
bipolar and unipolar disorders may look quite similar,
but, on average, bipolar depression has a younger
age of onset, more short-term mood variability, and is
more treatment-resistant than MDD (Cuellar, Johnson,
& Winters, 2005). In the National Epidemiologic Survey
on Alcohol and Related Conditions (N = 13,048),
patients with bipolar depression endorsed suicidal ideation
and psychomotor disturbance more often than
did patients with unipolar depression, and patients
with unipolar depression were somewhat more likely
to endorse fatigue (Weinstock, Strong, Uebelacker, &
Miller, 2009). Thus, the differences between bipolar
and unipolar depression are not large, and past history
of mania or hypomania (or family history of mania in a
patient who has not had a manic episode) may provide
more information for the differential diagnosis.

Even more complicated is the distinction between
agitated depression of the unipolar type and mixed
mania of the bipolar type; both are characterized by
sadness and a highly anxious, restless, activated state.
Goldberg and Kocsis (1999) recommend that clinicians
attempting to make these distinctions place emphasis
on attributes such as goal-drivenness and undiminished
energy (despite lack of sleep), both of which tip
the scales toward bipolar disorder rather than unipolar
depressive illness.

The distinction between bipolar disorder and schizophrenia
can also be a surprisingly difficult clinical judgment.
When a patient who has schizophrenia presents
with a psychotic episode, he/she can appear acutely activated,
grandiose in thinking and actions, and elated or
depressed. In conditions once thought to be etiologically
distinct, more and more studies are finding a significant
degree of genetic overlap between bipolar disorder
and schizophrenia or other psychotic conditions (Berrettini,
2003). For example, a recent genomewide association
study found significant overlap in gene variants

among patients with schizophrenia and patients with
bipolar disorder who had mood-incongruent psychotic
features (e.g., delusions or hallucinations that have no
clear content related to sadness or elation) (Goes et al.,
2012).

DSM-5 makes a distinction between schizoaffective
disorder and major mood disorders with psychotic
features. In schizoaffective disorder, delusions and hallucinations
have been present for at least 2 weeks, in
the absence of prominent affective symptoms. In major
mood disorders, psychotic symptoms occur only during
periods of significant mood disturbance. A 10-year
follow-up of patients with schizophrenia, schizoaffective
disorders, and major affective disorders (both
bipolar and unipolar) found that “mood-incongruent”
delusions and hallucinations (i.e., those whose content
does not relate to feelings of grandiosity and elation
or, alternatively, feelings of worthlessness) are a poor
prognostic sign across diagnoses (Harrow, Grossman,
Herbener, & Davies, 2000). Harrow and colleagues
(2000) argue for a dimensional view of schizoaffective
disorder, with some patients on the psychotic end and
others on the mood end of the spectrum.

DSM-5 also describes a subsyndromal or subaffective
condition: cyclothymic disorder. Patients with cyclothymic
disorder alternate between periods of hypomanic
symptoms and brief periods of depression that
fall short of the criteria for major depressive illness.
As soon as the person develops a full manic, mixed,
or depressive episode, the diagnosis of bipolar I or II
disorder is given. Again, these distinctions really concern
the degree and duration of symptoms rather than
their form. In my own experience, clinicians are prone
to “push” patients with cyclothymia into the bipolar II
category, especially if they feel that the patients are
not reliable in their historical reporting. Sometimes it
is better to observe the mood lability of a patient over
time than attempt to distinguish cyclothymic disorder
and bipolar disorder cross-sectionally.

DruG treatMeNt aND the course
of BiPolar DisorDer

Standard Pharmacotherapy

The course of bipolar illness (its pattern of relapsing
and remitting over time) is best considered with reference
to the drug treatments that help stabilize patients
and allow most to function in the community. In the


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

prepharmacological era (i.e., prior to 1960), patients
were hospitalized for years at a time (Cutler & Post,
1982). Nowadays, the availability of mood stabilizers
such as lithium carbonate, the anticonvulsants (e.g., divalproex
sodium [Depakote], lamotrigine [Lamictal],
and other agents), and the atypical antipsychotics (e.g.,
olanzapine [Zyprexa], quetiapine [Seroquel], risperidone
[Risperdal], ziprasidone [Geodon], or aripiprazole
[Abilify]) has done much to ameliorate the course
of bipolar illness (Goldberg, 2004; Malhi, Adams, &
Berk, 2009). Some of these drugs not only control the
acute episodes of the illness but also have “prophylactic
value,” which means that they help prevent future episodes
or minimize the duration or severity of episodes
that do occur.

Most psychiatrists describe three phases of drug
treatment: an “acute phase,” in which the goal is to control
the most severe symptoms of the manic, mixed, or
depressive disorder; a “stabilization phase,” in which the
goal is to help the patient recover fully from the acute
phase, which often means treating residual symptoms
(e.g., mild depression) or levels of social–occupational
impairment; and a “maintenance phase,” in which the
goal is to prevent recurrences and continue to treat residual
symptoms. The drugs recommended for bipolar
disorder vary according to the phase of treatment. During
the acute and stabilization phases, an antipsychotic
medication may accompany a mood stabilizer. An antidepressant
may be recommended after a manic episode
has stabilized if a patient has ongoing, residual depression
symptoms. These phases of treatment are also relevant
to the psychosocial–psychotherapeutic treatment
of bipolar disorder, which I discuss later.

Symptomatic Outcome

If drug treatment is so effective, then why do we need
psychosocial treatment? The problem that consistently
arises in the drug treatment of bipolar disorder is
“breakthrough episodes.” With lithium or anticonvulsant
treatment, the rate of relapse over 1 year is about
37% (Gitlin, Swendsen, Heller, & Hammen, 1995). In
1,469 adults with bipolar I and II disorders, 49% had
recurrences over 1 year; twice as many of these recurrences
were of depressive (rather than manic or hypomanic)
episodes. In a 12.8-year follow-up of 146 adult
patients with bipolar I disorder, patients had syndromal
or subsyndromal depressive symptoms for about 32%
of the weeks of their lives, manic or hypomanic symp


toms for 9%, and mixed or cycling symptoms states for
6%; patients were in remission only about half of the
time (Judd et al., 2002).

Keck and colleagues (1998) examined the 12-month
course of bipolar disorder among 134 patients who
began in an acute manic or mixed episode. The majority
of the patients (N = 104) were treated with mood
stabilizers, with or without accompanying antipsychotics
or antidepressants. The investigators made a distinction
among “syndromic recovery,” in which patients no
longer met the DSM criteria for a manic, mixed, or
depressive episode for at least 8 weeks; “symptomatic
recovery,” a tougher criterion by which patients had
to have minimal or no mood disorder symptoms for 8
weeks; and “functional recovery,” which required that
patients regain their premorbid (preillness) level of employment,
friendships, interests, and independent living
status. Of the 106 patients who completed the study,
51 (48%) achieved syndromic recovery by 12-month
follow-up. Only 28 (26%) achieved symptomatic recovery,
and 25 (24%) reached functional recovery at
follow-up. Predictors of poor outcome included low
socioeconomic status, medication noncompliance, and
longer duration of illness.

Social–Occupational Functioning

Patients with bipolar disorder experience significant
impairment in work, social, and family functioning,
and their chances of early illness recurrence increase
dramatically when they have subsyndromal depressive
symptoms (Altshuler et al., 2006; Gitlin, Mintz,
Sokolski, Hammen, & Altshuler, 2011). Additionally,
patients with persisting depressive symptoms often
have cognitive impairment, which strongly affects social
and occupational functioning (Altshuler, Bearden,
Green, van Gorp, & Mintz, 2008). A study of 253 bipolar
I and II patients revealed that only about 33%
of the patients worked full time, and only 9% worked
part time outside of the home; 57% of patients reported
being unable to work or able to work only in protected
settings (Suppes et al., 2001).

The relationship between mood symptoms and functioning
appears to be bidirectional: Residual depressive
symptoms are clearly associated with poorer social and
occupational functioning (e.g., Gitlin et al., 2011), but
other studies have shown that poor social functioning
predicts a shorter time to mood disorder relapse (e.g.,
Weinstock & Miller, 2008).


Bipolar Disorder

Medication Nonadherence

Part of the reason why patients with bipolar disorder
have so many “breakthrough episodes” is drug nonadherence.
In one review, Colom, Vieta, Tacchi, Sanchez-
Moreno, and Scott (2005) estimated that at least 60%
of patients with bipolar disorder discontinue their
medications at some point in their lives. Between 40
and 60% are partially or fully nonadherent in the year
after their first hospitalization for a manic or mixed
episode (Strakowski et al., 1998). One study of a large
health maintenance organization found that patients
took lithium for an average of only 76 days (Johnson
& McFarland, 1996). Nonadherence has considerable
implications for the course of the disorder: When patients
stop their medications suddenly, they are at much
higher risk for relapse or suicide (Baldessarini, Tondo,
& Hennen, 2003).

The reasons that patients stop taking mood stabilizers
are varied, and include side effects, lack of insight
into the illness, younger age, lower socioeconomic
status, lack of information about medications, negative
feelings about having one’s moods controlled by
a medication, missing high periods, recent hospitalizations,
and low family support (Colom, Vieta, Tacchi, et
al., 2005). Some of these issues are amenable to modification
through adjusting dosages or substituting one
agent for another. Other problems related to nonadherence
can be addressed in adjunctive psychotherapy.

Why Psychotherapy?

What is the role of psychosocial treatment in a disorder
with such a heavy biological and genetic basis? There
is little doubt that medication is the first-line treatment
for bipolar disorder. The evidence that lithium, the anticonvulsants,
and the atypical antipsychotics reduce
relapse rates and improve functioning is substantial.
But can we do better? An optimal and perhaps overly
optimistic view of the outcome of patients with bipolar
disorder would include symptom stability for extended
periods, minimal disruptions in social functioning after
episodes, and having consistent work and family lives.
Indeed, these outcomes are highly valued by patients,
who often devise their own self-management strategies
to cope with the illness (Murray et al., 2011).

The roles of adjunctive psychotherapy can include
teaching skills for symptom management, augmenting
social and occupational role functioning, and keeping

patients adherent to their drug regimens. Implicit in
this objective is that the physiology and psychology of
major psychiatric disorders are not fully separable. We
know that changes in neural function (e.g., as revealed
in functional magnetic resonance imaging scans) often
occur among patients who respond to psychotherapy
(e.g., Kumari et al., 2011). The time has come to think
about psychotherapy and medication as working synergistically
in the major mood disorders.

The strongest argument for including psychotherapy
in an outpatient treatment program is to help patients to
cope with stress triggers. As noted in the next section,
certain forms of life events and family tensions are risk
factors in the course of bipolar disorder. Psychotherapy
can target these factors and teach patients adaptive
coping mechanisms, which can then be brought to bear
during periods of wellness to help stave off the likelihood
of a future relapse.

a vulNeraBility–stress MoDel
of recurreNces

Implicit in the notion that psychotherapy would be
helpful to a patient with bipolar disorder is the notion
that stress plays a role in eliciting symptoms of mood
disorder. What is the evidence for this view? What are
the targets for psychosocial intervention?

Life Events and Social Rhythms

Life events are consistently associated with relapses of
bipolar depression, and in some studies, of mania as
well (Johnson, 2005a). Two major pathways have been
proposed for the association of life events and mood
relapses. The first of these, the social rhythm stability
hypothesis (Ehlers, Kupfer, Frank, & Monk, 1993),
posits that major life events disrupt daily rhythms (i.e.,
when one wakes, eats, exercises, socializes, works, and
sleeps) in mood disorders. Life events can act as zeitstorers,
which disrupt established social and circadian
rhythms (e.g., the production of neuroendocrines as a
function of the time of day). For example, a previously
unemployed patient who gets a job with constantly
shifting work hours is forced to adopt a new pattern
of daily routines, which may include changes in sleep–
wake habits. Major events can also result in the loss
of social zeitgebers—people or events that help maintain
the stability of rhythms. For example, a spouse or


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

partner helps to maintain a person on predictable sleep
schedules. A relationship separation, in addition to
being a significant emotional event, results in the loss
of this human timekeeper.

Patients with bipolar disorder are exquisitely sensitive
to even minor changes in sleep–wake habits.
Studies by Malkoff-Schwartz and colleagues (1998,
2000) have revealed that manic episodes are often precipitated
by life events that change sleep–wake habits
(e.g., changing time zones due to air travel). However,
depressive episodes were not differentially associated
with rhythm-disruptive life events. One of the clinical
implications of these findings is that if patients can be
taught to regularize their social rhythms, especially
in the face of life events that normally disrupt those
rhythms, then the outcome of bipolar disorder should
be improved. Thus, variability in the sleep–wake cycle
is a target for treatment. This is a central tenet of interpersonal
and social rhythm therapy (IPSRT; Frank,
2005), as discussed below.

Life Events, Goal Dysregulation, and Mania

Across more than 12 studies, people with a history of
mania and students who are vulnerable to mania have
described themselves as more likely to react with strong
emotions to reward (Johnson, Edge, Holmes, & Carver,
2012). Self-reported reward sensitivity has been found
to predict a more severe course of mania among those
with bipolar I disorder (Meyer, Johnson, & Winters,
2001; Salavert et al., 2007), and of conversion from bipolar
spectrum disorder to bipolar II or I disorder in
high-risk college students (Alloy et al., 2012). A related
construct, heightened ambition, is associated with a
more severe course of mania among patients with bipolar
I disorder (Johnson et al., 2012). Impulsive responding,
in which people pursue rewards without awareness
of potential negative consequences, becomes elevated
during the escalation to mania (Swann, Dougherty,
Pazzaglia, Pham, & Moeller, 2004).

Sheri Johnson and colleagues (2000) hypothesize
that excess reward sensitivity may heighten reactivity
to successes, such that manic symptoms would be more
likely after life events involving goal attainment (e.g.,
getting a promotion). Goal attainment may increase
confidence, which then fuels increased goal engagement
and accelerates the development of manic symptoms
(Johnson, 2005b). In two longitudinal studies of
patients with bipolar I disorder, goal-attainment life
events predicted increases in manic symptoms but not

depressive symptoms, even after excluding life events
that could have been caused by manic symptoms (e.g.,
job loss; Johnson et al., 2000, 2008).

Family Stress

Family conflicts are also a breeding ground for increased
cycling of bipolar disorder. One method of
measuring family stress is to evaluate a family’s level
of “expressed emotion” (EE). In this procedure, a researcher
administers the Camberwell Family Interview
(Vaughn & Leff, 1976) to a family member (parent,
spouse/partner, or sibling) for approximately 1 hour to
assess the relative’s reactions to the patient’s psychiatric
disorder, with particular emphasis on a recent illness
episode. Later, a trained judge evaluates tapes of these
interviews on three primary dimensions: critical comments
(e.g., “When I talk to him, I get upset that he just
shuts down. It’s like there’s no one there!”); hostility,
or personal, generalized criticism of the patient (e.g., “I
like nothing about him”); and emotional overinvolvement,
or the tendency to be overconcerned, overprotective,
or to use inordinately self-sacrificing behaviors
in the patient’s care (e.g., “I don’t invite people to the
house because Allen [son] doesn’t like it”). Family
members who score high on one or more of these dimensions
are called “high-EE”; those who do not are
called “low-EE.”

EE is a well-established predictor of the course of
schizophrenia. In Butzlaff and Hooley’s (1998) metaanalysis
of 28 longitudinal studies of EE in schizophrenia,
23 studies replicated the same core finding:
Patients who return after an illness episode to high-EE
families are two to three times more likely to relapse
in 9-month to 1-year prospective follow-ups than those
returning to low-EE families. Several studies have
documented a link between high-EE families and relapse
among patients with bipolar disorder followed either
prospectively or retrospectively (Honig, Hofman,
Rozendaal, & Dingemanns, 1997; Miklowitz, Goldstein,
Nuechterlein, Snyder, & Mintz, 1988; O’Connell,
Mayo, Flatow, Cuthbertson, & O’Brien, 1991; Priebe,
Wildgrube, & Muller-Oerlinghausen, 1989; Yan, Hammen,
Cohen, Daley, & Henry, 2004). A 2-year study of
family EE among bipolar adolescents undergoing family
treatment also replicated this longitudinal association
(Miklowitz, Biuckians, & Richards, 2006).

On first examination, one might conclude that patients
with bipolar disorder are sensitive to stress in the
family milieu, and that levels of EE elicit an underly



Bipolar Disorder

ing biological vulnerability. But the relationship is far
from simple. First, it appears that the high-EE relatives
of patients with bipolar illness, unipolar illness,
or schizophrenia are more likely than low-EE relatives
to interpret the patients’ negative problem behaviors as
controllable by the patients (see, e.g., Hooley & Licht,
1997; Weisman, Lopez, Karno, & Jenkins, 1993; Wendel,
Miklowitz, Richards, & George, 2000). Second,
relatives and patients coping with bipolar disorder are
often locked into verbally aggressive, negative cycles of
face-to-face interaction. Simoneau, Miklowitz, and Saleem
(1998) found that high-EE relatives of patients with
bipolar disorder were more negative than low-EE relatives
during face-to-face problem-solving interactions.
The relatives and patients in high-EE families were also
more likely to engage in counterproductive “attack–
counterattack” cycles. Often the patients were provocateurs
in these interchanges; they were not the “victims”
of verbally aggressive or punitive relatives (Miklowitz,
Wendel, & Simoneau, 1998; Simoneau et al., 1998).

Clearly, a psychosocial treatment program should
consider aspects of the family’s affective environment—
such as high-EE attitudes in relatives or the
negative interchanges that characterize relative–patient
communication—to be targets for intervention. But
does one attempt to change these attitudes and interaction
patterns directly, or instead make an “end run”
around them? Family members coping with a spouse/
partner, offspring, or sibling who has bipolar disorder
are understandably quite angry, and it makes little
sense to tell them they should not be. Others feel that
their overprotective behavior is more than warranted
by the situation.

In developing FFT, my associates and I concluded
that at least one component of dealing with these attitudes
and transaction patterns is psychoeducation,
which involves the provision of information to patients
and family members about the disorder and its
manifestations. As discussed earlier, relatives (parents,
spouses, or siblings) need to realize that at least some
proportion of the patient’s aversive behaviors (e.g., irritability,
aggression, inability to work, or low productivity)
can be attributed to a biochemically driven illness
state. This may seem obvious to us as clinicians, but to
family members who deal with the patient on a day-today
basis, it is easy to attribute aversive behaviors to
personality factors or laziness, or to believe that “He/
she is doing this to hurt me.” In parallel, patients need
to become more cognizant of the way they provoke
anger and resentment in family members.

Negative face-to-face interactions cannot be eradicated,
but they can be made more productive through
the techniques of communication and problem-solving
skills training. Thus, families or couples can be taught
to stick with one problem topic rather than trying to
solve many at a time, or to use listening skills to avoid
counterproductive attack–counterattack cycles. Later
in this chapter, I explain these methods with reference
to a difficult treatment case.

treatMeNt outcoMe stuDies

Controlled psychotherapy outcome studies are new
to the field of bipolar disorder and certainly have not
kept pace with research on drug treatment. This section
describes several randomized controlled trials (RCTs)
of individual and family/marital interventions. More
thorough reviews of the studies in this area are available
(Geddes & Miklowitz, 2013; Miklowitz & Scott,
2009).

Individual Therapy

Two models of individual therapy deserve emphasis
here. Cognitive-behavioral models focus on risk factors
for relapse, including medication nonadherence,
excessive risk taking (or reward overestimation) prior
to mania, and behavioral inactivity during depression.
Lam, Hayward, Watkins, Wright, and Sham (2005;
Lam et al., 2003) examined a 6-month, 12- to 18-session
cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) model with
drug treatment versus drug treatment alone (N = 103).
Patients had been in remission for at least 6 months but
had had at least three episodes in the past 5 years. At a
1-year follow-up, 44% of patients in CBT had relapsed
compared with 75% of the patients who received drug
treatment alone. Twelve to 30 months after treatment,
CBT did not prevent relapse relative to drug treatment
alone, but it did continue to show a positive influence on
mood and days spent in episodes. The effects on depression
were more significant than the effects on mania.

A multicenter effectiveness trial of CBT in the United
Kingdom (N = 253) indicated that not all subpopulations
of patients with bipolar disorder are equally likely
to benefit from CBT (Scott et al., 2006). The study
compared 22 sessions of CBT plus pharmacotherapy to
treatment as usual (TAU) plus pharmacotherapy. The
patients had been in a variety of symptomatic states before
study entry. No effects were found for CBT on time


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

to recurrence. A post hoc analysis revealed that patients
with less than 12 prior episodes had fewer recurrences
in CBT than in TAU. However, patients with 12 or more
episodes were more likely to have recurrences in CBT
than in TAU. The authors concluded that CBT is most
applicable to patients in the early stages of their disorder
or in those whose course is less recurrent. However,
a “metaregression” of six RCTs concluded that there
was no evidence that relapses were moderated by number
of prior episodes (Lam, Burbeck, Wright, & Pilling,
2009).

Cognitive rehabilitation, a form of behavioral treatment
that emphasizes attention, concentration, and
memory strategies, may be a useful adjunct to pharmacotherapy
for patients with bipolar disorder who
have cognitive impairment. In an 18-case open trial,
Deckersbach and colleagues (2010) found that after 14
sessions of treatment, patients had improvements in depressive
symptoms, occupational functioning, and executive
functioning compared to their baselines. Randomized
trials of cognitive rehabilitation in patients
with neuropsychological impairments are warranted.

Ellen Frank and colleagues (2005) investigated the
efficacy of IPSRT—a treatment that includes not only
the core elements of Klerman, Weissman, Rounsaville,
and Chevron’s (1984) model of interpersonal psychotherapy
for depression but also a component in which
patients self-regulate their daily routines and sleep–
wake cycles. Patients with a recent mood episode were
randomly assigned to either 45-minute IPSRT sessions
and mood-stabilizing medications or an active clinical
management intervention, also with medications. The
latter comprised 20-minute sessions with a psychotherapist
who focused on drug side effects and symptom
management. Randomization was done first during an
acute phase of treatment, with sessions held weekly;
and again at the beginning of a preventive, maintenance
phase of treatment, with sessions held biweekly
or monthly for up to 2 years. Patients who received
IPSRT in the acute phase had longer intervals prior
to recurrences in the maintenance phase than patients
who received clinical management in the acute phase.
IPSRT was most effective in delaying recurrences in
the maintenance phase among patients who succeeded
in stabilizing their daily routines and sleep–wake cycles
during the acute phase (Frank et al., 2005). IPSRT
also had a positive impact on vocational functioning
(Frank et al., 2008). Thus, consistency of routines may
protect against a worsening course of the disorder and
enhance functioning.

Group Psychoeducation

The effects of group psychoeducation have been documented
in several large-scale RCTs, including one at a
Veterans Administration outpatient clinic (Bauer et al.,
2006) and another at a health maintenance organization
(Simon, Ludman, Bauer, Unutzer, & Operskalski,
2006). In both studies, psychoeducation groups were
embedded in larger systems of care, including patient
monitoring by a nurse care manager and monitoring
of the physician’s adherence to treatment guidelines.
These systematic care models were shown to be highly
effective in improving illness course and functioning
compared to usual care for bipolar patients in these settings.


An RCT focused on the combination of pharmacotherapy
and group psychoeducation was undertaken
at the University of Barcelona (Colom et al., 2003).
A total of 120 remitted patients with bipolar disorder
who were receiving pharmacological treatment were
allocated to (1) 21 sessions of structured group psychoeducation
or (2) 21 sessions of an unstructured support
group, both administered by psychologists. Psychoeducation
sessions included lectures, role play, discussions
of beliefs and attitudes, behavioral interventions and
between-session homework assignments. Over 2 years,
individuals who received group psychoeducation were
significantly more likely than those allocated to the
unstructured group to show lower relapse and hospitalization
rates and higher, more stable plasma lithium
levels (Colom et al., 2003; Colom, Vieta, Sanchez-
Moreno, et al., 2005). Moreover, a 5.5-year follow-up
of this sample revealed that the gains associated with
group psychoeducation were sustained (Colom et al.,
2009). Thus, group psychoeducation appears to be a
cost-effective adjunct to pharmacotherapy for bipolar
patients who begin in remission.

Family Therapy

There are now several studies of family interventions
as adjuncts to medication for patients with bipolar
disorder. Here, I focus on trials published after 2000;
the reader is referred to more comprehensive reviews
(Miklowitz, 2008a; Miklowitz & Scott, 2009) for coverage
of earlier family and marital studies.

Five randomized trials have been completed on FFT.
Two of these were conducted with adults recruited
from hospital settings following an acute episode, one
at the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA;


Bipolar Disorder

Rea et al., 2003) and one at the University of Colorado
(Miklowitz, George, Richards, Simoneau, & Suddath,
2003). One study was conducted in the context of the
Systematic Treatment Enhancement Program for Bipolar
Disorder (STEP-BD; Miklowitz et al., 2007b),
which examined three intensive psychotherapies (FFT,
IPSRT or CBT) in comparison with a control condition
for patients with bipolar depression. Two RCTs have
been conducted with pediatric-onset patients, one involving
adolescents with bipolar disorder (Miklowitz et
al., 2008) and the other with symptomatic children and
adolescents (ages 9–17) who were genetically at risk for
bipolar disorder (Miklowitz et al., 2013). These studies
are examined in detail below.

The UCLA and Colorado Studies

These studies each examined a 9-month, 21-session
FFT intervention that comprised psychoeducation,
communication enhancement training, and problemsolving
training. Participants were patients and their
parents or spouses. Patients were recruited during an
index episode of bipolar disorder and maintained on
mood-stabilizing medications, with or without antipsychotic
or antidepressive agents. However, the studies
differed in an important respect: At Colorado, the
comparison “crisis management” group received two
sessions of family education and individual crisis sessions,
as needed, over 9 months. In the UCLA study,
patients in the comparison group received an individual
case management and problem-solving intervention
that was of similar intensity (21 sessions) to the FFT
intervention.

Despite these design differences, the results that
emerged from the Colorado and UCLA studies were
quite similar. In the Colorado study (Miklowitz et al.,
2003), FFT and medication led to lower frequencies
of relapses and longer delays prior to relapses over a
2-year period than did crisis management and medication.
FFT was also associated with more improvement
in depression and mania symptoms—effects that did
not appear until the 9- and 12-month follow-ups but
continued for the full 24 months of follow-up. In the
UCLA study (Rea et al., 2003), the effects of FFT were
seen on hospitalization rates over a 2-year follow-up.
The effects of FFT on time to relapse were not seen in
the first year but did appear in the second year. Notably,
rates of rehospitalization in the 1- to 2-year period
following the 9-month treatment were 12% in the FFT
group and 60% in the individual therapy group; for re


lapse, the rates were 28% and 60%, respectively. Results
of both studies suggest that there may be a delayed
effect of FFT: Patients and family members may need
to “absorb” the treatment and incorporate the education
and skills training into their day-to-day lives before it
has ameliorative effects on the illness.

This latter point was clarified further by Simoneau,
Miklowitz, Richards, Saleem, and George (1999), who
examined family interaction transcripts obtained in the
Colorado study before and after FFT or crisis management
treatment. Families (patients with their parents or
spouses) participated in interactional assessments that
comprised 10-minute problem-solving discussions that
were transcribed and coded via the Category System
for Coding Partner Interactions (Hahlweg et al., 1989).
Forty-four families returned at 1 year for the same assessment,
after the FFT or crisis management protocol
had been completed. Interestingly, at the posttreatment
(1 year) interactional assessments, patients in FFT and
those in crisis management could not be distinguished
on the basis of frequency of negative interactional behaviors
(e.g., criticisms). But there were clear differences
at posttreatment in positive interactional behaviors,
particularly in the nonverbal sphere. After FFT,
patients and relatives were more likely to smile at each
other, nod when others were speaking, and lean toward
each other when speaking. Moreover, the degree to
which patients improved in their nonverbal interactional
behavior over the course of psychosocial treatment
was correlated with their degree of symptom improvement
over the year of treatment.

FFT appeared to have ameliorated certain tensions
within the family environments. Future studies using
multiple, time-lagged assessments of family interaction
and patients’ symptoms would help to disentangle
the directional relationship between improvements in
family communication and patients’ symptomatic outcomes.


The STEP-BD Study

STEP-BD examined the effectiveness of treatment
with mood stabilizers in combination with psychosocial
treatments in 15 participating sites in the United
States (Miklowitz et al., 2007b). Patients with bipolar
disorder in a depressive episode (N = 293) were randomly
assigned to mood-stabilizing medications—with
or without antidepressants—and 30 sessions of FFT,
IPSRT, CBT, or collaborative care (CC), a three-session
psychoeducational treatment. Patients assigned to any


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

intensive psychotherapy had higher recovery rates over
1 year and recovered an average of 110 days faster than
patients in CC. Patients in intensive therapy were also
more likely to remain stable in mood over the yearlong
study. In FFT, 77% of the patients recovered by 1 year;
in interpersonal therapy, 65%; and in CBT, 60%. In the
CC condition, 52% recovered. The differences between
the intensive modalities did not reach statistical significance.
It is worth noting that in STEP-BD, there was no
evidence that patients randomly assigned to mood stabilizers
with adjunctive antidepressants recovered any
more rapidly from depression than patients assigned to
mood stabilizers with adjunctive placebo (Sachs et al.,
2007).

STEP-BD, one of the largest randomized treatment
studies for bipolar disorder, suggests that psychotherapy
is an essential component of the effort to stabilize
patients with bipolar disorder in a depressive episode.
When clinicians are treating bipolar, depressed patients
with mood stabilizers or atypical antipsychotics, adding
an intensive therapy may be associated with more
rapid recovery than adding an antidepressant (Miklowitz
et al., 2007a, 2007b). The common ingredients of
intensive treatments—such as teaching strategies to
manage mood, identifying and intervening early with
prodromal symptoms, enhancing patients’ compliance
with medications, and working toward resolution of key
interpersonal or family problems—may contribute to
more rapid recoveries. FFT proved to be a particularly
potent treatment in this study, although its limitations
also became apparent: Only 54% of the patients assessed
for the study had families who were accessible
and willing to participate in treatment.

Family Psychoeducation in Early‑Onset
Bipolar Disorder

More recent applications of family psychoeducation
have focused on patients with juvenile-onset bipolar
disorder, who most frequently live with or are strongly
connected with their families of origin. FFT for adolescents
(FFT-A; Miklowitz et al., 2004) uses the same
21-session structure, adapted to the developmental needs
of this age group (e.g., the occurrence of more frequent,
briefer episodes, typically with a mixed presentation). A
2-year RCT of 58 adolescent patients with bipolar disorder
revealed that, compared to patients who received
three sessions of family psychoeducation (enhanced
care, or EC), patients in FFT-A recovered more rapidly
from their baseline depressive symptoms, spent less time

depressed at follow-up, and had greater improvements
in depressive symptoms over a 2-year follow-up (Miklowitz
et al., 2008). Furthermore, the effects of FFT-A
were moderated by the level of EE in families during the
pretreatment period. Adolescents from high-EE families
showed greater improvement in both depressive and
manic symptoms over 2 years in FFT-A than in EC; the
effects of FFT-A in adolescents from low-EE families
were not as robust (Miklowitz et al., 2009).

A version of FFT has been developed for children
and adolescents who are at risk for developing bipolar
disorder. These youth have (1) a first-degree relative
(usually a parent) with bipolar I or II disorder and (2)
significant mood dysregulation and impairment, in the
form of major depression or bipolar disorder not otherwise
specified (BD-NOS). Children with BD-NOS
have brief (1–3 days) and recurrent periods of mania
or hypomania that represent a change from baseline. A
follow-up of children with BD-NOS and a positive family
history of mania found that up to half “converted” to
bipolar I or II disorder within 5 years (Axelson, Birmaher,
Strober, et al., 2011).

In a 1-year RCT, 40 high-risk children (ages 9–17)
with MDD or BD-NOS were randomly assigned to
a high-risk version of FFT (FFT-HR) or to a one- to
two-session education control (Miklowitz et al., 2013).
The participants in FFT-HR had more rapid recovery
from their initial mood symptoms, more weeks in remission
from mood symptoms, and more improvement
in hypomania symptoms over 1 year than participants
in the education control. As was found in the adolescent
sample, the magnitude of the treatment effect was
greater among high-risk children in high-EE (vs. low-
EE) families.

Other models of family intervention for pediatric
bipolar disorder are showing promise. In a large (N
= 165) wait-list trial, Fristad Verducci, Walters, and
Young (2009) found that children with mood disorders
who were assigned to multifamily groups showed
greater mood improvement over 6 study months than
children on a wait list. Moreover, children on the wait
list who participated in the multifamily groups 1 year
later showed the same amount of improvement between
12 and 18 months.

Finally, a family-focused CBT treatment developed
for school-age children with bipolar disorder incorporates
psychoeducation, cognitive restructuring, and affect
regulation interventions (West & Weinstein, 2012).
This 12-session treatment has shown positive effects in
open trials. Results of an RCT are pending.


Bipolar Disorder

Summary

The addition of psychosocial treatment—family, group,
or individual—to pharmacotherapy leads to more positive
outcomes of bipolar disorder than can be achieved
with pharmacotherapy alone. In drawing conclusions,
we must keep in mind the different clinical conditions
of patients at the outset of treatment. For example, the
studies of CBT and group psychoeducation focused on
patients in remission, whereas those of FFT and IPSRT
focused on patients who were symptomatic and only
partially recovered from an acute episode.

The remainder of this chapter is devoted to the specifics
of delivering FFT. For whom is it intended? How
does it proceed? How are families educated about bipolar
disorder, and how do they learn new styles of communicating
or solving problems? In reviewing these
methods, the reader may wish to reflect on the various
targets of family intervention (i.e., family attitudes or
expectations, interpersonal conflict, medication nonadherence)
and the various domains of outcome that are
presumed to be influenced by family interventions via
their impact on these targets.

coNtext of theraPy

Treatment Objectives and Structure

FFT has six objectives, all of which concern coping
with an episode of bipolar disorder. These are summarized
in Table 11.1. Some of these pertain to dealing
with the current episode; others are more focused
on anticipating episodes in the future, and the stress

table 11.1. the six objectives of familyfocused
treatment

Assist the patient and relatives in the following:
••
Integrating the experiences associated with recent
episodes of bipolar disorder
••
Recognizing and accepting the patient’s vulnerability
to future episodes
••
Accepting the need for mood-stabilizing medications
for symptom control
••
Distinguishing between the patient’s personality and
his/her bipolar symptoms
••
Recognizing and learning to cope with stressful life
events that trigger recurrences of mania or depression
••
Reestablishing functional family relationships after a
mood episode

triggers for these episodes. A strong case is made for
the protective effects of medications and a stable, nonstressful
family environment.

For patients with syndromal bipolar disorder, FFT
is usually given in 21 outpatient sessions lasting 1 hour
each. Sessions are given weekly for 3 months, biweekly
for 3 months, and monthly for 3 months. Although
the 21-session version is described here, shorter versions
have been developed for high-risk populations:
children at risk for bipolar disorder (12 sessions over
4 months) (Miklowitz et al., 2013) and adolescents/
young adults at risk for psychosis (18 sessions over 6
months) (Schlosser et al., 2012).

This 9 month, 21-session structure was originally
proposed by Falloon, Boyd, and McGill (1984) for
the behavioral treatment of families of patients with
schizophrenia. The session-by-session plan is more
a guide for the clinician than a requirement because
some families require less intensive contact at the beginning,
others require more intensive contact later,
and still others simply do not need this much treatment.
The treatment is designed to parallel stages of recovery
from a mood episode. During the stabilization phase,
about seven sessions are devoted to psychoeducation,
in which patients and their relatives become acquainted
with the nature, course, and treatment of bipolar disorder.
At this stage, patients are often still symptomatic
and usually are functioning socially or occupationally
at a level lower than their preepisode capabilities (Keck
et al., 1998). Psychoeducation is an attempt to hasten
clinical stabilization by reducing the family tensions
that often accompany the stabilization phase. This
is done through helping a patient and his/her family
members make sense of the different events that have
precipitated the acute episode, come to a common understanding
of the causes and the treatment of the illness,
develop plans for how the family will act if there
are signs of a developing recurrence, and modulate expectations
for the patient’s and the family’s functioning
in the recovery period.

Once the family has begun the communication training
module (seven to 10 sessions), the patient is usually
fully stabilized from the acute episode, although
he/she may still have residual mood symptoms. At this
point, the patient is usually able to tolerate exercises
oriented toward resolving family conflict and promoting
behavior change. For example, he/she can practice
listening while another family member speaks, and
family members can do the same for him/her. These
exercises can be difficult when a patient’s emotions are


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

still dysregulated, but the structure introduced by communication
training can help the patient modulate how
he/she expresses emotions.

During the final phase, problem-solving training
(four to five sessions), the mood episode is largely remitted
and the patient has moved into the maintenance
phase of drug treatment. At this stage, and sometimes
even earlier, the patient and family are motivated to
identify and address quality-of-life issues that have
been disrupted by the illness (e.g., how a married/cohabiting
patient can find work; how parents can help a
young adult offspring move out of the home and gradually
become more independent). The last few sessions
of FFT, held monthly, help to consolidate gains made
during the 9-month treatment.

Setting

FFT has been done in a variety of outpatient settings,
such as the Child and Adolescent Mood Disorders Program
(CHAMP) at the UCLA School of Medicine; the
Didi Hirsch Community Mental Health Services in
Culver City, California; the Colorado Family Project
in Boulder, Colorado; the Pediatric Bipolar Disorders
program at Stanford University; and the Child and Adolescent
Bipolar Services program at the University of
Pittsburgh School of Medicine.

UCLA-CHAMP specializes in the treatment of adolescents
and children who are on the bipolar spectrum
(bipolar I, bipolar II, or BD-NOS). The staff comprises
faculty members in psychology and psychiatry, psychiatry
fellows and psychology interns, marriage and family
therapists, and psychology graduate students. The
clinic, opened in January 2010, evaluates 10–12 new
patients and families per month.

Client Variables

FFT is conducted with patients with bipolar disorders
(bipolar I, bipolar II, or BD-NOS) who live with (or in
close proximity to) their parents, siblings, or, for adults,
spouses/partners. Patients can be of any age. Family
participants can also include combinations of parental
and spousal relatives, or divorced parents of the person
with bipolar disorder. In the latter case, we may conduct
some of the sessions with the patient and one parent and
other sessions with the patient and the other parent.

Patients with bipolar disorder can present as manic,
mixed, hypomanic, depressed, or rapid cycling. The

polarity of the most recent episode, however, is a moving
target—it may change before the patient is seen
next. Patients who are manic or hypomanic, particularly
those who are elated and grandiose, are often in
denial about whether they are really ill, and may believe
that the disorder and its treatment are simply ways
for others to control them. Depressed patients may be
more motivated for psychosocial treatment but may
have cognitive difficulty assimilating the educational
content of sessions. Patients with a mixed episode or
rapid-cycling bipolar disorder can be candidates for
FFT. Any of these presentations may require emergency
interventions such as changes in medications or
hospitalization during treatment. Although there is no
contraindication for offering FFT to patients who have
been symptomatically recovered for lengthy periods, in
our experience, they and their family members are less
motivated for treatment than those who have recently
coped with a mood episode.

Patients with comorbid alcohol or other substance
use disorders pose special problems. These patients are
usually resistant to psychosocial treatment and medication.
They are also difficult to diagnose; the effects
of drugs or alcohol can mimic the cycling of a mood
disorder. Generally, patients with active substance
use disorders are more successfully treated if they are
“dry” before FFT commences. It is often necessary to
supplement FFT with chemical dependency programs
(e.g., dual-diagnosis Alcoholics Anonymous groups).
Nonetheless, a protocol for treating adolescents with bipolar
disorder and substance abuse has been developed
(Goldstein, Goldstein, & Miklowitz, 2008; Miklowitz,
2012).

Concurrent Drug Treatment

We require that our patients be seen simultaneously by
a psychiatrist, who monitors the patient’s medications.
Typically, a regimen includes a primary mood stabilizer,
usually lithium carbonate, divalproex sodium (Depakote),
or lamotrigine (Lamictal). The choice of these
mood stabilizers is at least in part a function of whether
the patient presents with clear-cut episodes of euphoric
mania, in which case lithium is often recommended.
Lamotrigine is increasingly used for bipolar depression.
More and more, we are seeing patients treated with
atypical antipsychotics (risperidone [Risperdal], quetiapine
[Seroquel], aripiprazole [Abilify], ziprasidone
[Geodon], or olanazapine [Zyprexa]) as either primary


Bipolar Disorder

mood stabilizing agents or adjuncts to traditional mood
stabilizers. There is strong evidence that these agents
are highly effective in controlling mania (Scherk, Pajonk,
& Leucht, 2007), and some (notably, quetiapine)
have antidepressant properties as well (Malhi et al.,
2009). These agents are particularly valuable if the
patient is highly agitated or psychotic. Antidepressants
(e.g., paroxetine [Paxil], venlafaxine [Effexor], bupropion
[Wellbutrin]) are still recommended as adjuncts
to mood stabilizers or atypical antipsychotics if the
patient’s depression does not remit, but they are given
sparingly because of the risk of switching from depression
into manic, mixed, or rapid-cycling states (Altshuler
et al., 1995) and, in children, a concern about a
slightly increased risk of suicidal ideation or behaviors
(Vitiello & Swedo, 2004). However, there is little evidence
that antidepressants cause mania among patients
with bipolar depression who are simultaneously treated
with mood stabilizers or atypical antipsychotic agents
(Sachs et al., 2007).

A core principle of FFT is that the family therapist
must have regular contact with the patient’s psychiatrist.
This contact is established early in treatment. A
close affiliation between the psychosocial and pharmacological
treatment team enhances the likelihood of
the patient’s remaining compliant with his/her medications;
it also decreases the likelihood of “splitting,” or
the tendency for a patient (or even family members) to
have a “good doctor” and a “bad doctor.” For example,
patients frequently complain about their physicians
and say to their FFT clinicians, “I wish you could just
monitor my medications.” An FFT clinician who has
a regular dialogue with a patient’s physician can avoid
the trap that is being set by encouraging the patient to
bring up these problems with the physician directly.

Some patients who refuse all medications assume
that coming to therapy will be a substitute for drug
treatment. These patients often have had bad experiences
with pharmacotherapy and psychiatrists, and may
also believe that they are not ill, or that the illness they
do have can be treated using “alternative medicine.”
We have generally taken a hard line with these patients
and do not accept them into FFT unless they commit
to standard pharmacotherapy (usually lithium, anticonvulsants,
and/or atypical antipsychotics). Patients with
bipolar disorder who are unmedicated are highly likely
to have relapses, and it is not in their best interests for
the clinician to imply that their illness can be managed
with psychosocial treatment alone.

Therapist Variables

In our UCLA and Colorado studies, therapists’ ages
have ranged from 23 to 55 years, with from 1 to 30
years of clinical experience. The majority have been
graduate students in clinical psychology or psychology
interns, psychiatry fellows, or postdoctoral psychology
fellows. Few have had extensive background in family
therapy before learning FFT. The 15-site STEP-BD
program involved both therapists with doctorates and
social workers who varied considerably in treatment
experience. In other words, there is no requirement that
an FFT therapist has to have a certain amount of clinical
training at the outset.

Although there have been no studies of therapist
variables as predictors of the outcome of FFT, our clinical
experience has been that two variables influence
the uptake of this intervention. The first is the ability to
think of a family or couple as a system in which members
are interdependent and mutually influence other
members’ behaviors. Therapists who have trouble with
FFT often have difficulty making the transition to this
systemic way of thinking. They tend, for example, to
conduct family sessions as if they were individual sessions,
with one patient and several observers. Some of
these same problems arise in learning other forms of
family therapy.

The second positive predictor is the willingness to
think biopsychosocially—that is, to see bipolar disorder
as a biologically based illness that requires medications,
even if its symptoms are partially evoked by concurrent
stressors. Thus, a therapist often must argue for
the patient’s drug adherence even when psychosocial
issues are more interesting and seem more pressing.

We have found that the following training protocol
works well for learning FFT. First, therapists attend an
FFT workshop conducted over 1–2 days. Then, they
begin attending group supervision sessions in which
trained FFT therapists discuss their cases, and in which
they are able to observe sessions (or listen to tapes).
They read the published treatment manual (Miklowitz,
2008b) and, when relevant, the adapted manuals for adolescents
with BD or children at risk for BD. Then they
serve as cotherapists to trained FFT therapists. After
treating two cases with close supervision, they are usually
ready to see families or couples independently, or
even take on trainees themselves.

The cotherapy model has several advantages for
training. It has a long history in the family therapy lit



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

erature (see, e.g., Napier & Whitaker, 1988). Cotherapists
have a way of keeping their fellow therapists on
track. Also, if one person appears to be feeling “ganged
up on” by one clinician and other family members, the
other therapist can bridge the gap by allying him/herself
with this family member. In-session dialogue between
the clinicians can also provide effective modeling
of communication skills for members of a family
or couple.

PretreatMeNt assessMeNts

Diagnostic Evaluation

Bipolar disorder is becoming an increasingly common
diagnosis in inpatient and outpatient community settings.
Although this is a positive development given
its underidentification in the past, there is also an element
of sloppiness in modern diagnostic evaluations.
Nowhere is this more obvious than in the diagnosis of
children and adolescents, who are now being called
“bipolar” with little supporting evidence (Carlson et
al., 2009). The inadequacy of community diagnostic
evaluations derives in part from inadequate insurance
reimbursement for the evaluation phases of patients’
treatment. Some of the patients referred to us have been
more aptly diagnosed as having cyclothymic disorder,
borderline personality disorder, or even MDD. Many
adolescents are referred with “rage attacks.” Our colleagues
in community practice have often noted the
same problems when patients who presumably have
bipolar disorder are referred to them.

Upon seeing a new patient, a clinician often finds it
useful to determine the reliability of the diagnosis with
a formal assessment, using all or part of a structured
diagnostic interview. Within our research protocols, we
have used the Structured Clinical Interview for DSMIV—
Patient Version (SCID; First, Spitzer, Gibbon, &
Williams, 1995) as the diagnostic assessment device.
The SCID is well described elsewhere (Spitzer, Williams,
Gibbon, & First, 1992). When the patient is
under age 18, we use the Schedule for Affective Disorders
and Schizophrenia for School-Age Children—
Present and Lifetime Version (K-SADS-PL), with the
accompanying K-SADS Depression and Mania Rating
Scales (Axelson et al., 2003; Chambers et al., 1985;
Kaufman et al., 1997). The K-SADS-PL requires separate
interviews with the child and at least one parent,
followed by consensus ratings of each symptom item.

These instruments are being updated for DSM-5 to include
changes such as the addition of disruptive mood
dysregulation disorder or the broader definition of autism
spectrum disorders.

Some of the factors that can affect the reliability of
the data obtained from the SCID or K-SADS-PL include
whether the patient is acutely ill or stable; acutely
ill patients are less reliable in their symptom reports.
Typically, patients in a manic state minimize their
symptoms, whereas depressed patients may do the reverse.
Patients with bipolar disorder also have trouble
with retrospective reporting: “I’ve had over 1,000
episodes” and “I’ve been constantly manic–depressed
since I was an infant” are common responses to diagnostic
interviews.

Whether one uses the structured or an open-ended
clinical interview, it is often difficult to determine
whether a patient’s mood dysregulations and associated
changes in activity are at the subsyndromal or syndromal
levels. Some patients report brief periods of hypomania
or irritability that alternate with more severe depressions.
These brief, activated periods do not always
reach the DSM duration threshold for hypomania (4
days or more), especially among children and teens. In
some cases, the patient is “one symptom short.” Some
of these patients are better characterized as having cyclothymic
disorder or MDD. For children with manic
symptoms who do not meet the duration or symptom
count criteria, the diagnosis of BD-NOS is often given.

Hagop Akiskal (1996) has encouraged clinicians to
consider a broader bipolar spectrum that includes core
temperamental disturbances, including hyperthymia
(exuberance, overoptimism, grandiosity, stimulus seeking,
physical intrusiveness with others) or “sub-bipolar
dysthymia.” In FFT, the broadening of the bipolar spectrum
to include these patients introduces a quandary:
Does the clinician proceed with such patients in the
same way as with patients with bipolar I or bipolar II
disorder? How does the clinician educate the patient
and family about the factors that bring about manic or
depressive episodes if discrete episodes cannot be identified?
If a patient has never had a full manic episode,
should the therapist proceed under the assumption that
the patient eventually will develop mania spontaneously?
Do the same self-management techniques (e.g.,
using problem solving to minimize family conflict)
apply?

Our general impression has been that patients who
do not go through clear-cut cycles of mood episodes
comprise a different population of patients than those


Bipolar Disorder

with true bipolar disorder. Therefore, before we recommend
a course of FFT, we require that there be
evidence of an episodic course of illness, even if at the
subthreshold level. Nonetheless, psychosocial interventions
almost certainly have a role to play in the stabilization
of patients with these broad spectrum presentations,
an important direction for future research.

Mood Chart

Clarity on the diagnosis, as well as the patient’s progress
in treatment, is aided by asking the patient to keep
a daily mood chart. One such instrument, the Social
Rhythm Metric (Monk, Kupfer, Frank, & Ritenour,
1991), asks the patient to document daily mood on a
–5 (Depressed) to +5 (Euphoric/activated) scale,
along with social routines that may influence these
moods (e.g., sleep–wake times, times when the patient
socializes, the intensity of this social stimulation, the
patient’s exercise habits, and other factors).

Leverich and Post (1998) have developed a self-rated
“life chart” that requires the patient to keep track of
daily mood variations, medications, life stressors, and
sleep. Data from mood/activity charts help the clinician
and patient to evaluate collaboratively the type of
cycling the patient experiences and the degree to which
social stressors contribute to mood fluctuations. Figure

11.1 is an example of a mood chart; note the cycling of
the disorder in relation to specific social stressors and
sleep patterns reported by the patient. In this example, a
stressor (a pet’s illness) is associated with sleep disruption
and the appearance of mixed mood symptoms at
the subsyndromal level.
Family Assessments

FFT begins with a thorough assessment of family attitudes
and behaviors to identify the targets of intervention.
The research studies at UCLA have begun with
the Camberwell Family Interview, the instrument for
rating EE discussed earlier. This interview, usually
done when the patient is acutely symptomatic, focuses
on the prior 3-month period, which usually includes
the prodromal phases of symptom buildup. The interview
yields answers to the following questions: What
is the current level of tension in the household and in
the relative–patient relationship? Which of the patient’s
behaviors are eliciting stimuli for family arguments or
hostility? Do family members understand that the patient
has bipolar disorder, or are they likely to attribute
the patient’s negative behaviors to internal or controllable
factors?

A problem with the EE/Camberwell Family Interview
method is its lack of exportability to community

1/27 1/28 1/29 1/30 1/31 2/1 2/2 2/3 2/4 2/5 2/6 2/7 2/8 2/9 2/10 2/11 2/12
Hours of sleep 7 6 8 6 6 6 7 10 3 5 6 5 6 4 5 6
stayed out til3 am
argumentwith Dad
rejectingevent withboyfriend
cat
got sick
went to
hospital
cat out
of hospital
High

Normal
mood

Low

5
4
3
2
1
0
–1
–2
–3
–4
–5

figUre 11.1. Example of a self-rated mood chart.


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

care settings. Interviews with two parents can total 3
hours, and the coding of interview tapes can add an
additional 6 person-hours per family. If a clinician’s
purpose is treatment planning rather than research, he/
she may be able to substitute a self-report measure such
as the Perceived Criticism Scale (Hooley & Teasdale,
1989). This measure simply asks the patient to rate, on
a 1- to 10-point scale, the degree to which close relatives
express critical comments toward him/her, and
the degree to which he/she expresses critical comments
toward relatives. We evaluated the predictive validity
of this scale in a sample of 360 bipolar adults followed
over 1 year (Miklowitz, Wisniewski, Miyahara, Otto,
& Sachs, 2005). The degree to which patients reported
being upset or distressed by criticism from relatives
was a strong predictor of their levels of depression over
a 1-year prospective period. Interestingly, the amount
of criticism they perceived from relatives was not prognostically
significant.

In our research protocols, we typically bring the family
in for an interactional assessment before treatment
is initiated. First, each member of the family, including
the patient, identifies one or several family problem
topics. Then, the family discusses one or more of these
topics while the clinician observes through a one-way
mirror. Transcripts of these 10-minute problem-solving
discussions can then be coded using manuals such as
the Category System for Coding Partner Interactions
(Hahlweg et al., 1989) or the Global Assessment of Relational
Functioning (Dausch, Miklowitz, & Richards,
1996).

The clinician can also rely on simple observations
of the family’s communication and problem-solving
behavior to inform the skills training modules of FFT.
To quote Yogi Berra, “You can observe a lot by just
watching.” First, many family members or patients
are unable to focus on a single problem, and instead
“cross-complain” or accuse other family members to
counteract the accusations directed at them. Some engage
in attack–counterattack cycles. For any particular
family, the clinician must first identify the form these
interchanges take, which dyadic or triadic relationships
they involve; the content areas that trigger the interchanges
(e.g., medication-taking habits, independence,
interpersonal boundaries); and whether members of the
family are able to stop these cycles before they spiral
out of control. Who criticizes whom, and how often?
How does the target person respond? Does the original
problem ever get solved? How clear (or disorganized) is
the speech of patients or relatives?

Process of treatMeNt

Psychoeducation

Table 11.2 summarizes the topical domains that are
covered in FFT. The initiation of the psychoeducation
module of FFT requires three conditions. First, the patient
must be seeing a psychiatrist and have begun a
medication regimen. Second, a diagnostic assessment
must have been completed. Third, the patient must be
able to tolerate family sessions. There is no requirement
that the patient be in remission or recovery.

table 11.2. family-focused treatment:
structure and topical outline

I. Psychoeducation
The symptoms and course of bipolar disorder
••
The signs and symptoms of (hypo)mania and

depression
••
The development of the most recent mood episode
••
The role of life events in most recent episode
••
The course of the disorder over time

The etiology of bipolar disorder

••
The vulnerability–stress model
||The role of stress
||Genetic and biological predispositions

••
Risk and protective factors in the course of the
disorder

Interventions and self-management
••
Keeping a mood chart
••
Types of medications
••
Types of psychosocial treatments
••
How the family can help
••
Self-management of the disorder
••
The relapse prevention drill

II. Communication enhancement training
••
Expressing positive feelings
••
Active listening
••
Making positive requests for change
••
Expressing negative feelings

III. Problem-solving skills training
••
Define problems
••
Generate solutions
••
Evaluate advantages/disadvantages
••
Choose one or a combination of solutions
••
Develop an implementation plan
••
Review the problem’s status


Bipolar Disorder

In the seven or more weekly sessions that comprise
the psychoeducation module, participants (patients and
their close relatives) become acquainted with the symptoms
of bipolar disorder; the way episodes develop; the
roles of genetics, biology, and stress; pharmacological
treatments; and the role of stress management strategies.


The Initial Sessions: Providing a Rationale

As in most other forms of therapy, the clinicians begin
by explaining the rationale for FFT. Many participants
ask why family or couple sessions should accompany
medication for a patient adjusting to a recent episode
of bipolar disorder. Particularly helpful in orienting
participants is the “reentry model” (Miklowitz, 2008b,
p. 104):

An episode of mood disorder can be quite traumatic to
all members of the family. . . . In bipolar disorder, when
the person returns home and begins to recover, there is
a “getting reacquainted” period in which everyone has
to get to know everyone else again, and when everyone
tries to make sense of what happened. This is a tough
time for any family, and part of our purpose here is to
make this “reacquaintance period” less disturbing to all
of you. We’d like during this year to get you, as a family,
back to where you were before became
ill. We want to give you some tools to deal with
this recovery period.

There are two purposes for this introduction. First,
it communicates to the family members that their emotional
reactions to the patient’s illness—even if quite
negative—are normal and expectable. Second, it implies
that the therapy will include exploration and clarification
of participants’ emotional reactions to information
about the disorder. This feature of the therapy can
be made even more explicit:

If feelings come up for you when we’re discussing this
material, please bring them up. We’re interested in
knowing how this material applies to you and your own
experiences. You may or may not agree with some of
the material we present here. . . . The purpose of focusing
on this material is to put your experiences into a
context that will make sense. (p. 110)

Next, the treatment is previewed:

We’re going to work with you on two different levels.
One is on encouraging ’s ongoing

work with his psychiatrist so that he can get himself
stabilized on medications. The second is on how you
as a family can minimize stress. . . . We think there
are several ways to do this, including acquainting you
with the facts about bipolar disorder, and working with
you on improving your communication and problem
solving with each other. These strategies should increase
’s chances of making a good recovery
and help you as a family cope with the disorder.
How does this sound to you? (p. 107)

The Symptoms of Bipolar Disorder

FFT proceeds with a series of handouts that are used
as stimuli for generating family or couple discussions.
These contain descriptions of the symptoms of manic,
hypomanic, or depressive episodes, with illustrations.
The purpose of these handouts is not for the participants
to memorize the diagnostic criteria. Rather, they
provide a starting point for destigmatizing the illness
and breaking family taboos against talking about it.
The patient is asked to look at the lists and describe
to family members the way it feels when one is euphoric,
irritable, unable to sleep, or activated by racing
thoughts or grandiose plans. Likewise, family members
describe the behaviors they observe when the patient
cycles into mania or hypomania. A similar dialogue is
undertaken for depression symptoms. Consider the following
dialogue among a patient, mother, father, and
therapist.

Patient: Well, the thing is, there’s the manic and then
there’s the hypomanic. When I’m manic, I really
should be hospitalized. I control the weather; I’m famous.
When I’m hypomanic, well, I just can get into
that from having too much stress, too much caffeine,
and being all revved up. . .

motHer: I can tell when she’s high because I start getting
real mad at her. She provokes me.

FatHer: And she gets this look in her eyes. And she
says we’re not listening to her. . .

Patient: But you’re not! That’s when you’re most likely
to tune me out!

tHeraPist: Let’s hold on that for now, about listening.
It’s very important, and certainly something we’ll
want to focus on as we go along, but what else do
you notice when you get manic or hypomanic? [Redirects
the focus.]

Patient: I get sort of, well, reactive. . . I experience


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

everything so intensely, but see, they know this as
who I am.

Note the themes that arise in this discussion of
symptoms, and how these relate to the six objectives of
FFT outlined in Table 11.1. The patient’s vulnerability
to recurrences is made explicit by the family’s identification
of the prodromal signs of her episodes. The
patient points to the role of disturbed family communication.
She alludes to questions about whether some
of her symptoms are really just personality traits (i.e.,
intensity and reactivity). There is a beginning discussion
of stress factors that may play a role in triggering
her episodes.

The Vulnerability–Stress Model and the Life
Events Survey

Early in psychoeducation, the family clinicians make
a strong argument for the conjoint influences of stress,
biological imbalances of the brain, and genetic vulnerability
in the course of bipolar illness. A handout
illustrating these vulnerability–stress interactions is
provided, and various risk and protective factors are
reviewed. For example, the patient and family members
are warned of the impact of “poor sleep hygiene”
(i.e., keeping irregular hours, having unpredictable
bedtimes); alcohol and drug use; stressful family interchanges;
and provocative, overstimulating interpersonal
interactions. They are encouraged to make use of
available protective factors (e.g., social supports), and
help the patient maintain adherence to his/her pharmacotherapy
regimen. The purposes of the patient’s
various medications are given, and the role of blood
level monitoring (where relevant) is reviewed. In outlining
protective factors, a special emphasis is placed
on keeping the family environment low in conflict and
on maintaining reasonable performance expectations
of the patient during the recovery period. In the following
vignette, the clinician reminds the patient and his
mother that depression is not the same as lack of effort,
and that a period of recovery prior to regaining one’s
pre-illness occupational status is to be expected.

tHeraPist: (to Gary, the patient) I think you can’t expect
too much just yet. You’re still recovering from
your episode. It may take some time to get back on
track.

motHer: How long? He’s been like this now for a
while.

tHeraPist: I’m sure that’s frustrating, but you have to
think of this as a convalescent period. When someone
has a bad flu, he may need an extra day or two
in bed to recover completely. For bipolar disorder,
this period of time can average 3 to 6 months. But,
Gary, with your medication treatments and our family
sessions, and the fact that you’ve maintained your
friendships, I have every expectation that you’ll recover
and be able to get back to work.

The clinician here offers hope but does not paint a
rosy picture of the future. Often the family has been
through these episodes before, and a clinician who offers
an excessively optimistic view of the future will be
dismissed as unrealistic.

Describing the biology and genetics of the disorder
is critical to justifying the role of medications. However,
it is not necessary for the clinician to go into detail
about the neurophysiology of the disorder. Instead, the
clinician begins by asking the participants to review
their family pedigree and discuss any other persons
in the family who have had episodes of depression or
mania. In reviewing this history, the family is told that
the vulnerability to bipolar disorder may take many
forms, including major depression without mania, alcoholism,
suicide, and dysthymia. Next, the clinician
explains the notions behind neural dysregulation in bipolar
disorder:

“We know that people with bipolar disorder have
trouble regulating their emotional states, sleep, and
arousal, all of which are regulated by the limbic system,
an important circuit in your brain. In mania, we
think that the limbic system becomes overactive, and
the frontal cortex—the ‘executive’ in your brain—
stops being able to do its job. It’s almost like having
your foot on the gas pedal when the brakes are not
working. When a person gets depressed, the system
shuts down, and the circuits become underactive.
These changes in brain activity can’t be controlled
through your conscious efforts, but the medications
you take can go a long way toward balancing the activity
in your nervous system.”

When family members begin to attribute the patient’s
aversive behaviors to willfulness (the “fundamental
attributional error”), the clinician can remind
them of the existence of neural dysregulation. But the
family and patient should also be discouraged from
overemphasizing the biological nature of the disorder,


Bipolar Disorder

to the point of neglecting stress factors such as longstanding
family conflicts. In other words, the patient is
not entirely taken off of the hook: He/she is encouraged
to self-monitor when getting into arguments with family
members, and to determine whether his/her reactions
to these conflicts reflect an unresolved symptom
state or a reemergence of conflicts that would have been
troublesome even before he/she became ill.

Clarifying the stress triggers for the most recent episode
is aided by a handout describing life changes that
may have occurred when the episode was developing.
Some of these changes are quite severe and negative
(e.g., death of a parent); others are mild but may have
provoked changes in sleep–wake cycles (e.g., taking a
vacation). The clinician engages the family or couple
in a discussion about what stressors may have provoked
the patient’s current episode, with the caveat that the
triggers for mania and depression may be quite different.
It is not critical that the participants agree on
a singular cause for the most recent episode, but they
may benefit from the awareness that mood episodes are
affected by environmental as well as neurobiological
factors.

The Relapse Drill

Toward the end of psychoeducation, the family and patient
are given their first exposure to problem solving.
The task is to review the prodromal signs of a developing
episode and go through the steps that are necessary
to prevent a full relapse. Participants are asked to
generate alternative courses of action should the patient
relapse into mania or depression, which can include arranging
emergency psychiatric services (e.g., calling
the patient’s psychiatrist), introducing behavioral activation
exercises (e.g., assisting the depressed patient in
scheduling more outdoor activity during the day). Each
family member is asked to perform a function in the
relapse prevention plan. For example, in some families
it may make sense for a parent to undertake contact
with the physician. In others, the patient may want the
first opportunity to do so. The family or couple is encouraged
to leave phone numbers of emergency contact
people, including the family clinicians, in an easily accessible
place.

Dealing with Resistance to the Illness Concept

Patients with bipolar disorder often have strong reactions
to the psychoeducational materials, as do their

family members. These materials require that the participants
recognize bipolar disorder as an illness that
will eventually recur. Younger patients are particularly
likely to reject the notion of a recurrent illness, particularly
if they are still hypomanic; they feel powerful and
in control, and the idea of having an illness feels like
shackles. Moreover, they are particularly attuned to the
stigma associated with bipolar disorder or any other
psychiatric diagnosis, and fear that their behavior will
now be labeled as that of a crazy person. Resistance can
also originate with family members. Relatives of depressed
patients are apt to see the disorder as willfully
caused and not the product of biochemical imbalances.
Resistance from one member is often associated with
intense family conflicts.

Accepting a psychiatric disorder is a painful process
for patients and relatives. Often the psychoeducational
materials raise questions, such as “Why me? Why now?
What kind of life will I have? Will people treat me like
I’m mentally ill from now on? Will I ever get back to
normal?” Relatives ask themselves similar painful
questions, such as “Will I always have to take care of
him/her? Are my dreams and hopes for him/her gone?”
Spouses/partners may ask, “Should I leave him/her?”
When asking themselves these questions, some patients
respond by “underidentifying,” or denying the reality
of the disorder, or by acknowledging the illness superficially
but living their lives as if it were not real.

Others “overidentify” and unnecessarily limit themselves.
For example, one woman avoided romantic relationships
because “No one will ever be able to get close
to me because of my mood swings.” Likewise, family
members can deny the realities of the disorder or, in
contrast, overmonitor the patient’s health status and try
to limit his/her behavior unnecessarily. Family conflict
reaches a maximum when there is a mismatch between
coping styles, such as when patients underidentify and
relatives overidentify, or the reverse.

FFT clinicians proceed with a sensitivity to the painful
emotional issues underlying these reactions to the
illness. One method for dealing with these reactions is
to predict that denial will occur, and to reframe it as
a sign of health. For example, consider a young man
with hypomania who has accepted taking medications
but denies being ill, and whose parents overcontrol and
overmonitor his behavior. To this young man, the clinician
might say:

“Although I appreciate that you’re taking medication
and going along with the treatment plan, I’m going to


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

guess that you’re not always going to want to do this.
You probably have some questions about whether
this diagnosis is right for you or whether you’ll have
more symptoms. I can understand why you’d have
these questions. Coming to terms with having bipolar
disorder—or really any illness—is a very painful
process that can be hard to accept. This is a normal
and a healthy struggle. So, as we’re going through
our material, you may find yourself reacting to it and
feeling that it can’t be relevant to you. But I’d like for
you to agree that if you have these reactions, you’ll
bring them up so we can discuss them.”

Note that this intervention has a paradoxical flavor,
but that the clinician stops short of actually encouraging
the patient to remain resistant or to increase his level
of disagreement with the diagnosis. Instead, the clinician
reframes this denial as healthy and expectable, and
connects it with an underlying emotional struggle.

A second way to intervene is through “spreading the
affliction.” Being labeled as mentally ill can put a person
in a one-down position vis-à-vis other family members,
including siblings with whom he/she may already
feel competitive. A possible side effect of psychoeducation
is the exaggeration of these structural family problems.
The clinician can avoid this trap by encouraging
other members of the family to discuss their own experiences
with depression, anxiety, or other problems.
This process can help normalize mood problems and
take the patient “off the hot seat.”

The following vignette involves Josh, a 25-yearold
with a recent manic episode. He reacted strongly
because he thought everyone was telling him he was
“whacked out.” According to Josh, all he had done was
“party too much.” During one of the psychoeducation
sessions, his father admitted to having had a depressive
episode in college.

tHeraPist: Josh, you seem like you’re reacting to
something I just said about bipolar disorder. Were
you offended?

JosH: I dunno. It wasn’t anything you said; just I get
tired of being the only one in the family who has
problems.

tHeraPist: Is that really true? Has anyone else in the
family ever had any problems with depression? Or
what I’ve called mania?

FatHer: (pause) I did, and I’ve told Josh about this.
Remember what I told you about college?

JosH: (sullen) I don’t know. Why don’t you clue us in?
FatHer: I had that long period when I couldn’t sleep
and eat, and I couldn’t study. I dropped out for a semester.


The session then focused on the father and his own
history of depression. He revealed a history of psychosis
involving delusional thinking. Although the patient
was sullen at first, he became more cooperative in the
discussions that followed, and more willing to talk
about how the illness label made him feel stigmatized.

A third method of dealing with resistance involves
making analogies to medical disorders. The illness will
feel less stigmatizing to patient and family if they can
see it within the continuum of other kinds of chronic
physical illness. Diabetes and hypertension are often
good comparisons, particularly because the influence
of stress can also be brought to bear:

“Bipolar disorder involves biological imbalances
much like hypertension does, and it’s affected by
stress in much the same way. Most people have
changes in blood pressure when something stressful
happens. But people with hypertension have a vulnerability
to extreme shifts in their blood pressure.
In the same way, most people have mood changes
when something important happens, but people with
bipolar disorder operate at greater extremes.”

In making these analogies, the clinician validates the
patient’s feelings about social stigma:

“Although there are some similarities with illnesses
like hypertension, bipolar disorder can be tougher
to live with because other people tend to be afraid
of it and don’t know what it means. They can think
you’re doing it on purpose. You have to take the time
to educate other people—particularly those people
who are most important to you—and explain it in a
way that they won’t be freaked out by it.”

Communication Enhancement Training

The second module of FFT, CET, begins at approximately
Session 8 and lasts for about seven or eight sessions
(five weekly sessions, followed by two or three
biweekly sessions). CET is guided by two assumptions.
First, aversive family communication is a common sequel
to an episode of a psychiatric illness and to a large


Bipolar Disorder

extent reflects distress within the family or couple in
members’ attempts to deal with the disorder. Second,
the frequency of aversive communication can be reduced
through skills training.

CET uses a role-playing format to teach patients and
their relatives four communication skills: expressing
positive feelings, active listening, making positive requests
for changes in others’ behaviors, and giving negative
feedback. These skills are central to the behavioral
family management approach to schizophrenia of
Falloon and colleagues (1984) and Liberman, Wallace,
Falloon, and Vaughn (1981). The degree to which each
of these skills dominates the role-play exercises varies
according to the family assessments conducted earlier.
Treatment of a family with much heated conflict
and high-EE attitudes might focus on adaptive ways in
which participants could ask for changes in each other’s
behaviors. Treatment of an emotionally disengaged
couple might focus on positive feedback and listening
skills to coax the partners into experimenting with a
more interdependent relationship.

The module begins with an explication of the CET
method for the family:

A person can be at risk for another relapse of bipolar
disorder if the home environment is tense. . . .
Good communication and problem solving can be
among those “protective factors” against stress that we
talked about before. For a close relative, learning effective
communication skills can be a way of decreasing
tension and improving family relationships. . . . We
want to help you communicate in the most clear and
the least stressful way possible. . . . We’ll be asking
you to turn your chairs to each other and practice new
ways of talking among yourselves. (Miklowitz, 2008b,
pp. 208)

Note that CET is linked with two of the six objectives
of the larger treatment program: helping participants to
cope with stress triggers and restoring functional family
relationships after an illness episode. The first two
skills, positive feedback and active listening, generally
foster a feeling of collaboration between members of
the couple or family. In contrast, making positive requests
for change and giving negative feedback are
more conflict-oriented, and are only introduced once
participants are used to the role-playing and behavioral
rehearsal format.

For each skill, the clinician gives participants a
handout that lists the skill’s components (e.g., for active
listening: make good eye contact, nod your head,

ask clarifying questions, paraphrase/check out what
you heard). Then the clinician models the skill for the
family. For example, the clinician might compliment
one member of the family for his/her cooperativeness
with the treatment, or model effective listening while
another family member talks about a problem. After
the skill is introduced and modeled, participants are
asked to practice the skill with each other, with coaching
and shaping by the clinician. Typically the therapist
coaches one participant at a time on appropriate
ways to use a given skill. The feedback of other family
members is actively solicited. The speaker or listener
is then asked to try the skill again, until he/she has approximated
its use. A homework assignment, in which
participants keep a written log of their efforts in using
the skills between sessions, facilitates generalization of
the learning process to the home and work settings.

Many times, the skills are harder than they look.
Consider Jessie, a 38-year-old woman with bipolar disorder
who had had several episodes of psychotic mania
and also a borderline level of mental retardation. She
worked part-time as a gift wrapper in a department
store. Jessie was trying to move into her own apartment
and required help finding a moving van. She was instructed
to learn to make positive requests of her father,
with whom she and her sister lived.

tHeraPist: Maybe that’s a good topic to ask your
dad about. Can you look at this “Positive Requests”
handout and use these steps to ask your dad to help
you move?

FatHer: It won’t help. There won’t be anything to
move because she still hasn’t packed a single box!
(Laughs.)

Jessie: Well, get me the damn boxes and I’ll do it.

tHeraPist: (derailing this interchange) Do you think
you could ask your dad for something specific, like
helping you find a moving company?

Jessie: (Looks at father, smirking.) Dad, will you help
me find a moving company? (Giggles.)

FatHer: (more serious) You’re not. . . you’re not looking
at this. (Indicates handout.) You’re supposed to
say, “I’d appreciate it if you would. . . ”

Jessie: (Shrugs.) All right, I’d appreciate it if you
would! Get me a phone number. Please.

tHeraPist: (after a pause) Well, you got part of it that
time, Jessie. Dad, what did you like about what she
just said to you?


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

FatHer: (sarcastically) Gee, all the sincerity.

Jessie: (Laughs nervously.)

tHeraPist: Well, if you didn’t care for it, can you say
how she might say it to you?

FatHer: How about something like “I’d appreciate it if
you’d get me those phone numbers. It’d make it a lot
more comfortable for me to plan my move.”

tHeraPist: Nice job, Dad. Jessie, what did your dad do
that you liked or didn’t like?
Jessie: He followed the sheet. He did all the things you
said.

tHeraPist: True, but you don’t have to say it exactly
the way he did. You can put your own spin on it. Do
you feel you could try doing it one more time?

Jessie: (Gasps, giggles.)

tHeraPist: I know it’s hard being in the hot seat. But
you’re doing fine. Keep trying.

Jessie: Dad, could you get me those phone numbers of
the movers? I’d appreciate it. That way I could be. . .
I wouldn’t have to worry about the move, and, well,
just thank you for your help.

tHeraPist: That was very good, Jessie. Dad, how did
you like it that time?
FatHer: (a little tentative) That was better. It made a
lot more sense.

These kinds of skills are most difficult to learn if
the patient is highly symptomatic and/or cognitively
impaired, or if the level of conflict in the family is so
severe that productive conversations cannot ensue. This
patient was moderately hypomanic and also had limited
intellectual resources. Clearly, the skills training taxed
her and made her nervous. However, with patience and
practice, Jessie was able to adopt some of the communication
skills, and her relationship with her father gradually
improved. Her father, who was often quite critical,
became more and more convinced that her limited
functioning was a result of her bipolar disorder rather
than lack of effort, as he had believed previously.

The FFT manual (Miklowitz, 2008b) describes
“short-fuse” families. These families begin with apparently
innocuous discussions, which quickly escalate
into angry, back-and-forth volleys of criticism or hostility.
Our research indicates that these are usually high-
EE families or couples, but not invariably (Simoneau et
al., 1998). We have been surprised that relatives who,
on the surface, appear benign and supportive of the pa


tient during the EE/Camberwell Family Interview become
quite aggressive and confrontational when facing
the patient in a one-to-one interaction. Not surprisingly,
the likelihood that this will occur is greatly augmented
if the patient is hypomanic and irritable. Short-fuse
families typically have difficulty with communication
training because the participants’ emotions quickly get
out of hand (see the case study presented later). But
much can be accomplished by modifying the skills
training to the family’s natural styles. For example, the
therapist can encourage the participants to use active
listening skills during their arguments. After a negative,
back-and-forth interchange involving a couple, a
clinician said:

“I think this is an important discussion. You’re a
couple that really likes to get things out in the open.
But I’m afraid that you’re missing out on each other’s
viewpoints. So let’s see if we can make it more productive.
I want you each to paraphrase each other’s
statements before making your next argument, like
we did in the active listening exercises. Also, why
don’t you turn your chairs to each other so that you
can more easily keep eye contact?”

Note again the use of reframing. It is better to cast a
couple’s or family’s ongoing dynamics (unless clearly
abusive or threatening) as an adaptive way of coping
that needs modification than to label these dynamics as
“bad” or “dysfunctional.”

A short-fuse family may also be able to make good
use of positive requests for change or negative feedback
exercises, in which the partners make constructive suggestions
about specific aspects of each other’s behavior
(e.g., “I don’t like it when you talk down to me about
my health habits”) and offer suggestions as to ways
these behaviors could be improved (e.g., “Could you be
more aware of your tone of voice?”). These exercises
often set the stage for problem solving, the final module
of FFT.

Problem‑Solving Skills Training

Families of patients with bipolar disorder often have
difficulty with problem solving, especially if the patient
has recently been ill (e.g., Simoneau et al., 1998).
Family problems in adjusting to the postepisode phases
of bipolar disorder appear to fall into one of four categories:
medication nonadherence, difficulty resuming
prior work and social roles, repairing the financial and


Bipolar Disorder

social damage done during manic episodes (“life trashing”),
and relationship/living situation conflicts.

In FFT, the purposes of problem solving are threefold:
(1) to open a dialogue among family members
about difficult conflict topics; (2) to allow them a context
in which to share their emotional reactions to these
problems; and (3) to help them develop a framework for
defining, generating, evaluating, and implementing effective
solutions to problems. This module occupies the
final four to five sessions of FFT, and usually begins by
the fourth or fifth month, when sessions have been tapered
to biweekly. Problem solving is positioned last in
FFT because the patient is usually in remission by this
point and is more able, both cognitively and emotionally,
to experiment with new ways of behaving. Furthermore,
if the psychoeducation and CET have gone
well, family members are more ready to see their own
role in generating or maintaining family conflicts and
are more open to hearing each other’s viewpoints.

In problem solving, families are taught to break
broad problems down into smaller units that are more
amenable to solution. Family members are given a
problem-solving worksheet in which they are asked to
take the following steps: define the problem (with each
participant’s input); “brainstorm” all possible solutions
without evaluating them; consider each solution individually
and weigh its advantages and disadvantages;
choose a best solution or combination of solutions; and
plan and implement the chosen solutions. Once they
have had at least a moderately successful experience
in solving a relatively minor problem, participants are
given a homework task in which they record their attempts
to solve a new, larger problem. Assignments
are sometimes quite modest; some families are simply
given the task of defining one or more problems to work
on in the upcoming session.

The rationale for problem solving is presented as follows:


Up until now, we’ve been talking mainly about how you
communicate with each other. Now we’d like to deal
with some of the concrete problems of living you’ve all
been alluding to. But rather than our just giving you
suggestions about what to do about these—which probably
wouldn’t work that well anyway—we’d like to
teach you a way of solving problems cooperatively, as a
family. (Miklowitz, 2008b, pp. 259)

This rationale is then followed by a review of the
steps for solving problems and familiarizing the family

or couple with a problem-solving worksheet. The clinician
also reviews some of the problems the members
raised during earlier phases of treatment.

Consider this case example of the problem-solving
method. Karla, age 35, moved in with her new boyfriend,
Taki, shortly after her divorce. She was in poor
shape financially; she had a tendency to “spend to improve
my self-esteem.” In fact, most of her spending
sprees occurred during hypomanic periods, and Karla
had become hypomanic shortly after meeting Taki,
who was quite well off. Perhaps due to eagerness to
make the relationship work, he gave Karla access to
his credit cards. During their first months together, his
bills increased hugely. Karla’s own employment was
inconsistent. She had had trouble for years keeping to
a budget and maintaining a checking account. They
had begun to fight heavily about this problem. Karla
argued that money was his way of controlling women,
and Taki argued that she was taking advantage of him
and being inconsiderate.

First, the clinician returned to the communication
enhancement exercises. He encouraged the couple to
expand on these broader issues before zeroing in on
the more specific problem of spending. Karla voiced
her opinion about what she felt was the “meat of the
problem,” while Taki listened. Then Taki described his
take on the underlying issues, while Karla listened and
paraphrased. The structure imposed by problem solving
eventually helped them define the issue more specifically:
Karla spent more on clothing and “comfort
items” than either of them thought she should, but it
was unrealistic for her to try to support herself given
her unresolved symptomatic state. Various options
were then considered: Taki doing most of the buying,
Karla being assigned her own account with an upper
limit negotiated each month, and the two of them simply
separating their finances. These and other options
were evaluated as to their advantages and disadvantages.
Finally, they agreed on a somewhat complicated but
clever solution: Karla was to obtain three bank debit
cards assigned to each of three accounts. Each card was
labeled with an expense item (e.g., “doctor bills”) and
had a spending limit posted on it. They were to meet
weekly to determine whether the solution was working,
and to practice listening skills with each other when
they began to disagree.

In this example, the problem was to some degree generated
by the patient’s residual symptoms. There were
also relationship dynamics: Karla tended to become
overly dependent on men and then to devalue them, and


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

Taki tended to rescue women and then become angry
about being in the rescuer role. The clinician decided
to let them first “ventilate” about these larger relationship
themes. Allowing a certain amount of emotional
expression about loaded issues often reduces a family’s
or couple’s resistance to dealing with more specific
problems (in this case, disagreements about spending).

When taking families or couples through their first
problem-solving exercises, FFT clinicians monitor participants’
reactions to the method. Reactions can vary
from “This is just what we need” to “Gee, how superficial.”
Patients with bipolar disorder and their family
members seem to crave spontaneity and enjoy fastpaced,
unpredictable interchanges. They get bored easily.
The communication and problem-solving exercises
impose structure and encourage goal-directedness but
can also generate resistance. Resistance can take the
form of changing the subject, “cross-complaining,” or
being unwilling to cooperate with the homework tasks.

When addressing resistances, a clinician reiterates
the rationale for problem solving (e.g., “Sometimes you
have to gain confidence from solving minor problems
before you move on to bigger ones”). But often he/she
must determine whether it is really the problem-solving
method that family members object to or whether there
are certain costs or painful consequences associated
with attempting to solve a problem (e.g., a mother’s
fear that her son with bipolar disorder will be unable to
handle agreed-upon tasks that require greater independence).
Family members who fear the consequences
of solving a problem often approach solutions, then
quickly abandon the problem-solving process, arguing
that “this is not really the issue.” The therapist has a
number of options available. One is to take responsibility
for the unsolved problem. For example, he/she can
say, “Perhaps it was wrong of me to encourage you to
solve this problem. Maybe you have other things you
want to deal with first. Would you like to table it for
now?” Alternatively, the clinician may proceed more
paradoxically, framing the family’s difficulty as due to
“healthy avoidance”:

“Solving a problem as a family involves some costs–
benefits thinking. There are certainly some benefits
to solving this problem, but there may be some hidden
costs as well. I think if the costs of solving this
problem outweigh the benefits, it’s certainly understandable
that you’d want to avoid putting a solution
in place. Is that what’s happening here?”

Both of these interventions give the family members
“permission” to leave the problem untouched. Later,
when the pressure is off, they may be able to return
to the problem and have more success the second time
around.

Terminating FFT

FFT is terminated after 9 months. As termination approaches,
a therapist reviews with the family members
the six goals for treatment (discussed earlier) and the
degree to which those goals were or were not realized.
The status of the patient’s bipolar disorder is evaluated
relative to that at the beginning of treatment. In some
cases, maintenance or “tune-up” FFT sessions are recommended.


Referrals for subsequent treatment for both the patient
and other family members are discussed. For
example, some patients follow up FFT with individual
therapy or mutual support groups involving other
persons with bipolar disorder. Family members may
choose to attend support groups of the Depressive and
Bipolar Support Alliance (www.dbsalliance.org) or the
National Alliance on Mental Illness (www.nami.org).
In our experience, it is unusual for families to request
additional family or couple therapy after FFT, but referrals
are made, if requested.

The clinicians reiterates the importance of continued
medication adherence and incorporation of communication
and problem-solving skills into the family’s dayto-
day life. Finally, a review of the relapse drill (see the
earlier “Psychoeducation” section) is conducted: The
patient’s prodromal signs are reviewed, and the steps
the patient and family can take to avert a relapse are
reiterated.

case stuDy

Debra, a 36-year-old European American woman, lived
with her husband Barry, age 46, and their 8-year-old
daughter Jill. She had completed 2 years of college and
worked part time as a sales clerk in a luggage shop.
She had been married previously. Debra was referred
for FFT by a university clinic, where she had been diagnosed
with bipolar II disorder. The initial SCID confirmed
this diagnosis. Her depression was marked by
loss of interests and “being bummed” for several weeks
at a time. She also complained of loss of appetite, wak



Bipolar Disorder

ing several times each night, fatigue, guilt, and loss of
concentration. She denied having suicidal thoughts.
She recounted that her current depression was “a really
big one” and had lasted on and off for a full year. Debra
also said, “I’ve had tons of small ones.” She dated the
first onset of her depression to approximately 8 years
earlier, following her divorce from her first husband.

Debra also admitted to having had a hypomanic episode
in the previous month, including about 5 days of
elevated and irritable mood. She explained, “My confidence
level was up.” She admitted to racing thoughts,
increased activity and talkativeness, and becoming involved
in many different projects. She had trouble dating
the onset and offset of these periods, noting, “I’ve
been this way all my life.” She did admit that Barry had
commented on these mood phases. Debra complained,
“He now tells me I’m getting manic every time we get
in an argument. . . . It’s his newest weapon against me.”
She denied having delusions or hallucinations.

Debra had been treated previously with sertraline
(Zoloft) and bupropion (Wellbutrin). Her psychiatrist
had recently started her on divalproex sodium (Depakote)
at 1,500 mg/day, a medication that she said had
made a difference in stabilizing her mood.

Barry, an attorney, presented as a “no-nonsense”
type of man. He responded to the clinicians in a very
businesslike manner and insisted that he had no problems
of his own to discuss “except those that relate to
Debra’s care.” He denied any psychiatric history himself.
He preferred to talk about FFT as an educational
course and became defensive if his wife referred to it
as “therapy.” The FFT clinicians, a male–female cotherapy
team, did not dissuade him from labeling the
treatment this way, believing that they would need to
work on building a rapport with him before addressing
his defensive style.

Family Assessment

Based on the Camberwell Family Interview, Barry met
the criteria for a high level of EE. He voiced nine criticisms
during his 1-hour interview. He tended to complain
at length about Debra’s memory, work habits,
and disorganization (e.g., “She never remembers about
parent–teacher meetings,” “She forgets to turn in her
time sheet at work—it drives me crazy”). Barry admitted
that he still loved Debra but found her very frustrating.
He was convinced that she had ADHD as well as
bipolar disorder.

Debra and Barry came in for the family interactional
assessment well dressed and smiling. The clinicians interviewed
them individually, and arrived at an important
problem topic for them to discuss: Barry’s claim
that Debra lied to him. Her response was to apologize
for her past misdeeds and to argue, “I’m not lying or
withholding. . . . Those are usually things I’ve forgotten
or just don’t think are important.” Upon discussing
this issue, the couple’s dynamics became apparent,
with Barry speaking in an accusatory, scolding mode
and Debra apologizing and justifying her behavior. As
Barry became more accusatory, Debra looked more
and more depressed.

Barry: Lying is a way of life for you. You twist the
truth and say you don’t remember things.

DeBra: But I really don’t. I’ve been trying to tell you
everything. Sometimes I just forget. (Starts rocking
her chair.)

Barry: (holding Debra’s chair still) Why do you think
it’s OK to lie to me?
DeBra: I don’t. I’m being up front with you. Maybe you
want to believe there’s more, but there’s not.

Barry: I think you’ll always do this. It’s your bag. How
would you like it if I lied to you? How would it make
you feel? Would you want to stay married to me?

DeBra: (sullen) No, probably not. But I’m trying to be
open with my feelings, kinda with you as a practice
case. (Smiles awkwardly.)

Barry: You’re doing that little smile again. The one
you do when you’re trying to get away with something.


DeBra: (defensive) Oh, give me a break.
Barry: Is it because we’re talking so directly? I don’t
know if it’s your personality or if it’s the bipolar stuff
acting up, but you have no tolerance for anything
these days, especially people.

The therapists who viewed this assessment were
struck by Barry’s level of criticism, paired with Debra’s
tendency to take a one-down position. They also
learned during the assessment that Barry doled out
Debra’s medications and made her doctor appointments
for her, and also usually attended them with her. An
initial appointment for FFT was set with two clinical
psychologists, one of whom was a trainee.


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

Psychoeducation (Sessions 1–7)

During the initial session, the clinicians (Therapist
1 and Therapist 2 in the dialogues below) described
the FFT program to Barry and Debra, with particular
emphasis on the psychoeducational component.
They previewed the communication enhancement and
problem-solving modules. The couple listened politely
but expressed skepticism.

Barry: We’ve been in and out of therapy for years. I
haven’t been impressed.
tHeraPist 1: When you say “We,” do you mean you
as a couple?
Barry: As a couple, and she’s had her own therapy.

DeBra: I thought Dr. Walker was good.
Barry: Yeah, but you hadn’t had the bipolar diagnosis
yet. She was just treating you for depression. And she
got into that whole “You were probably abused as a
child and forgot about it” thing.

tHeraPist 1: What was your couple therapy like?

Barry: A lot of digging into our childhoods and getting
in touch with our feelings.

tHeraPist 1: Debra?

DeBra: It wasn’t that bad. I thought it was pretty useful.
tHeraPist 1: Well, it sounds like you’ve got different
opinions on how helpful those sessions were. Let me
tell you how this will be different. Our treatment is
going to be focused mainly on the present, and we’ll
be working on how you as a couple are coping with
bipolar disorder. Barry, you’re going to be affected
by the cycling of Debra’s mood disorder, but Debra,
you’re also going to be affected by the way Barry
responds to your symptoms. I’m not saying your past
will be irrelevant, but it’s just not our focus.
Barry: I need help dealing with all of this. The more
information I get, the better.
tHeraPist 1: I’m sure that’s true. But we won’t just
throw a lot of information at you—we want to individualize
it to your situation. I think you’ll have
a much easier time if you come to a common understanding
of the disorder as a couple and learn to
communicate about it.

In this dialogue, the therapist made a distinction between
FFT and more generic forms of couple therapy.
At this point, the clinicians already suspected that there
would be resistance from Barry, especially around

tasks in which he was asked to look at his own behavior
and its contribution to Debra’s mood problems.

The psychoeducation itself began in the second session
and continued through the seventh. The first task
was to encourage the couple to come to a shared definition
of “bipolar disorder.” During the assessments, both
had mentioned the term “cycling,” but without apparent
agreement on what it meant.

tHeraPist 1: I want to be sure we’re all on the same
page when we talk about the meaning of the term
“bipolar.” Debra, you did a great job just now of explaining
what depression feels like. Let’s talk about
the other side now. (Passes around a handout describing
the symptoms of mania/hypomania.) Barry,
which of these have you observed when Debra gets
hypomanic?

Barry: (surveying the handout) Well, all of these except
appetite disturbance. . . . I guess you could say
she has grandioseness—she thinks one day she’ll be
wealthy. (Laughs.)

tHeraPist 2: When was the last time you think she
was like that?
Barry: Last time I was working on a case—she always
gets like that when I’m working on a case.

DeBra: I agree, but I think it’s because I have a lot
more to do when he’s working all the time. . . . He
thinks it’s some “abandonment” thing, but I think he
forgets the realities I face when he’s gone. (Looks at
list.) I get more energy, I feel uncomfortable in my
own body, I jump outta my skin. . . probably a good
day to go shopping! (Giggles.) I probably get crankier,
don’t have much tolerance for people in general.

Barry: Especially me. (Smiles.)

This was the first time that Debra had defended
herself, by commenting on how relationship problems
fed into her mood swings. Interestingly, her assertive
stance cut through some of her husband’s negativity.
The therapists soon realized that Barry and Debra
lacked a consensus about what really constituted a bipolar
episode. This is a critical point in FFT: The members
of a couple or family need to come to a shared
perception of when the patient is getting ill, so that they
can institute procedures to keep the patient’s episodes
from spiraling (e.g., visits to the physician, reduction in
the patient’s workload, learning to deescalate negative
verbal exchanges). But it was not yet clear that Debra
had discrete episodes.


Bipolar Disorder

tHeraPist 2: Do you think you have what we’re calling
“episodes”? Like a couple of days of being wired?

DeBra: There can be, like 2 or 3 days when I can do a
lot of stuff, my memory gets better, and then 2 or 3
days when it’s just not gonna work. I can. . .

Barry: (Interrupts.) It’s that household project thing.
She starts redoing Jill’s room over and over. She’ll
sponge-paint it purple and then wipe it out that same
evening, put in new closets.

DeBra: I can filter all my energy into housework instead
of killing somebody. (They both chuckle.)

tHeraPist 1: Maybe I’m a little slow today, but I’m
trying to figure out whether you both agree on when
these high and low periods are. Debra, have you ever
kept a mood chart?

The therapist then produced a written assignment in
which Debra and Barry were asked to track independently,
on a daily basis, the ups and downs of Debra’s
mood states, so that agreements and disagreements
about what constituted the symptoms of the disorder
(as opposed to personality traits) could be tracked.

The dynamics of this couple became more evident in
Sessions 3–5. Debra was inconsistent about keeping her
mood chart, and Barry felt that his conscientiousness in
charting her mood was not being rewarded. “She won’t
take responsibility for her illness,” he argued. Nonetheless,
Debra had good recall of her mood swings, even
though she had not written them down. The therapists
offered the couple much praise for their somewhat halfhearted
attempt to complete this assignment. Interestingly,
Barry noted small changes in mood that he called
her “manic-ness,” which Debra argued were just her reactions
to everyday annoyances.

Barry: You were manic as hell on Saturday morning.
tHeraPist 2: What do you mean, Barry?
Barry: I went to tell her that Jill needed to get to soc


cer, and she practically bit my head off!
DeBra: Because you had told me eight times already.
I wasn’t manic, I was just getting annoyed. Even Jill
said something about you overdoing it.

This became a theme throughout the treatment:
Barry tended to overlabel Debra’s mood swings, to the
extent that he often called her “manic” when the real
issue appeared to be her transient irritability. He also
frequently called her “depressed” when Debra felt that

she was just “relaxing. . . bored. . . trying to unwind
and keep to myself for a while.” The therapists were
careful not to attribute blame or to take sides with either
of them. Therapist 1 said:

“I think this is a very hard distinction to make. I wish
I could give you a simple rule for determining when
Debra is in and out of an episode. But as you’ve seen,
it’s not always so clear. I usually suggest that people
go back to that symptom list and ask, ‘Is there more
than one of these symptoms? Does irritability go
with more sleep disturbance? Racing thoughts?’ Just
being annoyed is not enough to be called ‘manic,’
unless it’s ongoing, it cuts across different situations,
or it goes along with some of these other symptoms
and impairment in getting through your day.”

The therapists outlined a vulnerability–stress model
for understanding Debra’s episodes. Debra recounted
a family history of her mother’s depression and her
father’s alcohol abuse: “My mom was probably bipolar,
but we just didn’t call it that back then.” They also
discussed eliciting stressors that may have contributed
to Debra’s prior depressions. Barry became very vocal
when discussing her risk factors: He noted that crowded
places (e.g., shopping malls) made her hypomanic,
and that alcohol, even in small amounts, contributed
to her sleep disturbance and in turn contributed to her
hypomanias. The therapists offered a handout on risk
factors (e.g., substance abuse, sleep irregularity, unpredictable
daily routines, family conflict) and protective
factors (e.g., regular medications, good family communication).
Next, the clinicians helped Barry and Debra
devise a relapse prevention plan:

tHeraPist 1: The clients we’ve worked with who’ve
done best with this illness have been able to rely
on their spouses and other close family members
at times of crisis. It’s a fine line you have to walk
between being able to turn to your spouse and say,
“I think I’m getting sick again,” and to take some
of their advice without giving up control altogether.
Debra, when your moods are going up and down,
you are going to want more control. Barry, maybe
you sometimes feel like you’re walking a fine line as
well: You want to say “Yes, you are getting sick, and
I’d like to help you,” without rubbing it in, to be able
to give suggestions without taking over.

Barry: That’s one thing we have in common. We’re
both control freaks. I guess likes attract.


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

tHeraPist 1: Well, maybe the fact that you both like
to be in control of your own fate was part of what attracted
the two of you in the first place [reframing].
But like many things that attract people initially,
something like not wanting to give up control can
become a problem in the relationship later.

The partners came to some agreements about what
the prodromal signs of Debra’s hypomania looked like
(e.g., increased interest in household projects, getting
up extraordinarily early, irritability that occurred in
multiple situations) and some of her risk factors (e.g.,
alcohol). They conjointly developed a relapse prevention
plan that involved keeping emergency phone numbers
handy, avoiding alcohol, and avoiding high-stress
interpersonal situations (e.g., conflicts between Debra
and her mother). Barry and Debra also discussed how
they could communicate if her symptoms started to escalate.
Barry admitted that he “had to learn not to lash
out” at such times, and not to “just blurt out everything
I think.” Interestingly, both showed resistance to the
suggestion that Debra try to maintain a regular sleep–
wake cycle, even on weekends, when she had her worst
mood swings. Barry scoffed, “Maybe we should just
join the Army,” and both emphasized that they were not
about to give up their love of late-night partying.

The psychoeducation module ended with a discussion
of the effects of the illness label on Debra’s selfesteem.
She had been alluding throughout the first six
sessions to her discomfort with the diagnosis of bipolar
II disorder.

tHeraPist 1: Sometimes when we go through our
symptom lists and talk about the causes of bipolar
disorder, people can feel labeled or picked apart.
Debra, have you ever felt that way in here?

DeBra: When I first came in here, I felt picked on. I felt
like it was “blame Debbie time,” and now there was
this real biological reason to pin all our problems on.

tHeraPist 1: I hope you don’t think we’re saying that
all of your problems as a couple stem from your bipolar
disorder.

DeBra: No, I think you guys have been fair about that.
It was hard for me to talk about, and sometimes I
think Barry is just objecting to me, as a person.

tHeraPist 1: In other words, the line between your
personality and your disorder gets blurred.
DeBra: Yes, and to me they’re very different.

tHeraPist 1: I’m glad you’re bringing this up. I think
that’s very important, to be very clear on when we’re
just talking about you, your styles of relating to people.
. . . Not everything you do has to be reduced to
this illness.

Barry: And I probably do bring it up [the illness] too
much.

DeBra: (becoming activated) Yes, and you bring it up
in front of other people. . . . That can be a real problem
for me. We used to have such great conversations!
I get tired of talking with you about my disorder
all the time. That’s all you seem to wanna talk
about.

Barry: (startled) Why haven’t you told me this?

DeBra: I probably do need to tell you. . . . I just want
more of a happy medium, between talking about it
and not.

Barry: So what do you want?

DeBra: (becoming tearful) I’m not sure.

tHeraPist 1: I think it’s understandable that you
wouldn’t know. . . . You’re not always sure how much
help you need from Barry. Maybe you’re trying to
find a good balance. That may take some time. I
hope you don’t feel that all we’re interested in is your
disorder, and not in you as a person [examines apparent
resistance to the psychoeducational material].

DeBra: I usually don’t feel that way, except when I
try to do that mood chart [acknowledges emotional
pain underlying resistance to the therapeutic tasks].
I just want to have conversations with Barry like I
have with my girlfriends. I’d like to talk about things
other than my illness and my doctors.

Communication Enhancement Training
(Sessions 8–14)

During Session 8, the therapists introduced CET to the
couple. Barry and Debra both described a “demand–
withdrawal” pattern in their communication. Barry
would become intrusive in trying to understand Debra’s
mood state, and Debra would withdraw and become
noncooperative. Debra admitted that she had a difficult
time acknowledging being depressed and talking about
it because “you just didn’t do that in my family.” She
grew up in a Southern family, where “you didn’t air
your dirty laundry.” In contrast, Barry was from Los
Angeles, where “you might spill your guts to whoever
was stuck in traffic next to you.”


Bipolar Disorder

The therapists began by exploring the demand–
withdrawal pattern:

tHeraPist 1: This is one of the dynamics we’ve seen
in couples dealing with bipolar disorder. People with
a mood disorder can get irritable with their spouses,
and then their spouses react because they feel under
attack, and when they react, the arguments can really
spiral. The person with the disorder feels there’s
something he/she is legitimately angry about, and
the spouse sees the anger as evidence of the bipolar
illness.

Barry: Well, my problem is that Debra’s not aware of
her symptoms.

DeBra: I’m aware of them, but I wanna be left alone.
You finish my sentences. . .

Barry: And then you walk out of the room. You don’t
want to have anything to do with normal communication.
It’s just like it was with your parents. . .

DeBra: When I’m in that state [depression], the last
thing I want is a serious conversation or to have
someone question what I want to do or why.

tHeraPist 2: Let’s talk about what happens between
the two of you [draws couple back to relationship
focus]. When you try to talk about something, what
happens? One of you just won’t talk? You do talk,
but it doesn’t go well?

Barry: She procrastinates, she won’t deal with things;
then I yell; then she won’t be around me and she
withdraws; and then I start thinking about how long
I can live like this.

tHeraPist 2: Debra, how would you describe it?

DeBra: Barry gets frustrated when I don’t give him
the answers he’s looking for, and then I feel bad that
I frustrated him, and he feels bad that he got upset
at me, and then I feel bad that I made him feel bad
about upsetting me.

tHeraPist 2: Is that something you’d like to work
on—your communication as a couple?

Barry: Yes. There’s been no communication because
of the bipolar disorder. I don’t know if we’d have
these problems if she weren’t bipolar. She gets depressed,
her thoughts don’t get communicated, she
never even tries. . . and that reminds me of what I
was gonna ask you: Do you think she might have attention
deficit disorder as well as being bipolar?

DeBra: Oh, no, here we go. . .

tHeraPist 1: Barry, no one can tell for sure, but regardless
of what the cause is, it sounds like you’re
ready for us to start focusing more on your relationship
[redirects discussion but doesn’t directly challenge
Barry’s definition of the problem]. At least part
of what you’re describing sounds like the habits you
have communicating with each other as a couple.
We’ll be teaching you some fairly straightforward
skills for talking to each other, like how to praise
each other for things done well, how to listen, and
how to ask for changes in each other’s behavior. This
will help you during these cycles, whether they be
real mood cycles or just rocky periods in your relationship
[provides rationale for upcoming communication
module].

DeBra: Yeah, I need to learn how to argue. He’s a lawyer;
he’s a much better arguer than me.

Barry: (still angry) But you see, no one ever said a
damn thing in your family; no one was ever really
there. So of course you’re going to react to me because
I’m passionate, and then when I get really
pissed off, you finally take stock and listen. It’s the
only way I can get through to you.

tHeraPist 1: I think there’s a lot for us to work with
here. Debra, I’d like to take you off the “bipolar
hook” for a while, and let’s work on how you act and
react with each other. We don’t have to work on your
communication just about bipolar disorder—maybe
also how you talk about finances, friends. . .

Barry: But that’s all about doing it in here. . . . How
are you gonna know how we communicate at home?

tHeraPist 1: We’re gonna bug your house. (Both
chuckle) We’ll do some exercises in here that involve
role playing new ways of talking, but you’ll have to
practice these new ways in between sessions at home.
I personally think this will benefit you a great deal,
if you have the time to do it [expresses optimism].

The therapists now had a better understanding of
this couple’s communication patterns. The demand–
withdrawal pattern in part derived from their different
family histories, but it was equally true that Barry was
rewarded for being critical; it got results, even if these
results were accompanied by Debra’s resentment. They
disagreed on the extent to which these communication
patterns were driven by her bipolar disorder. Barry assumed
that most or all of their problems could be attributed
to the disorder, but Debra saw this assumption as


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

just an attempt to blame her for everything. The therapists’
take was that the marital dynamics existed independently
of Debra’s mood swings but became magnified
by her hypomanic and depressive episodes. During
hypomanic episodes she was more touchy and reactive,
and when depressed she was more likely to withdraw.

In Session 9, the therapists began the skills training.
FFT begins with positive communication skills to increase
the likelihood that members of a couple or family
will collaborate when dealing with more difficult
issues. One therapist began by introducing a handout
entitled Expressing Positive Feelings, in which each
partner is directed simply to praise the other for some
specific behavior the other has performed, and to tell
the partner how this behavior makes him/her feel. The
therapists first modeled the skill. One of them praised
Barry, saying, “I appreciate you taking the long drive
up here [to the clinic] and making an adjustment to
your schedule to make this possible. . . . It makes me
feel like you value what we do here.” Barry expressed
appreciation for the compliment. The therapist then
asked Barry and Debra to turn their chairs toward each
other and select a behavior to praise in each other. Interestingly,
neither had trouble selecting a topic. The
problem was in staying with positive emotions and not
letting negative ones leak in.

Barry: I appreciated your taking Jill to soccer on
Wednesday. It made me feel like you. . . like you
knew I was overwhelmed that day, and that, you
know, I’m usually the one doing all the parenting
while you. . .

tHeraPist 2: (interrupting) Barry, I’d like to stop you
before we get into that. Debra, can you tell me what
you liked so far about how Barry said that? Did he
follow the instructions on this sheet?

DeBra: Well, like you said, he was starting to get into
it, but I liked the first part. I’m glad he feels that way.
Barry: Do you feel I give you enough positive feedback?
DeBra: (pause) You have your days.

tHeraPist 2: Barry, I thought you did that pretty well.
Could you try it without the tail at the end?

Barry: (Chuckles.) There you go, stealing my thunder.
OK, um, Deb, thanks again for taking Jill to soccer.
It made me feel like you. . . like my schedule is important
to you, and that you’re thinking of me.

tHeraPist 2: Good. Debra, what’d you think?

DeBra: Much better.
Barry: Sometimes I think I was put on this earth to

learn tact.

Sessions 10 and 11 of CET focused on active listening
skills. One member of the couple listened while the
other spoke, first about issues outside of the marriage
(i.e., work relationships), then about couple-related
matters. Both Barry and Debra required restructuring
of their listening skills. Specifically, Debra tended to
“space out” when Barry spoke, and required prompting
to stay with the issues. She acknowledged that she
sometimes felt she was being tested by Barry when he
talked to her, to determine whether she could come up
with thoughtful, intuitive replies. Her “checking out”
was a way of coping with the performance anxiety that
she experienced when listening to him.

Not surprisingly, Barry’s difficulty with listening
centered on withholding his natural tendency to give
advice. When Debra began to talk, he would listen reflectively
for a minute or two, but then he would begin
to ask questions, such as “Well, when are you gonna
call that person?” or “Last time we talked you said you
were going to finish that resumé. Why haven’t you?”
Repeated practice within sessions—supplemented by
homework assignments to practice these skills—led
Barry to become more aware of what he was doing.
During a particularly poignant moment, he admitted,
“I don’t like the way I react to her. . . . I don’t like the
person I’m becoming.”

As FFT passed the 3-month point and the frequency
changed to biweekly, the clinicians introduced potentially
more heated forms of communication, such as the
partners making requests for changes in each other’s
behaviors and expressing negative feelings (Sessions
12–14). At this point, Debra was not as depressed as she
had been during the assessment phase, although Barry
continued to complain about her low functioning. He
argued that she had become unable to tell him what
she had and had not accomplished during the day, and
that she often made it appear that she had done things
that, in reality, she had not. He labeled this her “lack
of follow-through” problem. In contrast, Debra became
increasingly assertive about his “micromanagement” of
her behavior.

tHeraPist 1: One of the things we’d like to work on

with you is how you ask each other to change in

some way. What’s an appropriate way to ask some



Bipolar Disorder

one to help you? (Gives Barry and Debra the handout
titled “Making a Positive Request.”) Try looking
directly at each other; say what you would like the
other person to do, and how it would make you feel.
Debra, a minute ago you were talking about how
Barry micromanages you. Can you turn this into a
positive—ask him what you would like him to do?
Phrase it in a way that he can help you? How can he
ask you to follow through without nagging you?

DeBra: Uh, Barry, it would really make me happy if
you. . . in situations where there’s a dilemma, if
you’d give me a little more freedom.

Barry: For example? Do you mean you want us to do
things at your pace?

tHeraPist 1: Barry, let it come from her.

DeBra: Um, like, if there’s some shopping to do, it
would help me out if I could just say, “Yes, this is on
my list and I’ll do it. . . if you could wait for me to
get it done in my own time.” That would help ease
the tension.

tHeraPist 2: Barry, how did you feel about how Debra
asked you? Did she follow this sheet?

Barry: I think she asked me just fine, but my question
is, will she then do the shopping?

DeBra: I think it would really help me to have some
plan—like agreeing that if I do this part of the shopping,
you’ll do that part. Maybe that would stop me
from saying, “I’ll show him. He’s not gonna run my
life; I’m not gonna do it his way.”

tHeraPist 1: A person who feels one-down often
reacts by refusing to go along with the plan, even
though going along with it might be of help to them
personally. Debra, do you get into that sometimes?

The therapists were encouraging assertiveness in
Debra, and at the same time gently confronting what
Barry had earlier called her “passive–aggressiveness.”
They then asked Barry to make a positive request of
Debra.

tHeraPist 2: Barry, can you think of something you
could ask Debra to do, to change her behavior?

Barry: (looking at clinicians) OK, Deb, it’s very important
to me. . .

tHeraPist 2: Can you tell this to her?

Barry: (turns toward Debra) OK, it’s very important
to me that you not just walk away when we have dis


cussions. That you don’t just withdraw. Especially
when we talk about Jill and our differences about
her. That really irritates me.

The therapists again observed Debra withdraw in

reaction to Barry’s “high-EE” behavior. They com


mented on her reactions.

tHeraPist 1: Debra, what’s happening now? You seem
like you’re checking out.

DeBra: (Snaps back, smiles.) Yeah, I guess I am. What
were we talking about?

Barry: You see, I think that’s part of her attention deficit
disorder. Do you think she needs Ritalin [medication
for this condition]?

tHeraPist 1: Barry, in this case, I don’t think so. I
think that what happened, Debra, if I can speak for
you for a moment, is that you withdrew because you
felt you were under attack.

DeBra: That’s probably true. He got into his “You do
this, you do that.”

Barry: (frustrated) Well, you just asked me to change
something! Am I supposed to do all the work here?

tHeraPist 1: Barry, I’m going to encourage you to try
again. Only this time, I’d like you to be more aware
of how you phrase things. Notice you said what you
didn’t want her to do—withdraw when you were
talking to her. That’s quite important. But what
would you like her to do instead?

Barry: I want her to engage with me! To talk it out!

tHeraPist 1: Can you try again, only this time tell her
what you want her to do?

Barry: (Sighs.) Deb, when we talk, I’d really like. . .
I’d really appreciate it if you’d hang in there and finish
talking to me, especially about Jill. That would
make me feel, I don’t know, like we’re partners.

tHeraPist 2: Barry, that was much better, and I’ll bet
it was easier to hear. Debra?

DeBra: Yeah, I liked it. . . that’s easier. We need to do
more of this.

Much emphasis was placed throughout CET on
between-session homework assignments. The couple
was encouraged to hold weekly meetings and to record
their efforts to use the skills. Both spouses reported a
reduction in tension in the relationship by the time the
problem-solving segment was initiated.


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers
