Emotion Avoidance  The therapist now introduces the concept of emotional avoidance, describing how avoidance is harmful in the long term, despite potentially providing some short-term relief. As noted earlier, types of avoidance, including subtle behavioral (e.g., procrastination), cognitive (e.g., distraction) and safety signals (e.g., carrying a medication bottle), are introduced. It is important that the patient understand why and how avoidance is problematic. The therapist explains that avoidance (1) prevents habituation to a feared stimulus, so that fear levels are maintained at a high or constant level while in contact with the stimulus; (2) interferes with the process of extinction, so that the conditioned association between the cue and fearful response is maintained instead of weakened; and (3) prevents the patient from developing a sense of control or self-efficacy in managing the fear because positive outcomes are attributed to the avoidance strategy. The therapist asks the patient to generate personally relevant examples of avoidance and discusses how those strategies have maintained the cycle of emotions.  tHeraPist: We’re going to shift our focus now and look at how behaviors contribute to your emotional experiences. First, let’s talk about avoidance. Sometimes you might do things to avoid having to feel an uncomfortable emotion to begin with. For example, you mentioned that having to reach out to your coworkers at the school to get information about something you don’t know is very anxiety provoking for you, and brings about appraisals like they will think you are incompetent or stupid, correct?  JosePH: Yes, like the supplies I need for my class. I need more music books for the kids but I don’t know if I’m supposed to go get them myself, or if I’m supposed to order them through the school, or how I’m supposed to pay for them. I know I should just e-mail   Emotional Disorders  [his supervisor], but since she never mentioned anything about ordering supplies I’m afraid she’s going to think I’m stupid or asking too much, that I should be taking care of it myself instead of asking her.  tHeraPist: So you avoid asking her, in order to avoid having to feel anxious or “stupid.” This is a good example of one of the ways we can actively do things to avoid uncomfortable emotions. There are also some behaviors that can be more subtle, things we aren’t even aware we are doing as an avoidance strategy. For example, someone who has panic attacks might avoid caffeine so they don’t have to feel the physical sensations of increased arousal. Can you think of any examples of more subtle ways you may be avoiding uncomfortable emotions?  JosePH: Well, when you said that, I immediately thought of fruit. I haven’t eaten fruit in 2 years because I’m afraid it will make my IBS symptoms flare up.  tHeraPist: So you’re trying to avoid bloating and cramping?  JosePH: Well that, and probably more important, I’m trying to avoid embarrassing myself in public!  tHeraPist: So you can see, we have subtle and more overt ways of avoiding uncomfortable emotions, but the question is, does it make the problem go away?  JosePH: Well no, I still don’t know what I’m going to do about ordering books, and I guess I’m still worried about my IBS even without eating fruit.  tHeraPist: So you can see, avoidance might make the problem go away in the short term, but in the long term this strategy is not particularly helpful and may even make the situation worse. In fact, these avoidance behaviors can strengthen the association of fear and anxiety with these situations—the more you avoid e-mailing your supervisor, the more anxiety provoking the thought of contacting her gets.  JosePH: True, now it’s just looming out there and feels even worse.  Next, in-session exercises to demonstrate the effects of emotional avoidance are conducted. The first exercise involves asking the patient directly to suppress a thought, such as asking the patient to think of anything at all for the next 30 seconds, but not to allow him/ herself to think about a white bear (Wegner, Schneider,  Carter, & White, 1987). In this classic example, patients report great difficulty not thinking about a white bear and continually experience recurrent images or thoughts about a white bear throughout the experiment. The effectiveness of suppression strategies is then discussed. Second, the same exercise is conducted but the patient is asked to suppress a personally relevant and distressing memory or thought. Joseph, for example, had been actively trying not to think about an e-mail he had sent to his supervisor, asking for information about how to order supplies for his students. He was worried that he might have come across as incompetent, and that she would respond negatively to his e-mail. The same “white bear” experiment was conducted with this thought: Joseph was asked to think about anything he wanted to for 30 seconds, but not to think about this email. Predictably, Joseph found it extremely difficult to prevent ruminations about his supervisor’s potential reactions from coming into his mind. Thus, this exercise presents a poignant and personally relevant demonstration of the futility of active attempts to avoid distressing topics or situations.  Emotion-Driven Behaviors  The concept of EDBs was introduced earlier in treatment (Module 2), and the goal of this module is to focus on EDBs in greater detail and learn to identify and counter maladaptive EDBs. The therapist begins with a review of adaptive and nonadaptive EDBs. Again, an EDB to escape a situation when experiencing panic may be adaptive if a person is encountering a direct threat to his/her safety; however, an EDB to escape when panicking is maladaptive if there is no clear threat present. In the latter example, the panic and resulting EDB is an example of a “false alarm.” The therapist can then explain how EDBs are established and maintained through the concept of negative reinforcement. Similar to emotional avoidance, habitual reliance on EDBs does provide some relief in the short term, and can therefore become a powerful learned response that maintains the cycle of emotions. At this point, the patient is asked to generate examples of EDBs from his/her experience and discuss how negative reinforcement may be contributing to emotional distress. In the transcript below, Joseph describes personal examples of EDBs, including repeatedly using the bathroom in an attempt to control his IBS, and engaging in checking behaviors in response to doubting thoughts and fears of disappointing or causing harm to others.   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  tHeraPist: You mentioned you are getting up several hours before you need to leave for work. Can you tell me what you are doing during that time?  JosePH: Well, like I said, once I go to work it is hard for me to use the bathroom, so I want to make sure I have used the bathroom before I leave the house.  tHeraPist: And how many times are you using the bathroom before you leave?  JosePH: About five or six times.  tHeraPist: And what caused you to start going five or six times, instead of just the once?  JosePH: Well, in the beginning, I’d go once, but then I would start worrying about if I need to go again, so then I’d go again. Then I go back and forth for a while, worrying about if I’ve gone enough, then go again, then worry .. .  tHeraPist: And how do you know you’ve gone enough times?  JosePH: I never really know for sure, but at some point I just have to leave the house or I’ll be late for work. That’s why I started getting up earlier, to make sure I have enough time to use the bathroom.  tHeraPist: And what would happen if you went only once?  JosePH: That would make me very anxious, I couldn’t do that.  tHeraPist: And in that moment when you are experiencing uncertainty about whether or not you have gone enough times, what emotions come with that?  JosePH: I start feeling anxious.  tHeraPist: And what do you do when you start to feel anxious?  JosePH: I go again.  tHeraPist: And does that make you feel less anxious, at least in the short term?  JosePH: Yes, it makes me feel like I have some control over it.  tHeraPist: This is what we refer to as an EDB. What happens is, when you allow yourself to use the bathroom again in response to the worry about not having gone enough, it helps you to feel better temporarily, and that strengthens that relationship—worry, anxiety, use the bathroom again. It’s a very powerful concept. So what will you do next time this uncertainty comes along? Something that you know will make you feel better. You have learned that the anxi   ety you experience resulting from being uncertain as to whether you have dealt with the situation sufficiently to leave the house can be alleviated by just going again, which sets in motion a sort of loop. Can you think of other examples of this kind of relationship, between feeling anxious or uncertain and doing some sort of action?  JosePH: Well, I guess it’s sort of the same thing when I start worrying about forgetting to turn the stove off or if I’ve somehow left a candle burning from the night before, and I have to go back and check.  tHeraPist: And can you describe what happens right before you go back and check?  JosePH: I start to feel fear. I get an image in my head of the apartment on fire and my roommates still asleep, then I start worrying about it, and thinking what if I left for work and forgot to turn off the stove and the kitchen catches on fire and I end up burning down the apartment, and even worse with my roommates still in the apartment?  tHeraPist: Which is a pretty anxiety-provoking thought. What do you feel physically in that moment?   JosePH: I’m not sure, but probably pretty tense and nervous.   tHeraPist: And what do you do?  JosePH: I go back and check everything again.  tHeraPist: Once? Or more than once?  JosePH: I’ll check, then I’ll start doubting again, then I’ll check again.  tHeraPist: And when you first check, how do you feel?  JosePH: At first I feel better.  tHeraPist: So, just like the other example, this EDB of checking gets reinforced each time you do it because it makes you feel better, at least temporarily. When you feel that anxiety, you feel driven to perform the checking as a way of relieving or acting on the anxiety. But these EDBs don’t seem to work because the doubting thoughts return, and you end up late for work, or you have to lose out on sleep in order to make time for these behaviors. And just like we talked about with the avoidance behaviors, it seems to make it worse—the doubt and anxiety you feel is so strong that it feels like you couldn’t tolerate it if you didn’t do these behaviors. What we need to do, just like we did with your thoughts, is   Emotional Disorders  start breaking down these associations so you can learn new things about the doubt and anxiety driving these behaviors, like maybe you can tolerate these emotions more than you think, even without engaging in the EDB.  This module concludes with an introduction to countering patterns of avoidance and EDBs through targeting and modifying specific behaviors. The two primary therapeutic strategies are (1) beginning to engage in activities to evoke emotions that are currently being avoided and (2) counteracting maladaptive EDBs by developing and engaging in behaviors that are different, or thatcounteract, these responses.  Module 6: Awareness and Tolerance of Physical Sensations  Module 6 introduces the first opportunity to engage in an exposure that focuses on eliciting physical sensations that often trigger strong emotional reactions, and to begin to build the patient’s awareness of the contribution of physical sensations to emotional experiences. Following an introduction to the rationale for provoking physical sensations, therapist and patient work through a list of exercises designed to elicit emotion through physical activation, known as “symptom induction exercises.” Some examples include hyperventilating, spinning, and running in place. In addition, any exercises that may be particularly relevant to the patient may be added. Prior to each exercise, the therapist demonstrates the exercise, and following the patient’s completion of the exercise asks the patient to rate the intensity, distress, and similarity to physical sensations typically experiences during an emotion, each on a scale of 0 (Not at all) to 8 (Very much).  tHeraPist: So today we’ll do a number of exercises to induce some of these physical sensations that are often present when you experience anxiety, and look at the intensity, distress, and how close the sensations come to your experiences during uncomfortable emotions. The first one I’m going to ask you to do is the hyperventilation exercise. (following the exercise) What sensations do you notice?  JosePH: I didn’t like that at all.  tHeraPist: So you are having thoughts and judgments about the sensations, that you don’t like them. What about the actual physical sensations themselves— can you describe them?  JosePH: Dizzy, lightheaded, sort of unreal, like I’m disconnected. tHeraPist: Great. So thinking about those sensations, how would you rate the intensity of those sensations? JosePH: Probably a 7. tHeraPist: And how about the distress? JosePH: Also a 7. tHeraPist: And similarity?  JosePH: Well, I don’t usually get dizzy when I’m anxious, but I guess feeling lightheaded and surreal is closer, so maybe like a 5?  The therapist repeats the exposure two more times, and the last time asks the patient to pay particular attention to any thoughts he is having about the sensations, particularly any negative appraisals, and how these thoughts interact with and either lessen or intensify the physical sensations.  tHeraPist: How would you rate the intensity this time? JosePH: Probably a 5. tHeraPist: And the distress? JosePH: It was much better that time, probably only a 4. tHeraPist: What did you notice was different that time?  JosePH: Well, I guess I knew what to expect, and I wasn’t having the same thoughts as the first time. The first time I kept thinking, “I don’t like this,” and wondering when it was going to end. This time I just sort of went with it.  tHeraPist: Interesting. So when you just focused on the sensations themselves, without judgment or negative thoughts about them, the intensity was less?  JosePH: Yes, definitely.  Following the completion of all the chosen exercises, therapist and patient choose the most relevant exercises to engage in regularly over the next week. The patient is asked to complete one exercise several times a day, until the associated distress decreases. This repeated exposure helps facilitate learning of new information about the dangerousness (or lack thereof) of physical sensations and may help diminish future distress when physical symptoms do occur. See Figure 6.3 for an example of a Symptom Induction Test Form.   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  Please complete each of the exercises (as described) below. Be sure to engage in each exercise fully, and try to produce at least moderate symptom intensity. After the exercise, please note:  1. the physical symptoms you experienced 2. the intensity of the symptoms (0- to 8-point scale; 0 = No intensity, 8 = Extreme intensity) 3. the level of distress you experienced during the task (0- to 8-point scale; 0 = No distress, 8 = Extreme distress) 4. the degree of similarity to your naturally occurring symptoms (0- to 8-point scale; 0 = Not at all similar, 8 = Extremely similar) Wait until the symptoms have mostly subsided before attempting the next exercise. Use the other spaces provided to be creative and come up with additional exercises that are specific to you. When you are done, pick three of the exercises that produced the most anxiety for you. Put a star next to those exercises.  Procedure Symptoms experienced Intensity Distress Similarity Hyperventilation (60 seconds) Breathing through a thin straw (2 minutes) Spinning while standing (60 seconds) Running in place (60 seconds) Other: ( seconds) Other: ( seconds) Other: ( seconds) Other: ( seconds) Other: ( seconds) Other: ( seconds)  figUre 6.3. Symptom Induction Test Form.   Emotional Disorders  Module 7: Interoceptive and Situational Emotion Exposures  This treatment module allows application of all the skills learned thus far to actual situations, events, or activities that trigger strong levels of emotions that the patient has previously avoided. The therapist begins with a discussion about the rationale for emotion exposures. Although this module in the treatment program is often the most challenging, it is the best opportunity to make lasting behavioral and emotional changes. Emotion exposures serve three critical goals: (1) Interpretations and appraisals about the dangerousness of situations (internal or external) are modified and replaced with newer, more adaptive interpretations and appraisals; and (2) avoidance and related impairment is reversed, EDBs are recognized and modified, and the primary goal of extinguishing anxious and distressing reactions to the experience of intense emotions can proceed.  In addition to engaging in emotion exposures for homework, an important part of this module is practicing emotion exposures in session. This is critical because the therapist can often challenge the patient to engage in more difficult exposures in session and will be able to note any use of avoidance strategies or engagement in EDBs that may be outside the patient’s awareness. The particular in-session exposure tasks vary from patient to patient, and it is important that the therapist be able to generate a number of different possible tasks in which to engage. Once the task has been identified, the therapist can discuss any anxious or negative automatic appraisals occurring and help the patient consider other possibilities. The therapist should also remind the patient to use the skills of present-focused awareness and try to prevent any avoidance strategies that would interfere with the exposure. At the end of each session, the therapist helps the patient choose several emotion exposures to engage in outside of session for homework.  For Joseph, several different exposures were designed that targeted a variety of anxiety-provoking situations. Examples included walking straight ahead on a crowded sidewalk, forcing oncoming pedestrians to move aside rather than moving aside himself; engaging in a mock debate with a stranger and sticking to his opinion; eating a piece of fruit and riding on public transportation, and focusing his attention on what is going on around him rather than on any subsequent physical reactions to the fruit (e.g., gas, bloating); going to a party and excusing himself to the restroom,  in order to test some of his anticipatory automatic appraisals about what others will think of him; reducing the number of times he uses the bathroom in the morning from five to one; and similarly reducing the number of times he checks stoves, candles, and so forth, before leaving the house.  An exposure near the top of Joseph’s hierarchy was to go on a long car trip with some friends and acquaintances to see a concert in a nearby city. This would require him to face several of his fears at once. First, he would have to assert himself and ask his friends if he could come along in the car. Second, he would be traveling with a small group of people, including a few people he does not know well, and might be required to carry on casual conversation. Third, he would be locked in a small, confined space with no easy escape route should his IBS symptoms flare up.  tHeraPist: This was a big exposure assignment for you. Let’s start from the beginning, when you had to ask your friend if you could come along on the trip. Do you remember what you were experiencing just before you made that call?  JosePH: I noticed I felt shaky. I felt butterflies in my stomach, my face was hot, and my heart was beating fast.  tHeraPist: So, a lot of physical sensations associated with anxiety. What about thoughts?  JosePH: I was worried that my friend would be annoyed, like I am putting him out, or that he would be mad I waited so long to ask him. I also noticed I kept procrastinating, looking things up on the Internet, going to the corner store to buy a soda, things like that.  tHeraPist: Good! So you noticed some behaviors, too. And what happened when you called him? Did your anticipatory appraisals come true?  JosePH: Not at all, he was actually pretty happy I asked. He said he was hoping I was coming along, sort of like he was expecting it and was happy about it.  tHeraPist: What about the trip itself, how did that go?  JosePH: Well, about 10 minutes into it I started to feel some cramping in my stomach and thought, “Oh boy, here we go.” Then I remembered the exposure we did with the fruit and decided to try focusing on the music on the stereo, the view out the window, and the conversations that were happening in the car, rather than focusing on my stomach.   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  tHeraPist: Did that help?  JosePH: Well, the cramping was still there, but it wasn’t bothering me as much because I wasn’t just focusing on that.  tHeraPist: Did you have any urges to use the bathroom?   JosePH: I did at one point, and I decided to try what we talked about, and see if I could wait it out and see if it passed, and it did! At one point, though, I did need to use the bathroom.  tHeraPist: What happened then?  JosePH: I asked my friend if he could stop at the next rest stop.  tHeraPist: And what was his reaction, or the reaction of the other passengers?  JosePH: It was no big deal at all! No one seemed to care, and in fact I think they also wanted to stop, so it was no big deal! I also noticed something else. On the car ride back, I didn’t really think about it at all, and my gut started rumbling but I just didn’t worry about it and kept focusing on what was going on around me. It wasn’t even an issue at all on the way back.  For Joseph, great progress was made through exposures relating to his symptoms of anxiety and management of his IBS symptoms. However, Joseph continued to hold on to a core belief that he was “unworthy” and “unlikable.” Additional exposures were designed to target this belief directly.  tHeraPist: You seem to have made some great progress over the last few weeks, would you agree?  JosePH: Yes, I definitely feel like I can cope with my anxiety better, and things seem to be going really well at work right now, which helps. The other teachers have even started inviting me out for drinks after work, and I’ve gone a few times and actually had a lot of fun.  tHeraPist: That’s great news. One thing that is interesting—despite these changes, on your weekly questionnaires I notice you are still marking a few items like “I dislike myself” or “I feel utterly worthless.”   JosePH: Yeah, I still don’t think I’m a great person, and I still worry I’m just fooling people, or they are going to find out the “true” me and run the other way.  tHeraPist: I wonder if we can do some exposure work around those?  Using similar techniques learned in Module 4, the therapist helps Joseph generate evidence for and against the statements that he dislikes himself and that he is worthless. He is able to generate some evidence against this belief, for example, the large turnout of friends and supporters at a recent concert he put on. Using this and other evidence, the therapist helps Joseph generate a list of positive self-statements.  tHeraPist: So, what might you say about your recent experiences putting on the concert? JosePH: I don’t know, “I am a good musician?”  tHeraPist: That’s one, but maybe something even more objective and believable to you, like you work hard on your music?  JosePH: That’s true. And when I play, people seem to like it. tHeraPist: So you work hard at your music, and you entertain people with it? JosePH: Yes, that’s true. I also am a good listener. tHeraPist: Tell me more about that.  JosePH: Well, I have a friend who is going through a hard time right now, and sometimes he calls me just to talk about it. I usually am pretty good at letting him talk it through.  tHeraPist: So can we add “I am there for people and listen to them” to the list? Maybe even “I am a good friend?”  Once the therapist and Joseph generated a list of statements that are evidence against the core belief of being worthless and disliking himself, Joseph was asked to read these statements aloud and to notice his reactions to them.  tHeraPist: How was that reading those statements? JosePH: Awkward. I felt really uncomfortable. It makes  me feel anxious. tHeraPist: Can you describe that for me? JosePH: Well, I get this weird sort of “zap” of fear and  this feeling in the pit of my stomach, and I notice I get these kind of sarcastic thoughts like “That’s not true” or “Sure you are.”   Emotional Disorders  tHeraPist: So saying nice things about yourself brings on a feeling of fear, and some negative thoughts about yourself?  JosePH: Yes. I guess I feel kind of vulnerable, too, like my guard is down.  tHeraPist: That’s a very interesting observation. So saying something positive about yourself leaves you feeling a bit vulnerable, exposed maybe? Is it maybe a less familiar feeling to you than the self-criticism?  JosePH: Definitely. So is the fear like entering a foreign territory, like I don’t know what might jump out at me?  tHeraPist: Maybe something like that! Whereas the negative thoughts are perhaps more familiar and less fearful in a way. What if we made the statements a little less new and unfamiliar by repeating them a few times? (After Joseph rereads the statements two more times.) How was it this time?  JosePH: Well, a little easier, not quite as foreign, I guess, but still a little strange.  tHeraPist: Good. So exposing yourself to these statements repeatedly seems to have a similar effect as some of the other exposure exercises we’ve done? A little easier and less foreign each time?  JosePH: Yeah, I guess it gets a little easier each time.  tHeraPist: How about continuing with this exposure this week, generating a few more statements, and reading them out loud to yourself each day?  JosePH: I could try that.  In future sessions, the therapist revisits the patient’s continuing need for emotional exposures. If he/she determines that the patient would benefit from additional emotion exposures, they can be continued both in session and for homework at this time. Additionally, the therapist can focus on any events or emotional reactions over the past week that can be processed in session. Obstacles to exposure completion and reactions to exposures are discussed in session.  Module 8: Accomplishments, Maintenance, and Relapse Prevention  In the final treatment session, the therapist reviews both the major concepts presented in treatment and the patient’s progress. The therapist reviews the threecomponent model of emotions, focusing on cognitive  reappraisal, preventing emotional avoidance, and modifying EDBs. The patient is asked for his/her impression of progress made over the course of treatment, and the therapist can highlight areas of improvement and areas in need of continued practice. Reasons for lack of improvement (e.g., initial error in diagnosis, lack of understanding treatment principles, unrealistic goals, and lack of motivation) should also be reviewed. The therapist then discusses the inevitability of future stressors and potential reoccurrence of symptoms. The continuation of informal emotion exposures and use of skills learned are encouraged. The therapist may further assist the patient in staying committed to treatment by establishing long-term goals for the patient.  outcoMe aND coNclusioN  Joseph’s symptoms were assessed at pre- and posttreatment using a battery of self-report questionnaires, as described earlier. During treatment, Joseph’s SIAS score decreased from 51 at pretreatment to 26 at posttreatment. His BDI-II score decreased from 49 at pretreatment to 11 at post-treatment. His PSWQ score decreased from 80 to 35. Functionally, Joseph was able to meet many of his treatment goals over the course of treatment. For example, he was able to find a job he thoroughly enjoyed that matched his career goals. He significantly increased his social interactions and began engaging in activities, such as playing more local concerts, all of which significantly increased his selfconfidence and sense of self-worth. He gained control of his IBS symptoms and no longer engaged in avoidance behaviors related to his symptoms. At the time of termination, Joseph noted that he felt “like a completely different person” and was noticeably more positive and confident in his demeanor and presentation. Although Joseph was not part of the research program and, therefore, did not participate in an independent posttreatment clinical interview, his clinician (K. K. E.) estimated that his CSRs for both the social phobia and GAD diagnoses had dropped to a 3 (subclinical), the diagnosis of MDD was in partial remission with a CSR of 2, and although he improved in many of his OCDrelated symptoms, the diagnosis of OCD warranted a CSR rating of 4 (just above clinical severity).  Joseph returned to our Center for a follow-up assessment 8 months posttreatment that comprised of readministration of the ADIS and self-report questionnaires. At follow-up, Joseph’s self-reported symptom   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  ratings increased slightly from posttreatment. He endorsed somewhat higher scores on the SIAS, particularly on items related to greeting strangers or encountering strangers on the street, with a total follow-up score of 37. His scores on the PSWQ increased slightly, from 35 to 40. Notably, Joseph’s BDI score increased from 11 at posttreatment to 35 at follow-up, suggesting a relapse of depressive symptoms. In particular, Joseph indicated increases in pessimistic feelings about the future, guilty feelings, fatigue, and sleep disruption. At the time of his follow-up interview, Joseph reported that he had recently gone through a breakup with his girlfriend at the start of the holiday season, and he attributed his low mood to this breakup and the winter weather. Without further follow-up data, however, it is unclear the degree to which the increase in depressive symptoms is attributable to these situational variables or represents a relapse of his depression. Despite these increases at follow-up, Joseph did show a decrease in WSAS scores from pretreatment to follow-up (from 34, Severe interference, to 21, Moderate interference), which may reflect that even though his symptoms had returned to some degree, he was able to manage interference from the symptoms much better. However, Joseph did not complete the WSAS at posttreatment, so it is not clear exactly what the trajectory of change is on this measure.  Clinician ratings using the ADIS seemed largely to coincide with Joseph’s self-report. He experienced a slight worsening of his GAD and MDD symptoms from posttreatment to follow-up, receiving CSR ratings of 4 and 5, respectively. He was able to maintain his treatment gains for his OCD symptoms, which were again given a CSR of 4. Notably, Joseph’s social phobia was given a CSR rating of 2, suggesting that he was able to maintain and possibly even improve on gains made in treatment; whereas he still endorsed some fear and anxiety related to social situations, the interference and distress related to these fears was no longer endorsed at a clinical level.  referenCes  Allen, L. B., White, K. S., Barlow, D. H., Shear, M. K., Gorman, J. M., & Woods, S. W. (2010). Cognitive-behavior therapy (CBT) for panic disorder: Relationship of anxiety and depression comorbidity with treatment outcome.  Journal of Psychopathology and Behavioral Assessment,  32(2), 185–192. American Psychiatric Association. (2000). Diagnostic and  statistical manual of mental disorders (4th ed., text rev.). Washington, DC: Author.  American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.). Arlington, VA: Author.  Andrews, G. (1990). Classification of neurotic disorders. Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine, 83(10), 606– 607.  Andrews, G. (1996). Current controversies in the anxiety disorders. In R. M. Rapee (Ed.), Comorbidity in neurotic disorders: The similarities are more important than the difference (pp. 3–20). New York: Guilford Press.  Barlow, D. H. (1988). Anxiety and its disorders: The nature and treatment of anxiety and panic. New York: Guilford Press.  Barlow, D. H. (1991). Disorders of emotion. Psychological Inquiry, 2, 58–71.  Barlow, D. H. (2000). Unraveling the mysteries of anxiety and its disorders from the perspective of emotion theory. American Psychologist, 55(11), 1247–1263.  Barlow, D. H. (2002). Anxiety and its disorders: The nature and treatment of anxiety and panic (2nd ed.). New York: Guilford Press.  Barlow, D. H., Bullis, J. R., Comer, J. S., & Ametaj, A. A. (2013). Evidence-based psychological treatments: An update and the way forward. Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 9, 1–27.  Barlow, D. H., & Craske, M. G. (2007). Mastery of your anxiety and panic: Client workbook for anxiety and panic (4th ed.). New York: Oxford University Press.  Barlow, D. H., Gorman, J. M., Shear, M. K., & Woods, S.  W. (2000). Cognitive-behavioral therapy, imipramine, or their combination for panic disorder: A randomized controlled trial. Journal of the American Medical Association, 283, 2529–2536. Barlow, D. H., Sauer-Zavala, S. E., Carl, J. R., Bullis, J. R., & Ellard, K. K. (in press). The nature, diagnosis, and treatment of neuroticism: Back to the future. Clinical Psychological Science.  Beck, A. T. (1967). The diagnosis and management of depression. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.  Beck, A. T., Rush, A. J., Shaw, B. F., & Emery, G. (1979). Cognitive therapy of depression. New York: Guilford Press.  Beck, A. T., Steer, R. A., & Brown, G. K. (1996). Beck Depression Inventory manual (2nd ed.). San Antonio, TX: Psychological Corporation.  Bentley, K. H., Gallagher, M. W., Carl, J. R., Farchione, T. J., & Barlow, D. H. (2013). Development and validation of an Overall Depression Severity and Impairment Scale. Manuscript submitted for publication.  Boelen, P. A., Vrinssen, I., & van Tulder, F. (2010). Intolerance of uncertainty in adolescents: Correlations with worry, social anxiety, and depression. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 198, 194–200.   Emotional Disorders  Borkovec, T. D. (1994). The nature, functions, and origins of worry. In G. C. L. Davey & F. Tallis (Eds.), Worrying: Perspectives on theory, assessment, and treatment (pp. 5–34). New York: Wiley.  Borkovec, T. D., Hazlett-Stevens, H., & Diaz, M. L. (1999). The role of positive beliefs about worry in generalized anxiety disorder and its treatment. Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy, 6, 126–138.  Boswell, J. F., Thompson-Holland, J., Farchione, T. J., & Barlow, D. H. (2013). The intolerance of uncertainty: A common factor in the treatment of emotional disorders. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 69, 630–645.  Bouton, M. E. (2005). Behavior systems and the contextual control of anxiety, fear, and panic. In L. Feldman Barrett,  P. M. Niedenthal, & P. Winkielman (Eds.), Emotion and consciousness (pp. 205–227). New York: Guilford Press. Bouton, M. E., Mineka, S., & Barlow, D. H. (2001). A modern learning theory perspective on the etiology of panic disorder. Psychological Review, 108, 4–32.  Brown, T. A. (2007). Temporal course and structural relationships among dimensions of temperament and DSM-IV anxiety and mood disorder constructs. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 116, 313–328.  Brown, T. A., Antony, M. M., & Barlow, D. H. (1995). Diagnostic comorbidity in panic disorder: Effect on treatment outcome and course of comorbid diagnoses following treatment. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 63, 408–418.  Brown, T. A., & Barlow, D. H. (1995). Long-term outcome in cognitive-behavioral treatment of panic disorder: Clinical predictors and alternative strategies for assessment. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 63, 754–765.  Brown, T. A., & Barlow, D. H. (2002). Classification of anxiety and mood disorders. In D. H. Barlow (Ed.), Anxiety and its disorders: The nature and treatment of anxiety and panic (2nd ed., pp. 292–327). New York: Guilford Press.  Brown, T. A., & Barlow, D. H. (2009). A proposal for a dimensional classification system based on the shared features of the DSM-IV anxiety and mood disorders: Implications for assessment and treatment. Psychological Assessment, 21, 256–271.  Brown, T. A., Campbell, L. A., Lehman, C. L., Grisham, J. R., & Mancill, R. B. (2001). Current and lifetime comorbidity of the DSM-IV anxiety and mood disorders in a large clinical sample. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 110, 49–58.  Brown, T. A., Chorpita, B. F., & Barlow, D. H. (1998). Structural relationships among dimensions of the DSM-IV anxiety and mood disorders and dimensions of negative affect, positive affect, and autonomic arousal. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 107, 179–192.  Brown, T. A., Di Nardo, P. A., & Barlow, D. H. (2014). Anxiety Disorders Interview Schedule for DSM-5. New York: Oxford University Press.  Brown, T. A., Di Nardo, P. A., Lehman, C. L., & Campbell,  L. A. (2001). Reliability of DSM-IV anxiety and mood disorders: Implications for the classification of emotional disorders. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 110, 49–58. Campbell-Sills, L., Barlow, D. H., Brown, T. A., & Hofmann,  S. G. (2006a). Acceptability and suppression of negative emotion in anxiety and mood disorders. Emotion, 6, 587–595. Campbell-Sills, L., Barlow, D. H., Brown, T. A., & Hofmann,  S. G. (2006b). Effects of suppression and acceptance on emotional responses in individuals with anxiety and mood disorders. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 44, 1251– 1263. Campbell-Sills, L., Liverant, G. I., & Brown, T. A. (2004). Psychometric evaluation of the behavioral inhibition/behavioral activation scales in a large sample of outpatients with anxiety and mood disorders. Psychological Assessment, 16(3), 244–254.  Campbell-Sills, L., Norman, S. B., Craske, M. G., Sullivan, G., Lang, A. J., Chavira, D. A. (2009). Validation of a brief measure of anxiety-related severity and impairment: the Overall Anxiety Severity and Impairment Scale (OASIS). Journal of Affective Disorders, 112(1-3), 92–101.  Caspi, A., Sugden, K., Moffitt, T. E., Taylor, A., Craig, I. W., & Harrington, H. (2003). Influence of life stress on depression: Moderation by a polymorphism in the 5-HTT gene. Science, 301, 386–389.  Chorpita, B. F., Albano, A. M., & Barlow, D. H. (1998). The structure of negative emotions in a clinical sample of children and adolescents. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 107, 74–85.  Chorpita, B. F., & Barlow, D. H. (1998). The development of anxiety: The role of control in the early environment. Psychological Bulletin, 124, 3–21.  Clark, D. A. (2012). The English Improving Access to Psychological Therapies (IAPT) program: History and progress. In R. K. McHugh & D. H. Barlow (Eds.), Dissemination and implementation of evidence-based psychological interventions (pp. 61–77). New York: Oxford University Press.  Clark, L. A. (2005). Temperament as a unifying basis for personality and psychopathology. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 114, 505–521.  Clark, L. A., & Watson, D. (1991). Tripartite model of anxiety and depression: Psychometric evidence and taxonomic implications. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 103, 103– 116.  Craske, M. G., & Barlow, D. H. (2006). Mastery of your anxiety and worry (2nd ed.). New York: Oxford University Press.  Craske, M. G., Rowe, M., Lewin, M., & Noriega-Dimitri, R. (1997). Interoceptive exposure versus breathing retraining within cognitive-behavioural therapy for panic disorder with agoraphobia. British Journal of Clinical Psychology, 36, 85–99.  Dimidjian, S., Hollon, S. D., Dobson, K. S., Schmaling, K.   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  B., Kohlenberg, R. J., & Addis, M. E. (2006). Randomized trial of behavioral activation, cognitive therapy, and antidepressant medication in the acute treatment of adults with major depression. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 74(4), 658–670.  Di Nardo, P. A., Brown, T. A., & Barlow, D. H. (1994). Anxiety Disorders Interview Schedule for DSM-IV. Albany, NY: Graywind.  Drabant, E. M., Ramel, W., Edge, M. D., Hyde, L. W., Kuo,  J. R., Goldin, P. R. (2012). Neural mechanisms underlying 5-HTTLPR-related sensitivity to acute stress. American Journal of Psychiatry, 169, 397–405. Endicott, J., Nee, J., Harrison, W., & Blumenthal, R. (1993). Quality of Life Enjoyment and Satisfaction Questionnaire: A new measure. Psychopharmacology Bulletin, 29(2), 321–326.  Eysenck, H. J. (1947). Dimension of personality. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.  First, M. B., Spitzer, R. L., Gibbon, M., & Williams, J. B. W. (1996). Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV Axis I Disorders—Patient Edition (SCID-I/P, Version 2.0). New York: Biometrics Research Department, New York State Psychiatric Institute.  Foa, E. B., Riggs, D. S., Dancu, C. V., & Rothbaum, B. O. (1993). Reliability and validity of a brief instrument for assessment post-traumatic stress disorder. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 6(4), 459–473.  Foa, E. B., & Tolin, D. F. (2000). Comparison of the PTSD Symptom Scale—Interview Version and the Clinician- Administered PTSD scale. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 13(2), 181–191.  Goodman, W. K., Price, L. H., Rasmussen, S. A., Mazure, C., Fleischmann, R. L., & Hill, C. L. (1989). The Yale– Brown Obsessive Compulsive Scale: I. Development, use, and reliability. Archives of General Psychiatry, 46(11), 1006–1011.  Hafner, J., & Marks, I. M. (1976). Exposure in vivo of agoraphobics: Contributions of diazepam, group exposure, and anxiety evocation. Psychological Medicine, 6, 71–88.  Hamilton, M. (1959). The assessment of anxiety states by rating. British Journal of Medical Psychology, 32, 50–55.  Hamilton, M. (1960). A rating scale for depression. Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery, and Psychiatry, 23, 56–62.  Hayes, S. C., Strosahl, K. D., & Wilson, K. G. (1999). Acceptance and commitment therapy: An experiential approach to behavior change. New York: Guilford Press.  Heimberg, R. G., Horner, K. J., Juster, H. R., Safren, S. A., Brown, E. J., & Schneier, F. R. (1999). Psychometric properties of the Liebowitz Social Anxiety Scale. Psychological Medicine, 29(1), 199–212.  Heimberg, R. G., Liebowitz, M. R., Hope, D. A., Schneier,  F. R., Holt, C. S., & Welkowitz, L. A. (1998). Cognitive behavioral group therapy vs phenelzine therapy for social phobia: 12-week outcome. Archives of General Psychiatry, 55(12), 1133–1141. Hettema, J. M., Neale, M. C., & Kendler, K. S. (2001). A review and meta-analysis of the genetic epidemiology of anxiety disorders. American Journal of Psychiatry, 158, 1568–1578.  Huppert, J. D., Bufka, L. F., Barlow, D. H., Gorman, J. M., Shear, M. K., & Woods, S. W. (2001). Therapists, therapist variables and cognitive-behavioral therapy outcome in a multicenter trial for panic disorder. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 69, 747–755.  Izard, C. E. (1971). The face of emotion. New York: AppletonCentury- Crofts.  Jacobson, N. S., Martell, C. R., & Dimidjian, S. (2001). Behavioral activation treatment for depression: Returning to contextual roots. Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 8, 255–270.  Kendler, K. S. (1996). Major depression and generalized anxiety disorder: Same genes, (partly) different environments—revisited. British Journal of Psychiatry, 30(Suppl.), 68–75.  Kendler, K. S., Walters, E. E., Neale, M. C., Kessler, R. C., Heath, A. C., & Eaves, L. J. (1995). The structure of genetic and environmental risk factors for six major psychiatric disorders in women: Phobia, generalized anxiety disorder, panic disorder, bulimia, major depression, and alcoholism. Archives of General Psychiatry, 52, 374–382.  Kessler, R. C., Nelson, C. B., McGonagle, K. A., Lui, J., Swartz, M., & Blazer, D. G. (1996). Comorbidity of DSM- III-R major depressive disorder in the general population: Results from the National Comorbidity Survey. British Journal of Psychiatry, 168, 17–30.  Keyes, C. L., Wissing, M., Potgieter, J. P., Temane, M., Kruger, A., & van Rooy, S. (2008). Evaluation of the Mental Health Continuum—Short Form (MHC-SF) in Setswanaspeaking South Africans. Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy, 15(3), 181–192.  Keyes, C. L. M. (2005). Mental illness and/or mental health?: Investigating axioms of the complete state model of health. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 73, 539– 548.  Keyes, C. L. M. (2006). Mental health in adolescence: Is America’s youth flourishing? American Journal of Orthopsychiatry, 76, 395–402.  Lamers, S. M., Westerhof, G. J., Bohlmeijer, E. T., ten Klooster, P. M., & Keyes, C. L. (2011). Evaluating the psychometric properties of the Mental Health Continuum- Short Form (MHC-SF). Journal of Clinical Psychology, 67(1), 99–110.  Lee, J. K., Orsillo, S. M., Roemer, L., & Allen, L. B. (2010). Distress and avoidance in generalized anxiety disorder: Exploring the relationships with intolerance of uncertainty and worry. Behaviour Therapy, 39, 126–136.  Liebowitz, M. R. (1987). Social phobia. Modern Problems in Pharmacopsychiatry, 22, 141–173.  Liebowitz, M. R., Heimberg, R. G., Schneier, F. R., Hope, D. A., Davies, S., & Holt, C. S. (1999). Cognitive-behavioral   Emotional Disorders  group therapy versus phenelzine in social phobia: Longterm outcome. Depression and Anxiety, 10(3), 89–98.  Linehan, M. M. (1993). Cognitive behavioral treatment of borderline personality disorder. New York: Guilford Press.  Liverant, G. I., Brown, T. A., Barlow, D. H., & Roemer, L. (2008). Emotion regulation in unipolar depression: The effects of acceptance and suppression of subjective emotional experience on the intensity and duration of sadness and negative affect. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 46, 1201–1209.  Lonsdorf, T. B., Golkar, A., Lindstöm, K. M., Fransson, P., Schalling, M., & Ohman, A. (2011). 5-HTTLPR and COMTval158met genotype gate amygdala reactivity and habituation. Biological Psychology, 87, 106–112.  Margraf, J., Taylor, C. B., Ehlers, A., Roth, W. T., & Agras,  W. S. (1987). Panic attacks in the natural environment. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 175, 558–565. Mattick, R. P., & Clarke, J. C. (1998). Development and validation of measures of social phobia scrutiny fear and social interaction anxiety. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 36, 455–470.  McHugh, R. K., & Barlow, D. H. (Eds.). (2012). Dissemination and implementation of evidence-baed psychological interventions. New York: Oxford University Press.  Mennin, D. S., Heimberg, R. G., Turk, C. L., & Fresco, D.  M. (2005). Preliminary evidence for an emotion dysregulation model of generalized anxiety disorder. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 43, 1281–1310. Merikangas, K. R., Zhang, H., & Aveneoli, S. (2003). Longitudinal trajectories of depression and anxiety in a prospective community study. Archives of General Psychiatry, 60, 993–1000.  Meyer, T. J., Miller, M. L., Metzger, R. L., & Borkovec, T.  D. (1990). Development and validation of the Penn State Worry Questionnaire. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 28, 487–495. Miller, W. R., & Rollnick, S. (2013). Motivational interviewing: Preparing people for change (3rd ed.). New York: Guilford Press.  Montag, C., Fiebach, C. J., Kirsch, P., & Reuter, M. (2011). Interation of 5-HTTLPR and a variation on the oxytocin recepter gene influences negative emotionality. Biological Psychiatry, 69, 601–603.  Munafò, M. R., Brown, S. M., & Hariri, A. R. (2008). Seratonin transporter (5-HTTLPR) genotype and amygdala activation: A meta-analysis. Biological Psychiatry, 63, 852–857.  Nathan, P. E., & Gorman, J. M. (Eds.). (2007). A guide to treatments that work (3rd ed.). New York: Oxford University Press.  Norman, S. B., Cissell, S. H., Means-Christensen, A. J., & Stein, M. B. (2006). Development and validation of an Overall Anxiety Severity and Impairment Scale (OASIS). Depression and Anxiety, 23(4), 245–249.  Pezawas, L., Meyer-Lindenberg, A., Drabant, E. M., Verchinski, B. A., Munoz, K. E., & Kolachana, B. S. (2005). 5-HT- TLPR polymorphism impacts human cingulate-amygdala interactions: A genetic susceptibility mechanism for depression. Nature Neuroscience, 8(6), 828–834.  Raffa, S. D., Stoddard, J. A., White, K. S., Barlow, D. H., Gorman, J. M., & Shear, M. K. (2008). Relapse following combined-treatment discontinuation in a placebocontrolled trial for panic disorder. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 196(7), 548–555.  Rapee, R. M., Craske, M. G., & Barlow, D. H. (1990). Subject described features of panic attacks using a new selfmonitoring form. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 4, 171– 181.  Roy-Byrne, P. P., Craske, M. G., & Stein, M. B. (2006). Panic disorder. Lancet, 368, 1023–1032.  Rutter, M., Moffit, T. E., & Caspi, A. (2006). Gene– environment interplay and psychopathology: Multiple varieties but real effects. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 47, 226–261.  Ruzek, J. I., Karlin, B. E., & Zeiss, A. (2012). Implementation of evidence-based psychological treatments in the Veterans Health Administration. In R. K. McHugh & D.  H. Barlow (Eds.), Dissemination and implementation of evidence-based psychological interventions (pp. 78–96). New York: Oxford University Press. Safren, S. A., Heimberg, R. G., Horner, K. J., Juster, H. R., Schneier, F. R., & Liebowitz, M. R. (1999). Factor structure of social fears: The Liebowitz Social Anxiety Scale. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 13(3), 253–270.  Sauer-Zavala, S. E., & Barlow, D. H. (2013). The case for borderline personality disorder as an emotional disorder: Implications for treatment. Manuscript submitted for publication.   Shear, K., Belnap, B. H., Mazumdar, S., Houck, P., & Rollman, B. L. (2006). Generalized anxiety disorder severity scale (GADSS): A preliminary validation study. Depression and Anxiety, 23(2), 77–82.  Shear, M. K., Brown, T. A., Barlow, D. H., Money, R., Sholomskas, D. E., & Woods, S. W. (1997). Multicenter collaborative Panic Disorder Severity Scale. American Journal of Psychiatry, 154, 1571–1575.  Shear, M. K., Vander Bilt, J., & Rucci, P. (2001). Reliability and validity of a Structured Interview Guide for the Hamilton Anxiety Rating Scale (SIGH-A). Depression and Anxiety, 13, 166–178.  Stein, M. B., Campbell-Sills, L., & Gelernter, J. (2009). Genetic variation in 5HTTLPR is associated with emotional resilience. Neuropsychiatric Genetics, 150B, 900–906.  Storch, E. A., Larson, M. J., Price, L. H., Rasmussen, S. A., Murphy, T. K., & Goodman, W. K. (2010). Psychometric analysis of the Yale–Brown Obsessive–Compulsive Scale Second Edition Symptom Checklist. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 24, 650–656.  Suárez, L., Bennett, S. M., Goldstein, C., & Barlow, D. H.   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  (2009). Understanding anxiety disorders from a “triple vulnerability” framework. In M. M. Antony & M. B. Stein (Eds.), Handbook of anxiety and the anxiety disorders (pp. 153–172). New York: Oxford University Press.  Tsao, J. C. I., Mystkowski, J. L., Zucker, B. G., & Craske, M.  G. (2002). Effects of cognitive-behavior therapy for panic disorder on comorbid conditions: Replication and extension. Behavior Therapy, 33, 493–509. Tsao, J. C. I., Mystkowski, J. L., Zucker, B. G., & Craske,  M. G. (2005). Impact of cognitive-behavioral therapy for panic disorder on comorbidity: A controlled investigation. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 43, 959–970. Tull, M. T., & Roemer, L. (2007). Emotion regulation difficulties associated with the experience of uncued panic attacks: Evidence of experiential avoidance, emotional nonacceptance, and decreased emotional clarity. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 38, 378–391.  Tyrer, P. J. (1989). Classification of neurosis. Chichester, UK: Wiley.  Tyrer, P. J., Seivewright, N., Murphys, S., Ferguson, B., Kingdon, D., & Barczak, B. (1998). The Nottingham study of neurotic disorder: Comparison of drug and psychological treatments. Lancet, 2, 235–240.  Watson, D. (2005). Rethinking the mood and anxiety disorders: A quantitative hierarchical model for DSM-V. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 114, 522–536.  Watson, D., Clark, L. A., & Tellegen, A. (1988). Development and validation of brief measures of positive and negative  affect: The PANAS scales. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 54, 1063–1070.  Wegner, D. M., Schneider, D. J., Carter, S. R., III, & White,  T. L. (1987). Paradoxical effects of thought suppression. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 53(1), 5–13. Weinberg, A., & Hajcak, G. (2010). Electrocortical evidence for vigilance–avoidance in generalized anxiety disorder. Psychophysiology, 48(6), 1–10.  Weiser, M., Pauli, P., Weyers, P., Alpers, G., & Mühlberger, A. (2009). Fear of negative evaluation and the hypervigilance–avoidance hypothesis: An eye-tracking study. Journal of Neural Transmission, 116, 717–723.  Westerhof, G. J., & Keyes, C. L. (2009). Mental illness and mental health: The two continua model across the lifespan. Journal of Adult Development, 17(2), 110–119.  Westra, H. A., Arkowitz, H., & Dozois, D. J. A. (2009). Adding a motivational interviewing pretreatment to cognitive behavioral therapy for generalized anxiety disorder: A preliminary randomized controlled trial. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 23, 1106–1117.  Westra, H. A., & Dozois, D. J. A. (2006). Preparing clients for cognitive behavioural therapy: A randomized pilot study of motivational interviewing for anxiety. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 30, 481–498.  Williams, J. B. (1988). A structured interview guide for the Hamilton Depression Rating Scale. Archives of General Psychiatry, 45, 742–747.   CHaPter 7  Cognitive Therapy for Depression  Jeffrey e. youNG JayNe l. ryGh arthur D. weiNBerGer aaroN t. Beck  one of the most important developments in psychological approaches to emotional problems has been the success of cognitive therapy for depression. evidence for the powerful efficacy of this approach has increased steadily over the years, particularly in regard to successful long‑term outcome. employing a variety of well‑specified cognitive and behavioral techniques, cognitive therapy is also distinguished by the detailed structure of each session with its specific agendas, and by the very deliberate and obviously effective therapeutic style of interacting with the patient through a series of questions (socratic style). Moreover, the authors underscore very clearly the importance of a collaborative relationship between therapist and patient, and outline specific techniques to achieve this collaborative state, so that patient and therapist become an investigative team. in this chapter, the authors cover not only traditional cognitive therapy but also an expansion of cognitive therapy called “schema‑focused” therapy. This approach concentrates on identifying and modifying early maladaptive or “core” schemas thought to develop during childhood in more severely depressed and treatment‑resistant patients, often with comorbid personality disorders that may make them vulnerable to relapse. Detailed explication of this expanded treatment will be invaluable to experienced cognitive therapists, as well as to those becoming acquainted with cognitive therapy for depression for the first time. Two compelling cases, Denise, treated with traditional cognitive therapy, and Barbara, treated with schema‑focused therapy, illustrate each approach.—D. H. B.  overview aND research  Depression and the Emergence of Cognitive Therapy  Depression is one of the most common disorders encountered by mental health professionals. Research from the U.S. National Comorbidity Survey Replication (NCS-R; 2005) studies, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC; 2010), and the World Health Organization (WHO; 2008), and data provided  by the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH; 2006) indicate the following:  •• The lifetime prevalence estimate for major depressive disorder in the United States is 29.9% (Kessler, Petukhova, Sampson, Zaslavsky, & Wittchen, 2012).  •• The 12-month prevalence estimate for major depressive disorder in the United States is 8.6% (Kessler et al., 2012).  275   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  •• Across countries and cultures, the lifetime prevalence estimates for major depressive disorder are 14.6% in high- and 11.1% in low- to middle-income countries; the 12-month prevalence estimates are 5.5% in high- and 5.6% low- to middle-income countries (Bromet et al., 2011).  •• Major depressive episodes in the United States are associated with higher rates of substance dependence or abuse among adults ages 18 or older (21.5%) and among youth ages 12–17 (18.9%) than among those without such episodes (8.2% and 6.7%, respectively) (Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration [SAMHSA], 2008).  •• Depression increases the risk of heart attacks and is more common in those with chronic conditions such as obesity, diabetes, cardiovascular disease, cancer, asthma, and arthritis (NIMH, 2006; Strine et al., 2008; Chapman, Perry, & Strine, 2005).  •• Major depressive disorder in the United States is associated with 27.2 lost workdays and bipolar disorder (I or II) with 65.5 lost workdays for each ill worker per year (Kessler et al., 2006).  •• Major depressive disorder is the leading cause of disability in the United States for ages 15–44 (NIMH, 2006), and is a major contributor to the global burden of disease (WHO, 2004).  The high risk of relapse (Scott, 2000), high resource utilization (Howland, 1993), and loss of human capital (Berndt et al., 2000) associated with depression reveal the seriousness of the problem. The WHO (2004) projects that depression will be among the top three causes of the total number of years of life lost to illness, disability, or premature death by 2030. As these reports indicate, depression is widespread, debilitating, costly, and potentially devastating.  No amount of data can adequately capture or convey the personal pain and suffering experienced in depression. Many depressed people do not get professional help (Frank & Thase, 1999; Jarrett, 1995; Wang et al., 2005), and although the number seeking help increased over the last decade, undertreatment remains a serious problem (Olfson et al., 2002; Wang et al., 2005). The cost and/or lack of sufficient coverage by health insurance companies, concerns about confidentiality, continued social stigma, and the lack of information regarding where to go and what type of services to obtain are still obstacles to receiving appropriate and adequate mental health services (SAMHSA, 2008). Obtaining  the right type of help can be at once inhibiting and overwhelming, especially to those already impaired. The following quote remains relevant today:  Americans who do seek treatment for depressive symptoms must decide where to seek which treatment and from what type of practitioner. . . . The clinician must select a somatic, psychological, or combination of treatment, at a given dose and/or schedule of appointments. . . . Throughout this procedure, the patient decides to what extent he/she will comply with the recommendations, for how long, against recognized and unrecognized economic, practical, physical, and emotional costs. . . . Sadly, the lack of information as well as the continued social stigma of psychiatric illness and treatment influence decision-making. Simultaneously, the decisions occur in an environment filled with social, political, and economic debate, and tension among policy makers, third-party payers, and clinicians, as well as among different types of practitioner guilds. (Jarrett, 1995, p. 435)  When care is provided, it is frequently inadequate or minimally adequate (Wang et al., 2005). Evidencedbased treatments have not been widely adopted in clinical practice (Stirman et al., in press), reflecting a public health crisis (Keller & Boland, 1998). The need for delivery of treatments with proven and rapid efficacy remains paramount.  One of the major developments in the treatment of depression has been the emergence of cognitive therapy, which has expanded exponentially since Beck’s publication of a detailed treatment manual for depression in 1979 (Beck, 1967, 1976; Beck, Rush, Shaw, & Emery, 1979). The work of Beck and his colleagues has led to a paradigm shift within psychotherapy (Salkovskis, 1996). Due in part to Beck’s development of testable hypotheses and clinical protocols, cognitive therapy has received an enormous amount of professional attention (Hollon, 1998; McGinn & Young, 1996; Rehm, 1990). Of all the cognitive-behavioral treatment approaches to depression, Beck’s paradigm (Beck, 1967; Beck et al., 1979) has received the greatest amount of empirical study, validation, and clinical application (Barlow & Hofmann, 1997; de Oliveira, 1998; Dobson & Pusch, 1993; Hollon, 1998; Hollon, Thase, & Markowitz, 2002; Jarrett & Thase, 2010; Rehm, 1990; Roberts & Hartlage, 1996; Scott, 1996a). Cognitive therapy has become the treatment of choice for many disorders (Clark & Beck, 2010; Newman, Leahy, Beck, Reilly-Harrington, & Gyulai, 2002). There are many   Cognitive Therapy for Depression  excellent books for practitioners who teach cognitive therapy procedures (e.g., J. S. Beck, 2011), as well as workbooks and/or guides for clients (e.g., Gilson, Freeman, Yates, & Freeman, 2009; Leahy, 2010; Wright & McCray, 2011).  Along with this attention, however, has come confusion about what is actually meant by the term “cognitive therapy.” The actual cognitive therapeutic strategies employed in “cognitive” treatments may differ in many ways from one another and from those explicitly prescribed by Beck and colleagues (1979) in their manual for cognitive therapy of depression. Thus, the reader should be aware that common use of the term “cognitive therapy” does not necessarily imply uniformity in procedures. The therapy described by Beck and colleagues involves the use of both cognitive and behavioral techniques, and can therefore be accurately labeled “cognitive-behavioral”; however, in the literature, both terms have been applied in describing Beck and colleagues’ procedures, with some articles utilizing the term “cognitive therapy” (Sacco & Beck, 1995, p. 345).  Research on Treatment of the Acute Phase  Outcome research has found cognitive therapy to be effective with clinical populations in numerous controlled trials (see review by Beck & Alford, 2009; Hollon & Shelton, 2001). Although some early studies (Blackburn, Bishop, Glen, Whalley, & Christie, 1981; Rush, Beck, Kovacs, & Hollon, 1977) suggested that cognitive therapy may be superior to drug treatment for depression at termination, Meterissian and Bradwejn (1989) noted that psychopharmacological interventions often were not adequately implemented. In research in which interventions were adequate, cognitive therapy generally was shown to be equivalent in efficacy to antidepressant medications, including tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) and selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) in the treatment of outpatients with nonbipolar depression (DeRubeis et al., 2005; Hollon et al., 1992; Murphy, Simmons, Wetzel, & Lustman, 1984) and a monoamine oxidase inhibitor (MAOI) in the treatment of outpatients with atypical depression (Jarrett et al., 1999). Although many studies did not include pill-placebo conditions, the studies by Jarrett and colleagues and DeRubeis and colleagues (2005) found the active treatments superior to pill-placebos. In a mega-analysis by DeRubeis, Gelfand, Tang, and Simons (1999) of treatment outcome in four studies with  severely depressed outpatients, cognitive therapy was equivalent to antidepressant medication (imipramine or nortriptyline). A study by Bhar and colleagues (2008) found that CBT and pharmacotherapy (paroxetine) produced similar trajectories of change in cognitive and vegetative symptoms of major depression throughout 16 weeks of treatment.  Only two studies that included a pill-placebo found cognitive therapy to be less effective than psychopharmacological intervention. The first was the NIMH Treatment of Depression Collaborative Research Program (TDCRP) with moderate to severe depression in adults. The second was the multisite Treatment for Adolescents with Depression Study (TADS) for reduction of depressive symptoms in adolescents.  The NIMH TDCRP was the first major study to include a pill-placebo condition. The initial results of TDCRP (Elkin et al., 1989) suggested lower rates of improvement with cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) than did earlier studies. It also appeared that with more severely depressed patient groups, interpersonal psychotherapy and antidepressant drugs might be superior to CBT. The high visibility and prestige of the NIMH TDCRP study generated a great deal of debate (Hollon, DeRubeis, & Evans, 1996; Wolpe, 1993) because it appeared that the benefits of CBT in the acute treatment phase might have been overestimated in previous studies. However, on later examination of the data, Elkin, Gibbons, Shea, and Shaw (1996) acknowledged Jacobson and Hollon’s (1996) observation that the outcome results varied across sites, with cognitive therapy performing as well as medication at one of the three sites with severely depressed clients. Jacobson and Hollon noted that the best results were obtained at the site with the most experienced therapists. Hollon and colleagues (2002, p. 62) “suspect that the explanation is not that cognitive therapy cannot be effective with such patients, but that the therapist’s expertise makes a greater difference the more difficult the depression is to treat.” Additionally, a study by Albon and Jones (2003) raised the question of the distinctiveness of the two types of psychotherapy treatments in the TDCRP. Albon and Jones, expert therapists in CBT and interpersonal psychotherapy, respectively, developed prototypes of ideal regimens of their own respective treatments. Then, actual transcripts of treatment sessions from the TDCRP were compared to these expert prototypes. Albon and Jones found that both CBT and interpersonal psychotherapy sessions conformed most closely to the cognitivebehavioral prototype, and that closer adherence to the   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  cognitive-behavioral prototype produced more positive correlations with outcome measures across both types of treatment. Perhaps this is why Quilty, McBride, and Bagby (2008) found equivalent outcomes with interpersonal psychotherapy, CBT, and pharmacotherapy, and Peeters and colleagues (2013) found similar remission rates with CBT, interpersonal psychotherapy, and both treatments combined with medication. Similarly, Luty and colleagues (2007) found interpersonal psychotherapy and CBT equally effective overall but (in contrast to the NIMH TDCRP study) they found CBT to be more effective with severe depression.  In further analysis of the same dataset used in the Luty and colleagues (2007) study, Joyce and colleagues (2007) found that comorbidity of personality and major depressive disorders adversely affected the treatment response to interpersonal psychotherapy but not CBT. Bellino, Zizza, Rinaldi, and Bogetto (2007) found interpersonal psychotherapy and CBT (each combined with fluoxetine) equally effective in the treatment of depression in patients with borderline personality and major depressive disorders. Fournier and colleagues (2008) found that at 16 weeks of treatment, CBT was more effective in reducing depression than medication (paroxetine) for patients with moderate to severe depression and no personality disorder, but less effective for those with a personality disorder. This study did not include patients with borderline, schizotypal, or antisocial personality disorders. The efficacy of CBT (alone or as an adjunct to psychopharmacological treatment) with coexisting major depressive and personality disorders is still not clear.  Some writers have argued that the major psychotherapies are essentially equivalent in effectiveness, regardless of the disorder studied. To test this hypothesis, a recent meta-analysis examined whether CBT was superior to other forms of psychotherapy across a range of disorders (Tolin, 2010). The results showed that, across all disorders included in the study, CBT was superior to psychodynamic therapy, although not to interpersonal or supportive therapies, at posttreatment and at follow-up. However, the analysis found that CBT was significantly superior to the alternative therapies studied for depressive and anxiety disorders. Tolin (2010) concluded that “these results argue against previous claims of treatment equivalence and suggest that CBT should be considered a first-line psychosocial treatment of choice, at least for patients with anxiety and depressive disorders” (p. 710).  The multisite TADS (2004) for reduction of depressive symptoms in adolescents found that the combination of medication (fluoxetine) and CBT produced the most positive outcome, medication alone was superior to pill-placebo, but CBT alone did not significantly differ from pill-placebo. These findings were based on 12-week outcome measures. Analyses (TADS, 2007) on data from outcome measures at Weeks 18, 24, and 36, however, indicated that by Week 36 the effectiveness of CBT significantly increased and was equivalent to medication, and that the combination of medication and CBT was slightly more effective than CBT or medication alone.  Spirito, Esposito-Smythers, Wolff, and Uhl (2011) recently completed an updated review of outcome studies regarding CBT for adolescent depression and suicidality. They summarized the data regarding depression by concluding: “CBT for adolescent depression has received considerable support in the research literature. Individual and group CBT, with and without a parent component, appears to be well established and/or efficacious for the majority of participants.” Regarding CBT and suicidality in adolescents, the authors concluded that “the majority of studies of CBT for depressed adolescents have found a reduction in suicidal ideation regardless of CBT format (i.e., individual, group). It should be noted that reductions in suicidality have also been found in response to family therapy, supportive therapy, and pharmacotherapy. Nonetheless, while various forms of therapy resulted in comparable reductions in adolescent suicidality, CBT has shown the most promise in concurrently reducing MDD diagnoses/ symptoms and suicidal ideation.”  Several studies have not found the combination of CBT and drugs to be superior to either treatment alone with depressed outpatients in the acute phase of treatment (Biggs & Rush, 1999; Evans et al., 1992; Hollon, Shelton, & Loosen, 1991; Scott, 1996a; Shaw & Segal, 1999). The increment in efficacy appears to be modest in the acute phase of treatment at best, with increases in efficacy from 10 to 20% (Conte, Plutchik, Wild, & Karasu, 1986). Studies regarding treatment with depressed inpatients suggest beneficial results when CBT is combined with medication (Bowers, 1990; Miller, Norman, Keitner, Bishop, & Dow, 1989; Stuart & Bowers, 1995; Wright, 1996). Although cognitive therapy appears to be a useful adjunct to standard care with inpatients, it remains unclear whether cognitive therapy alone is sufficient (Hollon et al., 2002).   Cognitive Therapy for Depression  In attempts to make traditional cognitive therapy more accessible and/or affordable for the general public, Internet-based (ICBT) and group (CBGT) CBTs have been explored. In a review of rapidly accumulating data on ICBT, Johansson and Andersson (2012) concluded that there is mounting support for the effectiveness of guided ICBT (structured self-help materials with therapist contact via e-mail) over unguided ICBT (no therapist contact); the research indicates that guided ICBT is comparable to face-to-face therapy in effectiveness; tailored treatments (which include additional specific techniques for coexisting diagnoses) are superior to nontailored treatments (same material for all patients) with severe depression.  Regarding CGBT, a recent meta-analysis (Feng et al., 2012) on studies published from 2000 to 2010 revealed that CBGT was more effective with mild to moderate depression. The effect decreased as depression severity increased. The optimal length of session was 60–90 minutes. Take-home assignments improved results. Higher turnover rates were related to poorer outcomes. Feng and colleagues (2012) found a small effect on relapse rates at 6 months. The relapse rates were lowest, with no residual symptoms posttreatment.  Research on Relapse Prevention1  Even though the vast majority of patients recover from an episode of depression, they nevertheless remain vulnerable to future depression.  Recurrence is a major problem for many individuals suffering from depression: at least 50% of individuals who suffer from one depressive episode will have another within 10 years. Those experiencing two episodes have a 90% chance of suffering a third, while individuals with three or more lifetime episodes have relapse rates of 40% within 15 weeks of recovery from an episode (Kupfer, Frank, & Wamhoff, 1996, p. 293).  Other investigators have estimated that 85% of patients with unipolar depression are likely to experience recurrences (Keller & Boland, 1998, p. 350). Wang (2004), through a 6-year follow-up, found that 49.8% of those treated for major depression developed subsequent major depressive episodes. As these numbers clearly show, there is an urgent need for treatments capable of minimizing and preventing relapse.  What we consider a very exciting finding in the treatment of depression with cognitive therapy is the con   sistent observation (Paykel, 2007) that patients treated with cognitive therapy alone or with a combination of cognitive therapy and medication fare far better in terms of relapse than do patients treated with medication alone (when both treatments are stopped at termination). Despite differences in sample characteristics and methodologies across studies, cognitive therapy appears to have important prophylactic properties. After a 1-year follow-up, numerous studies have reported lower relapse rates for patients treated with cognitive therapy than for patients treated with antidepressants. Simons, Murphy, Levine, and Wetzel (1986) found relapse rates of 12% with cognitive therapy versus 66% with antidepressants; Bowers (1990) found relapse rates of 20% with cognitive therapy versus 80% with antidepressants; Shea and colleagues (1992) reported 9% relapse with cognitive therapy versus 28% with antidepressants; Hollon and colleagues (2005) reported rates of 31% relapse with cognitive therapy versus 76% with antidepressants. Results from the most extensive metaanalysis to date revealed that “on average, only 29.5% of the patients treated with cognitive therapy relapsed versus 60% of those treated with antidepressants” (Gloaguen, Cottraux, Cucherat, & Blackburn, 1998, p. 68). The prophylactic benefits of cognitive therapy are all the more significant because  there is no evidence that pharmacotherapy confers any protection against the return of symptoms after treatment has been terminated.2 Since the majority of depressed individuals will experience multiple episodes, the capacity of an intervention to prevent the return of symptoms after treatment may be at least as important as its ability to treat the current episode. (Evans et al., 1992, p. 802)  A related concern—and one of the most salient (but not exclusively associated) with psychotropic agents— is the presence of residual symptoms after treatment: “Treatment of depression by pharmacological means is likely to leave a substantial amount of residual symptoms in most patients” (Fava, Rafanelli, Grandi, Conti, & Belluardo, 1998, p. 820). Inevitably, patients who improve on antidepressants continue to manifest some of the symptoms of depression and, as numerous investigators have concluded, unless patients achieve full recovery, residual symptoms increase the risk of relapse (Evans et al., 1992; Fava, Rafanelli, Grandi, Conti, et al., 1998; Hardeveld, Spijker, de Graaf, Nolen, & Beekman, 2010; Keller & Boland, 1998; Rush et al., 2006).   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  A group of investigators who were concerned about the risk of relapse associated with residual symptoms looked at the lingering symptoms after treatment with fluoxetine (Prozac). They found that  even among subjects who are considered full responders to fluoxetine 20 mg for 5 weeks, more than 80% had 1 or more residual DSM-III-R symptoms of major depressive disorder, more than 30% had 3 or more symptoms, and 10.2% met formal criteria for either minor or subsyndromal depression. . . . These findings imply that minimal depressive symptoms are prodromal and increase the risk of developing an initial full-blown episode of major depression. (Nierenberg et al., 1999, pp. 224–225)  Cognitive therapy has been found to be effective in reducing both residual symptoms and relapse after the termination of medication: “Short-term CBT after successful antidepressant drug therapy had a substantial effect on relapse rate after discontinuation of antidepressant drugs. Patients who received CBT reported a substantially lower relapse rate (25%) during the 2-year follow-up than those assigned to [clinical management] (80%)” (Fava, Rafanelli, Grandi, Conti, et al., 1998,  p. 818). The protective benefits of cognitive therapy were still noticeable in a 4-year follow-up study, although the benefits faded after a 6-year period (Fava, Rafanelli, Grandi, Canestrari, & Morphy, 1998). Another study found that only 5% of the “CBT treated and recovered” group sought additional treatment compared with 39% of the antidepressant group (see Williams, 1997). Paykel and colleagues (1999) found significantly lower cumulative relapse rates at 68 weeks in patients who received 16 sessions of CBT following a partial response to pharmacotherapy. Bockting and colleagues (2005) compared treatment as usual (TAU, which included continuation of medication) with TAU augmented with brief cognitive therapy and found relapse significantly reduced in patients with five or more previous episodes of depression. The relapse rates were 72% for TAU versus 46% for TAU augmented with brief cognitive therapy. A preventive strategy used by psychiatrists to deal with high relapse rates associated with antidepressant medication is “continuation medication,” which is longterm (and in many cases lifelong) maintenance treatment (Evans et al., 1992; Fava, Rafanelli, Grandi, Conti, et al., 1998; Thase, 1999)—usually at the same dosage provided during the acute phase of treatment. The research comparing relapse rates in patients continuing  medication over the long term versus those treated and then withdrawn from cognitive therapy does not suggest a significant advantage to this practice. For example, DeRubeis and colleagues (2005) found that both groups had equivalent relapse rates (40%); Hollon and colleagues (2005) found that 31% relapsed when treated and then withdrawn from cognitive therapy compared to 47% that relapsed when treated with continuation medication. Fournier and colleagues (2008) found that patients with both major depression and a personality disorder who responded positively to 16 weeks of CBT, with three optional booster sessions over a 12-month period, showed superior sustained improvement with CBT compared to pharmacotherapy withdrawal, and equivalent improvement to pharmacotherapy with continuation over those 12 months. Dobson and colleagues (2008) followed patients who responded to a treatment of CBT, behavioral activation, or pharmacotherapy for acute depression. During a 2-year follow-up, psychotherapy patients received no further treatment and pharmacotherapy patients received either continuation pharmacotherapy or continuation pill-placebo. They found that CBT provided the strongest protection; both psychotherapies were equivalent to pharmacotherapy with continuation; both psychotherapies were superior to continuation pill-placebo.  Some researchers have pointed out the tautological nature of this solution: “Drug treatment results in a higher relapse rate than cognitive-behavioral therapy; therefore patients should be maintained on drugs to prevent relapse” (Antonuccio, Danton, & DeNelsky, 1995, p. 578). Although drugs are still the initial and most frequently prescribed form of treatment for major depression in the United States (Antonuccio et al., 1995; Cipriani et al., 2009), and the most commonly used method to maintain treatment gains (Geddes et al., 2003), three important points need to be considered: premature termination, iatrogenic effects of pharmacotherapy, and cost-effectiveness.  Research has shown that “a sizeable group of patients either chooses not to continue long-term pharmacotherapy in the absence of any depressive symptoms, cannot take medication due to a medical condition that precludes the use of antidepressants, or suffer from side effects that are intolerable to them” (Spanier, Frank, McEachran, Grochocinski, & Kupfer, 1999, p. 250). Although the newer “first-line” medications are more tolerable than older medications, 70% of patients continue to experience significant depressive symptoms with one of these medications, and up to 50% discon    Cognitive Therapy for Depression  tinue trials due to unwanted side effects (Connolly & Thase, 2012). Thase (2011) has noted that various combinations of antidepressants are widely prescribed as the result of problems with insufficient or nonresponse, even though properly controlled and adequately powered clinical trials have not yet been conducted on such combinations.  Regarding iatrogenic effects, one group of researchers concluded that “there is much evidence that antidepressant medications are not benign treatments. . . . Many antidepressants are cardiotoxic, have dangerous side effects, and are often used in suicide attempts. . . . [They also] result in relatively poorer compliance than psychotherapy, have a higher dropout rate, and result in as much as a 60% non-response rate with some patient populations” (Antonuccio et al., 1995, p. 581). We should note that psychotherapy also may have unintended and undesirable side effects (Mohr, 1995), but very little is known about negative effects associated with cognitive therapy.  The third consideration is the cost-effectiveness of treatment. The research on this topic is surprisingly limited. Antonuccio, Thomas, and Danton (1997) conducted a cost-effectiveness analysis on several outcome studies on depression and found that over a 2-year period the cost of fluoxetine alone was 33% higher than individual CBT, and that the cost of the combined treatment of fluoxetine with CBT was 23% higher than CBT alone. An Australian study (Vos, Corry, Haby, Carter, & Andrews, 2005) examined the costs and benefits of CBT and drugs in the episodic and maintenance treatment of depression. They found maintenance treatment with SSRIs to be the most expensive option, nearly double that of bibliotherapy, group CBT, individual CBT, and TCAs. Scott, Palmer, Paykel, Teasdale, and Hayhurst (2003) compared the cost-effectiveness of relapse prevention in depression by comparing CBT as an adjunctive treatment to antidepressants and clinical management, and with antidepressants and clinical management alone, over a 17-month period. They found the addition of CBT was more expensive but also more effective in reducing cumulative relapse rates (relapse rates were 29% with adjunctive CBT vs. 47% without adjunctive CBT). Importantly, they noted that the costs associated with adjunctive CBT in their study were a “worst-case” scenario because the follow-up extended only 17 months; other research (as noted in the previous section) has demonstrated maintenance of gains and lowered relapse rates up to 6 years with CBT. Sava, Yates, Lupu, Szentogatai, and David (2009)  conducted a cost comparison of CBT, rational–emotive therapy, and pharmacotherapy (fluoxetine), and found all three treatments equally effective with symptom reduction, but both psychotherapies were more costeffective than pharmacotherapy for the number of depression-free days/month over a 40-week period. Although Dobson and colleagues (2008) did not conduct a formal statistical comparisons of costs among treatment conditions, they noted that the “cumulative cost of continued medications proved to be more expensive by the end of the first year of follow-up in this study” (p. 471). Scott and colleagues (2003) argued that the incrementally adjusted costs over time to relapse should be considered in decision making on the value of various treatments. These findings suggest that CBT, either alone or in combination with drugs, can enhance cost-effectiveness, particularly when higher short-term costs of combined treatments are balanced against better outcomes and lower marginal costs in the long term.  What is the optimum frequency and duration of sessions for cognitive therapy to be effective, both at termination and at long-term follow-up? According to Sacco and Beck (1995, p. 332):  General guidelines suggest 15 to 25 (50-minute) sessions at weekly intervals, with more seriously depressed clients usually requiring twice-weekly meetings for the initial 4–5 weeks. To avoid an abrupt termination, a “tapering off” process is recommended, with the last few sessions occurring once every 2 weeks. After termination, some clients may also need a few booster sessions (four or five are common).  Some writers have noted that longer courses of treatment may be necessary for full and more lasting recovery (Elkin et al., 1996; Thase, 1992). Research by Jarrett and colleagues (2001) suggests that relapse rates in high-risk patients with an early age of onset or unstable remission might possibly be reduced further with “continuation-phase cognitive therapy” (C- CT), which consists of 10 sessions (biweekly during the first 2 months and once a month for the following 6 months) following the acute phase of treatment. The focus in the continuation phase is on relapse prevention and the generalization of skills (across responses, settings, stimuli, and times). This strategy is supported by studies (Jarrett et al., 2001; Vittengl, Clark, Dunn, & Jarrett, 2007; Vittengl, Clark, & Jarrett, 2009) aimed at preventing relapse in responders to a variety treatment modalities (pharmacotherapy, interpersonal psy    CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  chotherapy, and/or CBT) for the acute phase of depression. While more research is being conducted on this strategy (Jarrett & Thase, 2010; Jarrett, Vittengl, and Clark (2008) have suggested using scores on a variety of measures (Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression, Beck Depression Inventory [BDI], Inventory for Depressive Symptomatology, and the Longitudinal Interval Follow-Up Evaluation) to help cognitive therapists decide how many more sessions may be needed to help avoid relapse or recurrence.  Another alternative for relapse prevention is mindfulness- based cognitive therapy (MBCT), developed by Teasdale, Segal, and Williams (1995). MBCT draws from acceptance and meditation strategies that are also central to dialectical behavior therapy for borderline personality (Linehan, 1993a, 1993b). “MBCT aims at developing participants’ awareness of, and changing their relationship to, unwanted thoughts, feelings, and body sensations, so that participants no longer avoid them or react to them in an automatic way but rather respond to them in an intentional and skillful manner” (Ma & Teasdale, 2004, p. 32). Teasdale and colleagues (Ma & Teasdale, 2004; Teasdale, 1997a, 1997b; Teasdale et al., 1995, 2002) have argued that the primary mechanism of therapeutic change in cognitive therapy is in distancing or decentering from cognition rather than changing the content of thought. Two studies conducted on MBCT found that TAU followed by MBCT, in comparison with TAU alone, significantly reduced relapse in patients with three or more episodes of depression. In the first study, 66% relapsed with TAU alone versus 37% with TAU followed by MBCT (Teasdale et al., 2000); in the second study, 78% relapsed with TAU alone versus 36% with TAU followed by MBCT (Ma & Teasdale, 2004). Extending the followup period to 2 years, Matthew, Whitford, Kenny, and Denson (2010) found TAU followed by MBCT more effective than TAU alone in the “decrease of depressive symptoms, worry and rumination, and improvement in mindfulness skills” (p. 998) but noted a weakening of effects over time that appeared to be related to the amount of formal MBCT practice.  Although prior researchers (Segal, Williams, & Teasdale, 2002) presumed that the difficulty concentrating and negative thinking during a depressive episode would preclude training in attentional control skills with MBCT, van Aalderen and colleagues (2012) recently found that MBCT plus TAU, compared to TAU alone, showed equivalent gains in effectiveness for patients in remission as for those currently depressed.  Manicavasagar, Perich, and Parker (2012) also examined the effectiveness of MBCT in reducing current depression. They compared CBGT and MBCT, and found equivalent improvements in depression. Interestingly, they found no significant differences between the two conditions in mindfulness or rumination scores. The potential for lower costs associated with treatments that can be implemented in a group format suggest that they may be attractive for not only relapse prevention but also recurrent depression.  Research on Chronic Depression  As the previous data demonstrate, CBT has been shown to be an effective treatment across a wide range of depressed populations. Nevertheless, many depressed patients still do not respond to treatment. Depression that is resistant to current treatments remains a major public health problem. Of patients, 40–50% of patients may not complete or respond to CBT treatment for acute depression (DeRubeis et al., 2005; Jarret & Thase, 2010). Fifty percent of patients do not achieve full remission in depressive symptoms after two trials of medication (Mathys & Mitchell, 2011; Rush et al., 2006; Trivedi et al., 2006). Wiersma and colleagues (2008) note from current research that 20% of depressions persist after 2 years and that 25–35% of outpatient mental health patients suffer from chronic depression.  McCullough (2003) has proposed, on the basis of existing research, that there are qualitative differences between chronic and nonchronic forms of depression, and that they require different treatment strategies. According to McCullough, research “shows that the chronic disorders, when compared with acute/episodic major depression (both single and recurrent episodes with interepisode full recovery), differ significantly in terms of age of onset, clinical course patterns, developmental history, modal Axis II comorbidity profiles, characteristic response-to-treatment rates, predictable relapse percentages, and need for long-term treatment”  (p. 243). He notes that these differences largely have not been addressed in the treatment literature; consequently, therapeutic work by psychologists, psychiatrists, and social workers has been conducted as if patients with depression are an undifferentiated population. Young, Klosko, and Weishaar (2003) noted that although traditional CBT is highly effective for many patients, there remain a significant number who either are not helped or continue to experience emotional distress and impaired functioning, particularly those with significant  Cognitive Therapy for Depression  character pathology. For those with chronic problems, a more extensive treatment approach may be required.  Before discussing specific treatments for chronic depression, we describe the general characteristics of this population. An early age of onset (usually in midadolescence, before age 20) in the form of dysthymia tends to differentiate between the chronic and nonchronic forms of depression in 70–75% of clinical populations (Keller & Boland, 1998; Keller & Hanks, 1995; Mc- Cullough, 2000). Early life trauma or adverse family relations (loss of a parent in childhood; sexual, physical, and/or verbal abuse; neglect; and overprotection) are more evident in those with chronic depression (Chapman et al., 2004; Cong et al., 2012; Dube et al., 2001; Heim & Nemeroff, 2001; Kendler et al., 1995; Lizardi et al., 1995; Randolph & Dykman, 1998; Sachs- Ericsson, Verona, Joiner, & Preacher, 2006). In patients with early-onset dysthymia who experience chronic stress, those with the addition of an adverse family history evidence an increase in depression severity over time, compared to those without such adverse family histories but with familial loadings for dysthymic disorder (Dougherty, Klein, & Davila, 2004). There is a higher prevalence of comorbid disorders, particularly personality disorders (Garyfallos et al., 1999; Pepper et al., 1995). Cluster C personality disorders are associated with chronic depression (Hayden & Klein, 2001).  Five potentially promising treatments that expand on CBT have been developed that can address chronic depression. These treatments are Harley, Sprich, Safren, Jacob, and Fava’s (2008) application of Linehan’s (1993b) dialectical behavior therapy (DBT) skills training; applications (Barnhofer et al., 2009; Eisendrath et al., 2011) of Segal and colleagues’ (2002) MBCT; Wells and colleagues’ (2012) metacognitive therapy (MCT); McCullough’s (2000) cognitive-behavioral analysis system of psychotherapy (CBASP); and Young and colleagues’ (2003) schema therapy (ST).  Harley and colleagues (2008) have provided preliminary evidence that DBT skills training conducted in groups may be an effective alternative for treatmentresistant depression. Patients who had not achieved remission with antidepressant medication were assigned to either a 16-session, once-weekly DBT skills training condition (mindfulness, interpersonal effectiveness, emotion regulation, and distress tolerance) or a wait-list condition. They found significantly greater improvement (with large effect sizes on the Hamilton Rating Scale and BDI) in depressive symptoms in the DBT skills training group. Feldman, Harley, Kerrigan,  Jacobo, and Fava (2009) hypothesized that DBT skills training helps patients process their emotional experience in a way that reduces rather than exacerbates their depressive symptoms.  Another preliminary study (Barnhofer et al., 2009) and one case study (Eisendrath, Chartier, & McLane, 2011) successfully used MBCT to treat chronic depression. Barnhofer and colleagues (2009) compared MBCT plus TAU and TAU alone, and found significantly greater improvement in the MBCT plus TAU group. Eisendrath and colleagues (2011) successfully treated a patient with a modified version of MCBT. They added exercises and metaphors from acceptance and commitment therapy (ACT; Luoma, Hayes, & Walser, 2007; Zettle, 2007) and focused on current depression in their MCBT treatment. These are intriguing initial results, especially since these treatments are of relatively short duration and conducive to a group format.  Wells and colleagues (2012) also conducted a preliminary study in which they used MCT to treat patients with treatment-resistant depression. Attentional control, rumination, worry, and metacognitive beliefs were targeted in eight treatment sessions. They found significant improvements both posttreatment and at 12-month follow-up. This treatment will be of further interest if the positive results can be replicated in a randomized controlled trial.  McCullough’s (2000) CBASP is an integrative, time-limited treatment that contains elements of cognitive, behavioral, interpersonal, and psychodynamic psychotherapies. McCullough (2003) states:  Treatment begins with a cognitive-emotionally retarded adult child who brings a negative “snapshot” view of the world to the session. The chronic patient functions, at least in the social–interpersonal arena, with the structural mindset of a 4–6 year old preoperational (Piaget) child. . . . The patient must be taught to function formally, to perceive that his or her behavior has consequences, be taught to generate authentic empathy, and to learn to assert himself or herself effectively. Psychotherapy begins with an “adult child” who must be assisted to mature developmentally in the cognitive– emotive sphere. (pp. 247, 248)  Change is brought about through a contingency program that relies on negative reinforcement. First, contingencies between behaviors and consequences are exposed. Then, as the result of positive changes in behavior, discomfort and distress are reduced or eliminated. Three techniques are used to bring about change:   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  situational analysis, interpersonal discrimination exercise, and behavioral skill training/rehearsal. Two studies have used CBASP with chronically depressed outpatients. The first (Keller et al., 2000) compared the effects of CBASP alone, Serzone (nefazodone) alone, and combined treatment after a 12-week acute phase of treatment. The overall response rate was 48% for both monotherapies, compared with 73% for the combined treatment. Among the 76% (519 out of 681) completers of the study, 52% responded to CBASP, 55% responded to Serzone, and 85% responded to combined treatments. The second (Klein et al., 2004), a 1-year follow-up to this initial study, examined relapse and depressive symptoms over time in the CBASP responders by comparing the effects of continuation CBASP therapy (16 sessions over 52 weeks) with assessment only. There were significantly fewer relapses and depressive symptoms for those in the continuation CBASP therapy. A more recent study, however, has provided mixed results. Kocsis and colleagues (2009) compared pharmacotherapy augmented with CBASP, pharmacotherapy augmented with brief supportive therapy, and continued pharmacotherapy alone with nonresponders and partial responders to an initial medication trial. Although 37.5% experienced a partial response or remitted with these three treatments, the researchers did not find significant differences among the three groups. Two more studies currently are in progress (Schramm et al., 2011; Wiersma et al., 2008) to help clarify the specific utility of CBASP for chronic depression.  ST (or schema-focused therapy) also is an integrative therapy (Young et al., 2003), with elements of cognitive, behavioral, interpersonal, and emotion-focused therapies. Hawke and Povencher (2011) note that “Young’s schema theory does not attempt to compete with traditional Beckian theory, but rather expands on it for treatment-resistant clientele whose psychological problems are thought to be maintained by complex characterological underpinnings. It does so by placing greater emphasis on the developmental origins of severe psychopathology” (p. 258).  A study by Giesen-Bloo and colleagues (2006) found surprisingly strong and significant results in favor of ST over transference-focused therapy with the chronic disorder of borderline personality. After 3 years of treatment (sessions twice per week), 45% of the patients in schema-focused therapy (vs. 24% in transference-focused therapy) completely recovered. One year later, over half (52%) in ST fully recovered (vs. 29% in transference-focused therapy) and two   thirds (70%) in ST showed significant improvement. In addition, patients in ST were significantly less likely to drop out of therapy (27% dropped out of ST vs. 50% out of transference-focused therapy). Even stronger results were reported (Farrell, Shaw, & Webber, 2009) for group schema-focused therapy (GST; see Farrell & Shaw, 2012) for people with borderline personality disorder. This study compared individual TAU (CBT or psychodynamic) plus adjunct GST with TAU alone. Ninety-four percent receiving TAU plus GST, compared to 16% receiving TAU alone, no longer met criteria for borderline personality disorder at the end of 20 months of treatment. In addition, there was a 0% dropout rate in the TAU plus GST condition compared to 25% in the TAU condition. Given the high degree of similarities between patients with chronic disorders (adverse childhood histories, early-onset depression, and a multitude of schemas), we believe that ST is very likely to be an effective treatment for the chronically depressed population as well. Fritz Renner, at Maastricht University in the Netherlands, is currently conducting a study on the effectiveness of ST with chronic depression (Web link: clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/nct01153867).  Current Status and Future Research on Treating Depression  There is now a considerable body of research on treatments for depression. Certainly there are enough inconsistencies in the literature to warrant continued debate and research regarding the relative merits of different treatments for depression. Nevertheless, the overall efficacy of cognitive therapy for depression is clearly a replicable and robust finding.  Many important, unanswered questions—along with inconsistent research findings—will probably make it impossible for proponents of any single treatment to make firm recommendations favoring one treatment for depression over another across disorders and populations. In the spirit of Beck’s emphasis on testable hypotheses and clinical protocols, we hope that, through more sophisticated research studies, it will eventually be possible to better understand which types of depressed patients benefit most from which type of treatment, or combination of treatments, and in what sequence.  The remainder of this chapter is devoted to describing the cognitive model of depression and schema theory; detailing the basic characteristics of cognitive and   Cognitive Therapy for Depression  schema therapies; and demonstrating applications of cognitive and schema therapies to depression in clinical practice.  coGNitive MoDel of DePressioN  The cognitive model assumes that cognition, behavior, and biochemistry are all important components of depressive disorders. We do not view them as competing theories of depression but as different levels of analysis. Each treatment approach has its own “focus of convenience.” The pharmacotherapist intervenes at the biochemical level; the cognitive therapist intervenes at the cognitive, affective, and behavioral levels. Our experience suggests that when we change depressive cognitions, we simultaneously change the characteristic mood, behavior, and, as some evidence suggests (Free, Oei, & Appleton, 1998; Joffe, Segal, & Singer, 1996), the biochemistry of depression. Although the exact mechanism of change remains a target of considerable investigation, speculation, and debate (Barber & DeRubeis, 1989; Castonguay, Goldfried, Wiser, Raue, & Hayes, 1996; Crews & Harrison, 1995; DeRubeis et al., 1990; DeRubeis & Feeley, 1990; Hayes & Strauss, 1998; Oei & Free, 1995; Oei & Shuttlewood, 1996; Shea & Elkin, 1996; Sullivan & Conway, 1991; Whisman, 1993), “there are indications that cognitive therapy works by virtue of changing beliefs and information-processing proclivities and that different aspects of cognition play different roles in the process of change” (Hollon et al., 1996, p. 314).  Our focus in this chapter is on the cognitive disturbances in depression. Cognitive science research emphasizes the importance of information processing in depressive symptomatology (Ingram & Holle, 1992). According to these theories, negatively biased cognition is a core process in depression. This process is reflected in the “cognitive triad of depression”: Depressed patients typically have a negative view of themselves, of their environment, and of the future. They view themselves as worthless, inadequate, unlovable, and deficient. Depressed patients view the environment as overwhelming, as presenting insuperable obstacles that cannot be overcome, and that continually result in failure or loss. Moreover, they view the future as hopeless: Their own efforts will be insufficient to change the unsatisfying course of their lives. This negative view of the future often leads to suicidal ideation and actual suicide attempts.  Depressed patients consistently distort their interpretations of events, so that they maintain negative views of themselves, their environment, and the future. Beck suggests that much of this distorted cognitive processing takes place outside of conscious awareness, in the form of “automatic thoughts,” those thoughts that intervene between life events and the patient’s emotional reactions to those events. Automatic thoughts often go unnoticed by the patient because they are out of awareness, they are part of a repetitive or habitual way of thinking, and because they occur so often. Automatic thoughts are often contrary to what a patient logically and consciously knows to be true, and most patients, prior to therapy, cannot stop them through rational thought processes.  This process of cognitive distortion is far more common in depressed patients than in nondepressed individuals. For example, a depressed woman whose husband comes home late one night may conclude that he is having an affair with another woman, even though there is no other evidence supporting this conclusion. This example illustrates an “arbitrary inference,” reaching a conclusion that is not justified by the available evidence. Other distortions include all-or-nothing thinking, overgeneralization, selective abstraction, and magnification (Beck et al., 1979).  scheMa theory  According to subsequent developments within the cognitive model, an important predisposing factor for many patients with depression is the presence of schemas (Stein & Young, 1992; Young, 1990/1999).3 Beck (1976) emphasized the importance of schemas in depression and provided the following definition:  A schema is a cognitive structure for screening, coding, and evaluating the stimuli that impinge on the organism. . . . On the basis of this matrix of schemas, the individual is able to orient himself in relation to time and space and to categorize and interpret experiences in a meaningful way. (p. 233)  Furthermore, Beck, Freeman, and Associates (1990) noted:  In the field of psychopathology, the term “schema” has been applied to structures with a highly personalized idiosyncratic content that are activated during disorders such as depression, anxiety, panic attacks, and   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  obsessions, and become prepotent. . . . Thus, in clinical depression, for example, the negative schemas are in ascendancy, resulting in a systematic negative bias in the interpretation and recall of experiences as well as in short-term and long-term predictions, whereas the positive schemas become less accessible. It is easy for depressed patients to see the negative aspects of an event, but difficult to see the positive. They can recall negative events much more readily than positive ones. They weigh the probabilities of undesirable outcomes more heavily than positive outcomes. (p. 32)  There has also been increasing recognition that “focusing on core schemas is a key to effective short-term therapy” (Freeman & Davison, 1997, p. 8).  Through clinical observation, Young has identified a subset of schemas that he terms early maladaptive schemas (EMSs): “Early Maladaptive Schemas refer to extremely stable and enduring themes that develop during childhood and are elaborated upon throughout the individual’s lifetime and that are dysfunctional to a significant degree” (Young, 1990/1999, p. 9). The 18 EMSs identified by Young are listed in Figure 7.1.4  According to Young’s (see Young et al., 2003) theory, early schemas5 result from an interaction between the child’s innate temperament and early negative life experiences, especially with significant others. Children gradually construct pervasive, maladaptive views of themselves and others that are filtered through, and consistent with, their schemas.  According to Young, EMSs are (1) a priori truths about oneself and/or the environment; (2) selfperpetuating and resistant to change; (3) dysfunctional;  (4) often triggered by some environmental change (e.g., loss of a job or mate); (5) tied to high levels of affect when activated; and (6) as noted earlier, usually result from an interaction of the child’s temperament with dysfunctional developmental experiences with family members, caretakers, and peers (Young, 1990/1999). Young goes on to elaborate that when an EMS is triggered, specific early memories, core beliefs, strong emotions, and physiological reactions are also activated. (In Young’s model, core beliefs represent the cognitive component of schemas.6) EMSs are likely to develop when the environment does not meet the child’s core needs for safety, stability or predictability, love, nurturance and attention, acceptance and praise, empathy, realistic limits, and validation of feelings and needs. When their core needs are not met, children often internalize attitudes and beliefs  that later prove maladaptive. For example, a child who is criticized repeatedly may develop a Failure schema: a sense that no matter what he/she does, his/her performance will never be good enough.  A schema usually occurs outside of awareness and may remain dormant until a life event (e.g., being fired from a job) activates it. In this example, once the Failure schema has been activated, the patient categorizes, selects, and encodes information in such a way that the schema is maintained. EMSs therefore predispose many depressed patients to distort events in a characteristic fashion, leading to a negative view of themselves, the environment, and the future.  For patients who have a large number of strong and deeply entrenched EMSs, and for patients who cope with their schemas by rigidly avoiding life situations or by overcompensating for them, we have found that the concept of “schema modes” (Young et al., 2003) is very often invaluable in understanding and changing patients’ thoughts, feelings, and behaviors. Mode work strengthens and develops healthy modes and weakens dysfunctional modes, thereby increasing control over one’s responding.  Young’s concept of a mode is similar to that of an ego state. A “mode” is defined as “those schemas or schema operations—adaptive or maladaptive—that are currently active for an individual” (Young et al., 2003,  p. 271). Modes include whatever an individual is thinking, feeling, and doing at a given point in time, and may therefore be thought of as states rather than traits. A dysfunctional mode is activated when specific maladaptive schemas have erupted into distressing emotions, avoidance responses, or self-defeating behaviors that take over and control an individual’s functioning at a given point in time. An individual may “flip” from one mode to another; as that shift occurs, an individual’s cognitions, emotions, and coping responses change as well. Young and colleagues have identified four main types of modes: Child modes (Figure 7.2a), Maladaptive Coping modes (Figure 7.2b), Dysfunctional Parent modes (Figure 7.2c), and the Healthy Adult mode. The Healthy Adult mode is the healthy, adult part of the self that serves an “executive” function relative to the other modes. The Healthy Adult helps meet the child’s basic emotional needs. Building and strengthening the patient’s Healthy Adult to work with the other modes more effectively is the overarching goal of mode work in ST (Young et al., 2003, p. 277).   Cognitive Therapy for Depression  1. ABANDONMENT/INSTABILITY The perceived instability or unreliability of those available for support and connection. Involves the sense that significant others will not be able to continue providing emotional support, connection, strength, or practical protection because they are emotionally unstable and unpredictable (e.g., angry outbursts), or unreliable or erratically present; because they will die imminently; or because they will abandon the patient in favor of someone better. 2. MISTRUST/ABUSE The expectation that others will hurt, abuse, humiliate, cheat, lie, manipulate, or take advantage. Usually involves the perception that the harm is intentional or the result of unjustified and extreme negligence. May include the sense that one always ends up being cheated relative to others or “getting the short end of the stick.” 3. EMOTIONAL DEPRIVATION Expectation that one’s desire for a normal degree of emotional support will not be adequately met by others. The three major forms of deprivation are as follows: A. Deprivation of nurturance: Absence of attention, affection, warmth, or companionship. B. Deprivation of empathy: Absence of understanding, listening, self-disclosure, or mutual sharing of feelings from others. C. Deprivation of protection: Absence of strength, direction, or guidance from others. 4. DEFECTIVENESS/SHAME The feeling that one is defective, bad, unwanted, inferior, or invalid in important respects; or that one would be unlovable to significant others it exposed. May involve hypersensitivity to criticism, rejection, and blame; self-consciousness, comparisons, and insecurity around others; or a sense of shame regarding one’s perceived flaws. These flaws may be private (e.g., selfishness, angry impulses, unacceptable sexual desires) or public (e.g., undesirable physical appearance, social awkwardness). 5. SOCIAL ISOLATION/ALIENATION The feeling that one is isolated from the rest of the world, different from other people, and/or not part of any group or community. 6. DEPENDENCE/INCOMPETENCE Belief that one is unable to handle one’s everyday responsibilities in a competent manner, without considerable help from others (e.g., take care of oneself, solve daily problems, exercise good judgment, tackle new tasks, make good decisions). Often presents as helplessness. 7. VULNERABILITY TO HARM OR ILLNESS Exaggerated fear that imminent catastrophe will strike at any time and that one will be unable to prevent it. Fears focus on one or more of the following: (A) medical catastrophes (e.g., heart attacks, AIDS); (B) emotional catastrophes (e.g., going crazy); (C) external catastrophes (e.g., elevators collapsing, victimized by criminals, airplane crashes, earthquakes). 8. ENMESHMENT/UNDEVOLOPED SELF Excessive emotional involvement and closeness with one or more significant others (often parents), at the expense of full individuation or normal social development. Often involves the belief that at least one of the enmeshed individuals cannot survive or be happy without the constant support of the other. May also include feelings of being smothered by, or fused with, others OR insufficient individual identity. Often experienced as a feeling of emptiness and floundering, having no direction, or in extreme cases questioning one’s existence. (continued)  figUre 7.1. Early maladaptive schemas. Copyright 1999 by Jeffrey E. Young. Reprinted by permission.   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  9. FAILURE The belief that one has failed, will inevitably fail, or is fundamentally inadequate relative to one’s peers, in areas of achievement (school, career, sports, etc.) Often involves beliefs that one is stupid, inept, untalented. ignorant, lower in status, less successful than others, and so forth. 10. ENTITLEMENT/GRANDIOSITY The belief that one is superior to other people; entitled to special rights and privileges; or not bound by the rules of reciprocity that guide normal social interaction. Often involves insistence that one should be able to do or have whatever one wants regardless of what is realistic, what others consider reasonable, or the cost to others; OR an exaggerated focus on superiority (e.g., being among the most successful, famous, and wealthy) in order to achieve power or control (not primarily for attention or approval). Sometimes includes excessive competitiveness toward, or domination of others: asserting ones power, forcing one’s point of view, or controlling the behavior of others in line with one’s own desires—without empathy or concern for others’ needs or feelings. 11. INSUFFICIENT SELF-CONTROL/SELF-DISCIPLINE Pervasive difficulty or refusal to exercise sufficient self-control and frustration tolerance to achieve one’s personal goals, or to restrain the excessive expression of one’s emotions and impulses. In its milder form, patient presents with an exaggerated emphasis on discomfort avoidance: avoiding pain, conflict, confrontation, responsibility, or overexertion—at the expense of personal fulfillment, commitment, or integrity. 12. SUBJUGATION Excessive surrendering of control to others because one feels coerced—usually to avoid anger, retaliation, or abandonment. There are two major forms of subjugation: A. Subjugation of needs: Suppression of one’s preferences, decisions, and desires. B. Subjugation of emotion: Suppression of emotional expression, especially anger. Usually involves the perception that one’s own desires, opinions, and feelings are not valid or important to others. Frequently presents as excessive compliance, combined with hypersensitivity to feeling trapped. Generally leads to a buildup of anger, manifested in maladaptive symptoms (e.g., passive–aggressive behavior, uncontrolled outbursts of temper, psychosomatic symptoms, withdrawal of affection, “acting out,” substance abuse).  13. SELF-SACRIFICE Excessive focus on voluntarily meeting the needs of others in daily situations at the expense of one’s own gratification. The most common reasons are to prevent causing pain to others, to avoid guilt from feeling selfish, or to maintain the connection with others perceived as needy. Often results from an acute sensitivity to the pain of others. Sometimes leads to a sense that one’s own needs are not being adequately met and to resentment of those who are taken care of. (Overlaps with concept of codependency.) 14. APPROVAL SEEKING/RECOGNITION SEEKING Excessive emphasis on gaining approval, recognition or attention from other people or fitting in, at the expense of developing a secure and true sense of self. One’s sense of esteem is dependent primarily on the reactions of others rather than on one’s own natural inclinations. Sometimes includes an overemphasis on status, appearance, social acceptance, money, or achievements—as a means of gaining approval, admiration, or attention (not primarily for power or control). Frequently results in major life decisions that are inauthentic or unsatisfying, or in hypersensitivity to rejection. (continued)  figUre 7.1. (continued)   Cognitive Therapy for Depression  15. NEGATIVITY/PESSIMISM A pervasive, lifelong focus on the negative aspects of life (pain, death, loss, disappointment, conflict, guilt, resentment, unsolved problems, potential mistakes, betrayal, things that could go wrong, etc.), while minimizing or neglecting the positive or optimistic aspects. Usually includes an exaggerated expectation—in a wide range of work, financial, or interpersonal situations—that things will eventually go seriously wrong, or that aspects of one’s life that seem to be going well will ultimately fall apart. Usually involves an inordinate fear of making mistakes that might lead to financial collapse, loss, humiliation or being trapped in a bad situation. Because potential negative outcomes are exaggerated, these patients are frequently characterized by chronic worry, vigilance, complaining, or indecision. 16. EMOTIONAL INHIBITION The excessive inhibition of spontaneous action, feeling, or communication—usually to avoid disapproval by others, feelings of shame, or losing control of one’s impulses The most common areas of inhibition involve (A) inhibition of anger and aggression; (B) inhibition of positive impulses (e.g., joy, affection, sexual excitement, play); (C) difficulty expressing vulnerability or communicating freely about one’s feelings, needs, etc.; or (D) excessive emphasis on rationality while disregarding emotions. 17. UNRELENTING STANDARDS/HYPERCRITICALNESS The underlying belief that one must strive to meet very high internalized standards of behavior and performance usually to avoid criticism. Typically results in feelings of pressure or difficulty slowing down and in hypercriticalness toward oneself and others. Must involve significant impairment in pleasure, relaxation, health, self-esteem sense of accomplishment, or satisfying relationships. Unrelenting standards typically present as (A) perfectionism, inordinate attention to detail, or an underestimate of how good one’s own performance is relative to the norm; (B) rigid rules and “shoulds” in many areas of life, including unrealistically high moral, ethical, cultural or religious precepts; or (C) preoccupation with time and efficiency so that more can be accomplished. 18. PUNITIVENESS The belief that people should be harshly punished for making mistakes. Involves the tendency to be angry, intolerant, punitive, and impatient with those people (including oneself) who do not meet one’s expectations or standards. Usually includes difficulty forgiving mistakes in oneself or others because of a reluctance to consider extenuating circumstances, allow for human imperfection, or empathize with feelings. figUre 7.1. (continued)  Research Related to Schema Theory  A large number of research studies have examined the 18 EMSs, as measured by the Young Schema Questionnaire (YSQ; Young, 2005). While the results have varied somewhat across different populations, all 18 EMSs have generally been supported (Lee, Taylor, & Dunn, 1999; Schmidt, 1994; Schmidt, Joiner, Young, & Telch, 1995).  Numerous studies have looked at EMSs in depressed patients. Hawke and Provencher (2011) provide an excellent review of research on EMSs in both mood (Bailleux, Romo, Kindynis, Radtchenko, & Debray, 2008; Halvorsen et al., 2009; Halvorsen, Wang, Eisemann, & Waterloo, 2010; Riso et al., 2003, 2006; Wang, Halvorsen, Eisemann, & Waterloo, 2010) and anxiety disorders. Elevations across most, if not all,  schema domains have been evident when comparing depressed patients with never-ill controls. In a study specifically comparing EMSs in patients with chronic depression, nonchronic depression, and healthy controls, Riso and colleagues (2003) found that both depressed groups scored higher on all schema domains compared to healthy controls. However, the scores in the chronic depression group were highest on schemas in the disconnection and rejection, impaired autonomy and performance, and overvigilance domains, even when researchers controlled for depressive and personality disorder symptoms. Hawke and Provencher (2011,  p. 261) note: “This suggests that chronic depression is associated more strongly with EMSs than the nonchronic form, and that this association is not simply a function of current depressive or Axis II symptoms.”  CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  Child Mode Description Common associated schemas  Vulnerable Child Experiences dysphoric or anxious affect, especially fear, sadness, and helplessness, when “in touch” with associated schemas. Abandonment, Mistrust/Abuse, Emotional Deprivation, Defectiveness, Social Isolation, Dependence/Incompetence, Vulnerability to Harm or Illness, Enmeshment/Undeveloped Self, Negativity/Pessimism. Angry Child Vents anger directly in response to perceived unmet core needs or unfair treatment related to core schemas. Abandonment, Mistrust/Abuse, Emotional Deprivation, Subjugation (or, at times, any of the schemas associated with the Vulnerable Child). Impulsive/ Undisciplined Child Impulsively acts according to immediate desires for pleasure without regard to limits or others’ needs or feelings (not linked to core needs). Entitlement, Insufficient Self-Control/Self- Discipline. Happy Child Feels loved, connected, content, satisfied. None. Absence of activated schemas.  figUre 7.2a. Child modes. From Young, Klosko, and Weishaar (2003). Copyright 2003 by The Guilford Press. Reprinted by permission.  Maladaptive Coping Modes Description  Compliant Surrenderer Adopts a coping style of compliance and dependence. Detached Protector Adopts a coping style of emotional withdrawal, disconnection, isolation, and behavioral avoidance. Overcompensator Adopts a coping style of counterattack and control. May overcompensate through semiadaptive means, such as workaholism.  figUre 7.2b. Maladaptive Coping modes. From Young, Klosko, and Weishaar (2003). Copyright 2003 by The Guilford Press. Reprinted by permission.  Dysfunctional Parent Mode Description Common associated schemas  Punitive/Critical Parent Restricts, criticizes, or punishes the self or others. Subjugation, Punitiveness, Defectiveness, Mistrust/Abuse (as abuser). Demanding Parent Sets high expectations and high level of responsibility toward others; pressures the self or others to achieve them. Unrelenting Standards, Self-Sacrifice.  figUre 7.2C. Dysfunctional Parent modes. From Young, Klosko, and Weishaar (2003). Copyright 2003 by The Guilford Press. Reprinted by permission.   Cognitive Therapy for Depression  Renner and colleagues (2012) also found EMSs, particularly those in the disconnection and rejection and impaired autonomy and performance domains, to be related to severity of depressive symptoms. They note that, consistent with Beck’s theory, “these findings are consistent with the cognitive model of depression, placing schemas or core beliefs in the domains of failure, loss, and worthlessness at the core of depressive symptoms” (p. 587). In their examination of the robustness of EMSs with evidence-based treatments (CBT and interpersonal psychotherapy [IPT], with and without medication) for depression, they found that EMSs remained relatively stable over time (pre- and posttreatment). This finding is consistent with Young and colleagues’ (2003) notion of EMSs as stable, trait-like beliefs that remain even after successful treatment of Axis I symptoms. According to the schema model, these results should not be surprising, since none of the treatments in this study specifically targeted change in EMSs.  In a recent study, Eberhart, Auerbach, Bigda-Peyton, and Abela (2011) examined how EMSs and stress impact depressive symptoms by comparing two models of stress: diathesis–stress and stress-generation. The diathesis–stress model posits that EMSs only create vulnerability to depression when interacting with high levels of stressors. The stress generation model posits that EMSs are instrumental in creating stressful conditions which then increase depression. The results supported the stress generation hypothesis. The researchers noted that  a number of maladaptive schemas in the domains of disconnection and rejection, impaired autonomy and performance, and other-directedness predicted the generation of dependent, interpersonal stressors. These dependent interpersonal stressors, in turn, predicted increases in depressive symptoms. Moreover, there was evidence that these stressors mediated the relationships between maladaptive schemas and depressive symptoms. In particular, mediation effects were observed for subjugation schemas, failure schemas, and a number of schemas related to disconnection and rejection” (p. 96). [body]This research highlights the importance of targeting EMSs in the treatment of chronic depression.  In the following sections we present information about the general characteristics and nature of cognitive therapy, a discussion of the process of cognitive therapy, then two case examples that illustrate cognitive therapy in action. The patient in the first case has a nonchronic form of depression and is treated with  “standard” cognitive therapy (as originally outlined in Beck et al.’s 1979 book). The focus of standard cognitive therapy is on changing depressive thinking in the present. The patient in the second case has chronic depression and is treated with both cognitive and schema therapies. The focus of ST, in this case, is on identifying and modifying the patient’s underlying schemas through mode work.  characteristics of theraPy  Cognitive therapy with adult depressed outpatients is usually undertaken in the therapist’s office. It has most frequently been applied in a one-to-one setting. However, group cognitive therapy has also been shown to be successful with many depressed outpatients (Beutler et al., 1987; Jarrett & Nelson, 1987), although it may not be as effective as individual treatment (Wierzbicki & Bartlett, 1987). Additionally, computer-assisted cognitive therapy for depression (50-minute vs. 25-minute sessions with computer assistance) also has been found effective (Wright et al., 2005). It is not unusual to involve spouses, partners, parents, and other family members during treatment. For example, they may provide information that helps patients test the validity of their thinking with respect to how other family members view them. Moreover, couple therapy based on the cognitive model is often very effective in relieving depression related to chronic interpersonal problems (Beck, 1988; O’Leary & Beach, 1990).  In our clinical experience, a number of therapist characteristics contribute to effective cognitive therapy. First, cognitive therapists ideally should demonstrate the “nonspecific” therapy skills identified by other writers (see, e.g., Truax & Mitchell, 1971): They should be able to communicate warmth, genuineness, sincerity, and openness. Second, the most effective cognitive therapists seem to be especially skilled at seeing events from their patients’ perspectives (accurate empathy). They are able to suspend their own personal assumptions and biases while listening to depressed patients describe their reactions and interpretations. Third, skilled cognitive therapists can reason logically and plan strategies; they are not “fuzzy” thinkers. In this respect they resemble good trial lawyers, who can spot the sometimes subtle flaws in another individual’s reasoning and skillfully elicit a more convincing interpretation of the same events. Skilled cognitive therapists plan strategies several steps ahead, anticipating the   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  desired outcome. Fourth, the best practitioners of this approach are active. They have to be comfortable taking the lead, providing structure and direction to the therapy process.  Although patient characteristics have received some empirical attention (Eifert, Beach, & Wilson, 1998; Padesky, with Greenberger, 1995; Persons, Burns, & Perloff, 1988; Shea et al., 1990), we do not yet have adequate knowledge as to which patient characteristics are related to success in cognitive therapy. Our experience suggests that patients with major depressive disorder (or milder forms of depression) respond well to the cognitive therapy approach described in this chapter. To the extent that the patient is diagnosed with Axis II personality disorders and/or his/her depression is chronic, the combination of cognitive and schema therapies may be significantly longer in duration and more crucial in obtaining a more complete and lasting positive response to treatment.  Cognitive therapy can serve an important adjunctive role to pharmacotherapy for bipolar disorders (Ball et al., 2006; Basco & Rush, 1996; Colom, Vieta, Martinez, Jorquera, & Gastó, 1998; Craighead, Miklowitz, Vajk, & Frank, 1998; Lam, Hayward, Watkins, Wright, & Sham, 2005; Scott, 1996b), and is effective in treating patients with severe endogenous depression (Thase, Bowler, & Harden, 1991; Whisman, 1993). Preliminary evidence also suggests that cognitive therapy is effective in the treatment of women with postpartum depression (Bledsoe & Grote, 2006).  It is advisable to assess patients’ suitability for cognitive therapy (Padesky, with Greenberger, 1995; Safran & Segal, 1990; Safran, Segal, Vallis, Shaw, & Samstag, 1993). In our experience, certain patient characteristics are predictive of a more rapid response. “Ideal” cognitive therapy patients are appropriately introspective and can reason abstractly; are well organized, good planners, and conscientious about carrying out responsibilities; are employed or have a history of employment; are not excessively angry at either themselves or at other people; are less dogmatic and rigid in their thinking; can identify a clear precipitating event for the depressive episode; and have close relationships with others. Most patients deviate in some ways from this prototype, and these characteristics are not essential to successful treatment. However, patients with more of these attributes often show faster improvement in depressive symptoms through cognitive therapy.  Age is not an obstacle: Patients across the lifespan seem to benefit from cognitive therapy (Beutler et al.,  1987; Floyd, Scogin, McKendree-Smith, Floyd, & Rokke, 2004; Gallagher-Thompson, Hanley-Peterson, & Thompson, 1990; Harrington, Wood, & Verduyn, 1998; Koder, Brodaty, & Anstey, 1996; Levendusky & Hufford, 1997; Reinecke, Ryan, & DuBois, 1998). Many studies have indicated that children and adolescents show significant clinical improvement following CBT (Curry, 2001). Studies of older patients show that “various forms of cognitive and behavioral psychotherapy can be as effective in treating geriatric depression as depressions occurring earlier in life” (Futterman, Thompson, Gallagher-Thompson, & Ferris, 1995, p. 511).  collaBoratioN  Basic to cognitive therapy is a collaborative relationship between patient and therapist. When therapist and patient work together, the learning experience is enhanced for both, and the cooperative spirit that is developed contributes greatly to the therapeutic process. Equally important, the collaborative approach helps to ensure compatible goals for treatment, and to prevent misunderstandings and misinterpretations between patient and therapist. Because of the importance of the collaborative relationship, we place great emphasis on the interpersonal skills of the therapist, the process of joint selection of problems to be worked on, regular feedback, and the investigative process we call “collaborative empiricism.”  Interpersonal Qualities  Because collaboration requires that the patient trust the therapist, we emphasize those interpersonal qualities that contribute to trust. As noted earlier, warmth, accurate empathy, and genuineness are desirable personal qualities for the cognitive therapist, as well as for all psychotherapists. It is important that the cognitive therapist not seem to be playing the role of therapist. The therapist should be able to communicate both verbally and nonverbally that he/she is sincere, open, concerned, and direct. It is also important that the therapist not seem to be withholding impressions or information, or evading questions. The therapist should be careful not to seem critical or disapproving of the patient’s perspective.   Rapport between patient and therapist is crucial in the treatment of depressed patients. When rapport is   Cognitive Therapy for Depression  optimal, patients perceive the therapist as someone who is tuned in to their feelings and attitudes, who is sympathetic and understanding, and with whom they can communicate without having to articulate feelings in detail or qualify statements. When the rapport is good, both patient and therapist feel comfortable and secure.  A confident, professional manner is also important in cognitive therapy. A therapist should convey relaxed confidence in his/her ability to help a depressed patient. Such confidence can help to counteract the patient’s initial hopelessness about the future. Because the cognitive therapist must sometimes be directive and impose structure, especially in the early stages of treatment, it is helpful to maintain a clear sense of professionalism.  Joint Determination of Goals for Therapy  The patient and therapist collaboratively work together to set therapeutic goals, determine priorities among them, and create an agenda for each session. Problems to be addressed over the course of therapy include specific depressive symptoms (e.g., hopelessness, crying, and difficulty concentrating) and external problems (e.g., couple difficulties, career issues, childrearing concerns). Priorities are then jointly determined in accordance with how much distress is generated by a particular problem and how amenable that particular problem is to change. During the agenda-setting portion of each therapy session (discussed in detail in the next section), therapist and patient together determine the items to be covered in that session. Through this collaborative process, target problems are selected on a weekly basis.  The process of problem selection often presents difficulties for the novice cognitive therapist, including failure to reach agreement on specific problems on which to focus, selection of peripheral concerns, and the tendency to move from problem to problem instead of persistently seeking a satisfactory solution to only one problem at a time. Because the problem selection process entails both structuring and collaboration on the part of the therapist, considerable skill is necessary.  Regular Feedback  Feedback is especially important in therapy with depressed patients; it is a crucial ingredient in developing and maintaining the collaborative therapeutic relationship. The cognitive therapist initiates the feedback component early in therapy by eliciting the patient’s  thoughts and feelings about many aspects of the therapy, such as the handling of a particular problem, the therapist’s manner, and homework assignments. Since many patients misconstrue therapists’ statements and questions, it is only through regular feedback that the therapist can ascertain whether he/she and the patient are on the same “wavelength.” The therapist must also be alert for verbal and nonverbal clues to covert negative reactions.  As part of the regular feedback process, the cognitive therapist shares the rationale for each intervention. This helps to demystify the therapy process and facilitates the patient’s questioning of the validity of a particular approach. In addition, when a patient understands how a particular technique or assignment may help solve a particular problem in the patient’s life, he/she is more likely to participate conscientiously.  Another key element of the feedback process is for the therapist to check regularly to determine whether the patient understands his/her formulations. Patients sometimes agree with a formulation simply out of compliance, and depressed patients frequently exhibit both compliance and reluctance to “talk straight” with their therapists for fear of being rejected or criticized, or of making a mistake. Therefore, the therapist must make an extra effort to elicit the patient’s feelings or wishes relevant to compliance (e.g., anxiety about rejection, wish to please) and be alert for verbal and nonverbal clues that the patient may indeed not understand the explanations.  At the close of each session the cognitive therapist provides a concise summary of what has taken place, and asks the patient to abstract and write down the main points from the session. The patient keeps this summary for review during the week. In practice, the therapist uses capsule summaries frequently during a standard therapeutic interview: in preparing the agenda, in a midpoint recapitulation of the material covered up to that point, and in the final summary of the main points of the interview. Patients generally respond favorably to the elicitation of feedback and presentation of capsule summaries. We have observed that the development of empathy and rapport is facilitated by these techniques.  Collaborative Empiricism  When the collaborative therapeutic relationship has been successfully formed, patient and therapist act as an investigative team. Though we elaborate on the investigative process later, it is appropriate to introduce   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  it in the context of the collaborative relationship. As a team, patient and therapist approach the patient’s automatic thoughts and schemas in the same manner that scientists approach questions: Each thought or schema becomes a hypothesis to be tested, and evidence is gathered that supports or refutes the hypothesis. Events in the past, circumstances in the present, and possibilities in the future are the data that constitute evidence, and the conclusion to accept or reject the hypothesis is jointly reached as patient and therapist subject the evidence to logical analysis. Experiments may also be devised to test the validity of particular cognitions. Cognitive therapists need not persuade patients of illogicality or inconsistency with reality because patients “discover” their own inconsistencies. This guided discovery process, a widely accepted educational method, is one of the vital components of cognitive therapy.  the Process of coGNitive theraPy  Here we attempt to convey a sense of how cognitive therapy sessions are structured and of the course of treatment. Detailed discussion of particular techniques follows this section.  The Initial Sessions  A main therapeutic goal of the first few sessions is to produce some symptom relief. Reducing the patient’s suffering helps to increase rapport, collaboration, and confidence in the therapeutic process. Symptom relief, however, should be based on more than rapport, sympathy, and implied promise of “cure.” In the first few sessions, the cognitive therapist starts the process of defining the patient’s problems and demonstrating some of the strategies that will be used in the therapy to deal with those problems.  Problem definition is a primary goal in the early stages of therapy. The therapist collaboratively works with the patient to define the specific problems on which they will focus during therapy sessions. The cognitive therapist does this by obtaining as complete a picture as possible of the patient’s psychological and life situation difficulties. The therapist also seeks details concerning the depth of depression and particular symptomatology. Cognitive therapists are especially concerned with how patients see their problems.  Once the specific problems have been defined, patient and therapist establish priorities among them.  Decisions are made on the basis of amenability to therapeutic change and centrality of the life problem or cognition to the patient’s emotional distress. To help establish priorities effectively, the therapist must see the relationships among particular thoughts, particular life situations, and particular distressing emotions.  Another goal of the initial session is to illustrate the close relationship between cognition and emotion. When the therapist is able to observe the patient’s mood change (e.g., crying), he/she points out the alteration in affect and asks for the patient’s thoughts just before the mood shift. The therapist then labels the negative thought and points out its relationship to the change in mood. He/she initially gears homework assignments toward helping the patient see the close connection between cognition and emotion.  A frequent requirement in the early stage of therapy is to socialize the patient to cognitive therapy. A patient who has previously undertaken analytically oriented or Rogerian therapies may begin cognitive therapy expecting a more insight-oriented, nondirective therapeutic approach. The cognitive therapist can facilitate the transition to a more active and structured approach by maintaining a problem-oriented stance, which often entails gently interrupting a patient who tends to speculate about the sources of the problems and to seek interpretations from the therapist.  Finally, the therapist must communicate the importance of self-help homework assignments during the initial session by stressing that doing the homework is actually more important than the therapy session itself. The therapist also can enhance motivation by explaining that patients who complete assignments generally improve more quickly. The nature and implementation of self-help homework assignments are considered in further detail in a later section of this chapter.  The Progress of a Typical Therapy Session  Each session begins with the establishment of an agenda for that session. This ensures optimal use of time in a relatively short-term, problem-solving therapeutic approach. The agenda generally begins with a short synopsis of the patient’s experiences since the last session, including discussion of the homework assignment. The therapist then asks the patient what he/she wants to work on during the session, and often offers topics to be included.  When a short list of problems and topics has been completed, patient and therapist determine the order   Cognitive Therapy for Depression  in which to cover them and, if necessary, the time to be allotted to each topic. There are several issues to consider in establishing priorities, including stage of therapy, severity of depression, likelihood of making progress in solving the problem, and potential pervasiveness of the effect of a particular theme or topic. The cognitive therapist is sensitive to a patient’s occasional desire to talk about something that seems important to him/her at the moment, even if such discussion seems not to be productive in terms of other goals. This kind of flexibility characterizes the collaborative therapeutic relationship.  After these preliminary matters have been covered, patient and therapist move on to the one or two problems to be considered during the session. The therapist begins the discussion of a problem by asking the patient a series of questions designed to clarify the nature of the patient’s difficulty. In doing so, the therapist seeks to determine whether early maladaptive schemas, misinterpretations of events, or unrealistic expectations are involved. The therapist also seeks to discover whether the patient had unrealistic expectations, whether the patient’s behavior was appropriate, and whether all possible solutions to the problem were considered. The patient’s responses suggest to the therapist a cognitivebehavioral conceptualization of why the patient is having difficulty in the area of concern. The therapist by now has discerned the one or two significant thoughts, schemas, images, or behaviors on which to work. When this target problem has been selected, the therapist chooses the cognitive or behavioral techniques to apply and shares their rationale with the patient. The specific techniques used in cognitive therapy are explained in the following sections of this chapter.  At the close of the session, the therapist asks the patient for a summary, often in writing, of the major conclusions drawn during the session. The therapist asks for the patient’s reactions to the session to ascertain whether anything disturbing was said and to forestall any delayed negative reactions following the interview. Finally, the therapist gives a homework assignment designed to assist the patient in applying the particular skills and concepts from the session to the problem during the following week.  Progression of Session Content over Time  Although the structure of cognitive therapy sessions does not change during the course of treatment, the content often changes significantly. The first phase of  treatment, symptom reduction, focuses on overcoming hopelessness, identifying problems, setting priorities, socializing the patient to cognitive therapy, establishing a collaborative relationship, demonstrating the relationship between cognition and emotion, labeling errors in thinking, and making progress on a target problem. Therapy is initially centered on the patient’s symptoms, with attention given to behavioral and motivational difficulties.   In the second phase, which is focused on changing schemas for relapse prevention and chronic cases, therapist and patient turn from specific thoughts about particular problems to core schemas about the self and others, and to the modes associated with those schemas. Therapist and patient explore how the schemas and modes initiate, exacerbate, and maintain many of the patient’s problems. Therapist and patient then work collaboratively to restructure and modify the schemas and modes through a variety of techniques, which eventually brings about a broader and more pervasive improvement in life functioning and mood.  Over the course of therapy, the patient assumes increased responsibility for identifying problems, coming up with solutions, and implementing the solutions through homework assignments. The therapist increasingly assumes the role of advisor or consultant as the patient learns to implement therapeutic techniques without constant support. As the patient becomes a more effective problem solver, the frequency of sessions is reduced, and therapy is eventually discontinued.  The remainder of this chapter is devoted to a detailed description of cognitive- and schema-based treatment strategies.  syMPtoM reDuctioN  Behavioral Techniques  Behavioral techniques are used throughout the course of cognitive therapy, but they are generally concentrated in the earlier stages of treatment. Behavioral techniques are especially necessary for those more severely depressed patients who are passive, anhedonic, socially withdrawn, and unable to concentrate for extended periods of time. By engaging such a patient’s attention and interest, the cognitive therapist tries to induce the patient to counteract withdrawal and become more involved in constructive activity. From a variety of be    CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  havioral techniques, the therapist selects those that will help the patient cope more effectively with situational and interpersonal problems. Through homework assignments, the patient implements specific procedures for dealing with concrete situations or for using time more adaptively.  The cognitive therapist uses behavioral techniques, with the goal of modifying automatic thoughts. For example, a patient who believes “I can’t get anything done any more” can modify this thought after completing a series of graded tasks designed to increase mastery. The severely depressed patient is caught in a vicious cycle, in which a reduced activity level leads to a negative self-label, which in turn results in even further discouragement and consequent inactivity. Intervention with behavioral techniques can change this self-destructive pattern.  The most commonly used behavioral techniques include scheduling activities that include both mastery and pleasure exercises, cognitive rehearsal, selfreliance training, role playing, and diversion techniques. The scheduling of activities is frequently used in the early stages of cognitive therapy to counteract loss of motivation, hopelessness, and excessive rumination. The therapist uses the Weekly Activity Schedule for planning activities hour by hour, day by day (see Figure 7.3). Patients maintain an hourly record of the activities in which they engaged. Activity scheduling also helps patients obtain more pleasure and a greater sense of accomplishment from activities on a daily basis. The patients rate each completed activity (using a 0- to 10-point scale) for both mastery and pleasure. The ratings usually contradict patients’ beliefs that they cannot accomplish or enjoy anything anymore. To as-  Note: Grade activities M for mastery and P for pleasure 0–10.   Mon.Tues.Wed.Thurs.Fri.Sat.Sun. Morning6–77–88–99–1010–1111–12Afternoon12–11–22–33–44–55–6Evening6–77–88–99–1010–1111–1212–6 figUre 7.3. Weekly Activity Schedule.   Cognitive Therapy for Depression  sist some patients in initiating mastery and pleasure activities, the therapist may sometimes find it necessary to subdivide an activity into segments, ranging from the simplest to the most difficult and complex aspects of the activity. We call this the “graded task” approach. The subdivision enables depressed patients to undertake tasks that were initially impossible, thus providing proof of success.  Cognitive rehearsal entails asking a patient to picture or imagine each step involved in the accomplishment of a particular task. This technique can be especially helpful with those patients who have difficulty carrying out a task that requires successive steps for its completion. Sometimes impairment in the ability to concentrate creates difficulties for the patient in focusing attention on the specific task. The imagery evoked by the cognitive rehearsal technique helps the patient to focus and the therapist to identify obstacles that make the assignment difficult for the particular patient.  Some depressed patients rely on others to take care of most of their daily needs. With self-reliance training, patients learn to assume increased responsibility for routine activities such as showering, making their beds, cleaning the house, cooking their own meals, and shopping. Self-reliance involves gaining increased control over emotional reactions.  Role playing has many uses in cognitive therapy. First, it may be used to bring out automatic thoughts through the enactment of particular interpersonal situations, such as an encounter with a supervisor at work. Second, through homework assignments, it may also guide the patient in practicing and attending to new cognitive responses in problematic social encounters. A third use of role playing is to rehearse new behaviors. Thus, role playing may be used as part of assertiveness training and is often accompanied by modeling and coaching.  Role reversal, a variation of role playing, can be very effective in helping patients test how other people might view their behavior. This is well illustrated by a patient who had a “humiliating experience” while buying some clothes in a store. After playing the role of the clerk, the patient had to conclude that she had insufficient data for her previous conclusion that she appeared clumsy and inept. Through role reversal, patients begin to view themselves less harshly as “self-sympathy” responses are elicited.  Finally, the therapist may introduce various distraction techniques to assist the patient in learning to reduce the intensity of painful affects. The patient learns  to divert negative thinking through physical activity, social contact, work, play, and visual imagery. Practice with diversion techniques also helps the patient gain further control over emotional reactivity.  Cognitive Techniques  The specific cognitive techniques provide points of entry into the patient’s cognitive organization. The cognitive therapist uses techniques for eliciting and testing automatic thoughts, and identifying schemas to help both therapist and patient understand the patient’s construction of reality. In applying specific cognitive techniques in therapy, it is important that the therapist work within the framework of the cognitive model of depression. Each set of techniques is discussed in turn.  Eliciting Automatic Thoughts  “Automatic thoughts” are those thoughts that intervene between outside events and the individual’s emotional reactions to them. They often go unnoticed because they are part of a repetitive pattern of thinking, and because they occur so often and so quickly. People rarely stop to assess their validity because they are so believable, familiar, and habitual. The patient in cognitive therapy must learn to recognize these automatic thoughts for therapy to proceed effectively. The cognitive therapist and the patient make a joint effort to discover the particular thoughts that precede emotions such as anger, sadness, and anxiety. The therapist uses questioning, imagery, and role playing to elicit automatic thoughts.  The simplest method to uncover automatic thoughts is for therapists to ask patients what thoughts went through their minds in response to particular events. This questioning provides a model for introspective exploration that patients can use on their own, when the therapist is not present, and after the completion of treatment.  Alternatively, when a patient is able to identify those external events and situations that evoke a particular emotional response, the therapist may use imagery by asking the patient to picture the situation in detail. The patient is often able to identify the automatic thoughts connected with actual situations when the image evoked is clear. In this technique, therapists ask patients to relax, close their eyes, and imagine themselves in the distressing situation. Patients describe in detail what is happening as they relive the event.   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  If a distressing event is an interpersonal one, cognitive therapists also can utilize role playing. The therapist plays the role of the other person in the encounter, while the patient plays him/herself. The automatic thoughts can usually be elicited when the patient becomes sufficiently engaged in the role play.  In attempting to elicit automatic thoughts, the therapist is careful to notice and point out any mood changes that occur during the session, and to ask the patient his/her thoughts just before the shift in mood. Mood changes include any emotional reaction, such as tears or anger. This technique can be especially useful when the patient is first learning to identify automatic thoughts.  Once patients become familiar with the techniques for identifying automatic thoughts, they are asked to keep a Daily Record of Dysfunctional Thoughts (Beck et al., 1979; see Figure 7.4), in which they record the emotions and automatic thoughts that occur in upsetting situations between therapy sessions. In later sessions, patients are taught to develop rational responses to their dysfunctional automatic thoughts and to record  them in the appropriate column. Therapist and patient generally review the daily record from the preceding week, near the beginning of the next therapy session. In sessions, the therapist also teaches chronic patients to recognize modes. Various affective exercises are then used to bring about change in the underlying schemas associated with those modes.  Eliciting automatic thoughts should be distinguished from the interpretation process of other psychotherapies. In general, cognitive therapists work only with those automatic thoughts mentioned by patients. Suggesting thoughts to patients may undermine collaboration and inhibit patients from learning to continue the process on their own. As a last resort, however, when nondirective strategies fail, a cognitive therapist may offer several possible automatic thoughts, then ask the patient whether any of these choices fit.  Even when many efforts to elicit automatic thoughts have been made by the therapist, sometimes the thought remains inaccessible. When this is the case, the cognitive therapist tries to ascertain the particular meaning of the event that evoked the emotional reaction. For ex-  DATE SITUATION Describe: 1. Actual event leading to unpleasant emotion, or 2. Stream of thoughts, daydream, or recollection, leading to unpleasant emotion. EMOTION(S) 1. Specify sad/ anxious/ angry, etc. 2. Rate degree of emotion, 1–100. AUTOMATIC THOUGHT(S) 1. Write automatic thought(s) that preceded emotion(s). 2. Rate belief in automatic thought(s), 0–100%. RATIONAL RESPONSE 1. Write rational response to automatic thought(s). 2. Rate belief in rational response, 0–100%. OUTCOME 1. Rerate belief in automatic thought(s), 0–100%. 2. Specify and rate subsequent emotions, 0–100%.  Explanation: When you experience an unpleasant emotion, note the situation that seemed to stimulate the emotion. (If the emotion occurred while you were thinking, daydreaming, etc., please note this.) Then note the automatic thought associated with the emotion. Record the degree to which you believe this thought: 0% = not at all; 100% = completely. In rating degrees of emotion: 1 = a trace; 100 = the most intense possible.  figUre 7.4. Daily Record of Dysfunctional Thoughts.   Cognitive Therapy for Depression  ample, one patient began to cry whenever she had an argument with her roommate, who was a good friend. Efforts to elicit automatic thoughts proved unsuccessful. Only after the therapist asked a series of questions to determine the meaning of the event did it become clear that the patient associated having an argument or fight with ending the relationship. Through this process, therapist and patient were able to see the meaning that triggered the crying.  Testing Automatic Thoughts with Nonchronic Patients  When therapist and patient have managed to isolate a key automatic thought, they approach the thought as a testable hypothesis. In this “scientific” approach, which is fundamental to cognitive therapy, the patient learns to think in a way that resembles the investigative process. Through the procedures of gathering data, evaluating evidence, and drawing conclusions, patients learn firsthand that their view of reality can be quite different from what actually takes place. By designing experiments that subject their automatic thoughts to objective analysis, patients learn how to modify their thinking because they learn the process of empirical thinking. Patients who learn to think this way during treatment are better able to continue the empirical approach after the end of formal therapy.  The cognitive therapist approaches the testing of automatic thoughts by asking the patient to list evidence from his/her experience for and against the hypothesis. Sometimes, after considering the evidence, the patient immediately rejects the automatic thought, recognizing that it is either distorted or actually false.  When previous experience is not sufficient or appropriate to test a hypothesis, the therapist asks the patient to design an experiment for that purpose. The patient then makes a prediction and proceeds to gather data. If the data contradict the prediction, the patient can reject the automatic thought. The outcome of the experiment may, of course, confirm the patient’s prediction. It is therefore very important for the therapist not to assume that the patient’s automatic thought is distorted.  Some automatic thoughts do not lend themselves to hypothesis testing through the examination of evidence. In these cases, two options are available: The therapist may either produce evidence from his/her own experience and offer it in the form of a question that reveals the contradiction or ask a question designed to uncover a logical error inherent in the patient’s beliefs. The  therapist might say, for example, to a male patient who is sure he cannot survive without a close personal relationship, “You were alone last year, and you got along fine; what makes you think you can’t make it now?”  In testing automatic thoughts, it is sometimes necessary to refine the patient’s use of a word. This is particularly true for global labels such as “bad,” “stupid,” or “selfish.” What is needed in this case is an operational definition of the word. To illustrate, a patient at our clinic had the recurring automatic thought, “I’m a failure in math.” Therapist and patient had to narrow down the meaning of the word before they could test the thought. They operationalized “failure” in math as “being unable to achieve a grade of C after investing as much time studying as the average class member.” Now they could examine past evidence and test the validity of the hypothesis. This process can help patients to see the overinclusiveness of their negative self-assessments and the idiosyncratic nature of many automatic thoughts.  Reattribution is another useful technique for helping the patient to reject an inappropriate, self-blaming thought. It is a common cognitive pattern in depression to ascribe blame or responsibility for adverse events to oneself. Reattribution can be used when the patient unrealistically attributes adverse occurrences to a personal deficiency, such as lack of ability or effort. Therapist and patient review the relevant events and apply logic to the available information to make a more realistic assignment of responsibility. The aim of reattribution is not to absolve the patient of all responsibility but to examine the many factors that contribute to adverse events. Through this process, patients gain objectivity, relieve themselves of the burden of self-reproach, and can then search for ways to solve realistic problems or prevent their recurrence.  Another strategy involving reattribution is for therapists to demonstrate that patients’ criteria for assigning responsibility to their own unsatisfactory behavior are stricter than criteria they use in evaluating the behavior of others. Cognitive therapists also use reattribution to show patients that some of their thinking or behavior problems can be symptoms of depression (e.g., loss of concentration) and not signs of physical decay.  When a patient is accurate in identifying a realistic life problem or skills deficit, the cognitive therapist can use the technique of generating alternatives, in which therapist and patient actively search for alternative solutions. Because a depressed person’s reasoning often becomes restricted, an effort to reconceptualize the   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  problem can result in the patient’s seeing a viable solution that he/she may previously have rejected.  It should be noted that all the cognitive techniques outlined here entail the use of questions by the therapist. A common error we observe in novice cognitive therapists is an exhortative style. We have found that therapists help patients to change their thinking more effectively by using carefully formed questions. If patients are prompted to work their own way through problems and reach their own conclusions, they learn an effective problem-solving process. We next elaborate on the use of questioning in cognitive therapy.  Questioning  As we have stressed throughout this chapter, questioning is a major therapeutic device in cognitive therapy. A majority of the therapist’s comments during the therapy session are questions. Single questions can serve several purposes at one time, whereas carefully designed series of questions can help patients consider a particular issue, decision, or opinion. The cognitive therapist seeks through questioning to elicit what patients are thinking, instead of telling patients what he/she believes they are thinking.  In the beginning of therapy, questions are employed to obtain a full and detailed picture of a patient’s particular difficulties; to obtain background and diagnostic data; to evaluate the patient’s stress tolerance, capacity for introspection, coping methods, and so on; to obtain information about the patient’s external situation and interpersonal context; and to modify vague complaints by working with the patient to arrive at specific target problems on which to work.  As therapy progresses, the therapist uses questioning to explore approaches to problems, to help the patient to weigh advantages and disadvantages of possible solutions, to examine the consequences of staying with particular maladaptive behaviors, to elicit automatic thoughts, and to demonstrate EMSs and their consequences. In short, the therapist uses questioning in most cognitive therapeutic techniques.  Although questioning is itself a powerful means of identifying and changing automatic thoughts and schemas, it is important that the questions be carefully and skillfully posed. If questions are used to “trap” patients into contradicting themselves, patients may come to feel that they are being attacked or manipulated by the therapist. Too many open-ended questions can leave patients wondering what the therapist expects of them.  Therapists must carefully time and phrase questions to help patients recognize their thoughts and schemas, and to weigh issues objectively.  Self‑Help Homework Assignments  Rationale  Regular homework assignments are very important in cognitive therapy. When patients systematically apply what they have learned during therapy sessions to their outside lives, they are more likely to make significant progress in therapy and to be able to maintain their gains after termination of treatment. Burns and Spangler (2000) found that patients who did the most homework showed larger and more significant decreases in depression than those who were less compliant. Homework assignments are often the means through which patients gather data, test hypotheses, and begin to modify their thoughts and schemas. In addition, the data provided through homework assignments help to shift the focus of therapy from the subjective and abstract to more concrete and objective concerns. When a patient and therapist review the previous week’s activities during the agenda-setting portion of the interview, they may do so quickly, and the therapist can draw relationships between what takes place in the session and specific tasks, thereby avoiding tangents and side issues. Homework assignments further patients’ self-reliance and provide them with methods to continue working on problems after the end of treatment. Cognitive therapists emphasize the importance of homework by sharing with patients their rationale for assigning homework in therapy. They are also careful to explain the particular benefits to be derived from each individual assignment.  Assigning and Reviewing Homework  The cognitive therapist designs each assignment for the particular patient. The assignment should be directly related to the content of the therapy session, so that the patient understands its purpose and importance. Each task should be clearly articulated and very specific in nature. Near the end of each session, the assignment is written in duplicate, with one copy going to the therapist and the other to the patient.  Some typical homework assignments include reading a book or article about a specific problem, practicing distraction or relaxation techniques, counting auto    Cognitive Therapy for Depression  matic thoughts on a wrist counter, rating activities for pleasure and mastery on the Weekly Activity Schedule, maintaining a Daily Record of Dysfunctional Thoughts, and listening to a tape of the therapy session.  During the therapy session, the therapist asks for the patient’s reactions to homework assignments. For example, the therapist might ask whether the assignment is clear and manageable. To determine potential impediments, the therapist may ask the patient to imagine taking the steps involved in the assignment. This technique can be especially helpful during the earlier stages of therapy. The patient assumes greater responsibility for developing homework assignments as therapy progresses through the middle and later stages.  It is essential that patient and therapist review the previous week’s homework during the therapy session itself. If they do not, the patient may conclude that the homework assignments are not important. During the first part of the therapy sessions, therapist and patient discuss the previous week’s assignment, and the therapist summarizes the results.  Difficulties in Completing Homework  When a patient does not complete homework assignments, or does them without conviction, the cognitive therapist elicits automatic thoughts, schemas, or behavioral problems that may help them both understand where the difficulty resides. The therapist does not presuppose that the patient is being “resistant” or “passive–aggressive.” When the difficulties have been successfully identified, therapist and patient work collaboratively to surmount them. It is, of course, common for patients to have difficulties in completing homework, and here we consider some of the typical problems and ways to counteract them.  When patients do not understand the assignment completely, the therapist should explain it more fully, specifying his/her expectations in detail. Sometimes using the behavioral technique of cognitive rehearsal (described earlier) can be helpful in such situations.  Some patients believe that they are naturally disorganized and cannot maintain records and follow through on detailed assignments. Therapists can usually help to invalidate such general beliefs by asking patients about other circumstances in which they make lists—for example, when planning a vacation or shopping trip. Therapists can also ask these patients whether they could complete the assignment if there were a substantial reward entailed. This kind of question helps  such patients recognize that self-control is not the problem; rather, they do not believe that the reward is great enough. When patients realize that the problem is an attitudinal one, therapist and patient can proceed to enumerate the advantages of completing the assignment.  More severely depressed patients may need assistance to structure their time, so that homework becomes a regular activity. This can generally be accomplished by setting a specific time each day for the homework assignment. If necessary, patient and therapist can set up a reward system to increase motivation to complete the homework. For example, patients can reward themselves for doing the assignment by making a special purchase.  Some patients are afraid of failing the assignments or of doing them inadequately. In these cases, the therapist can explain that self-help assignments cannot be “failed”: Doing an assignment partially is more helpful than not doing it at all, and mistakes provide valuable information about problems that still need work. In addition, because performance is not evaluated, patients cannot lose if they view the activity from a more adaptive perspective.  Sometimes patients believe their problems are too deeply embedded and complex to be resolved through homework assignments. The therapist can explain to these patients that even the most complex undertakings begin with and comprise small, concrete steps. A writer, for example, may resolve “writer’s blocks” by taking the attitude, “If I can’t write a book, I can at least write a paragraph.” When enough paragraphs have been written, the result is a book. Therapist and patient can consider the advantages and disadvantages of the patient’s belief that problems cannot be solved by doing homework. Or the therapist can ask the patient to experiment before reaching such a conclusion. In instances in which a patient believes that he/she has not made enough progress and that the homework is therefore not helpful, the therapist can detail the progress the patient has made or help the patient see that it may take more time before substantial change can be perceived.  When patients seem to resent being given assignments, the therapist can encourage them to develop their own assignments. He/she might also offer patients alternative assignments from which to choose, making one of the alternatives noncompliance with homework assignments. If patients choose noncompliance, the therapist can help to examine the consequences of that choice. Still another strategy is to present patients with a consumer model of therapy: Patients have a certain   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  goal (overcoming depression), and the therapist offers a means to achieve that goal; patients are free to use or reject the tools, just as they are free to buy or not to buy in the marketplace.  Some patients believe that they can improve just as readily without homework. In this case, therapists have two options. First, they can offer their own clinical experience (which is supported by existing empirical evidence) that most patients who do not actively engage with and complete therapeutic homework progress more slowly in therapy. The other option is to set up an experiment for a given period of time, during which patients do not have to complete assignments. At the end of the predetermined period, therapists and patients can evaluate patients’ progress during that time interval. Once again, it is important for cognitive therapists to keep an open mind: Some patients do indeed effect significant change without formally completing homework assignments.  Special Problems  The novice cognitive therapist often errs by staying with the standard method we have outlined here, even if it is not working very well. The cognitive therapist should be flexible enough to adapt to the needs of patients and to the several special problems that commonly arise in therapy. We have grouped these special problems into two categories: difficulties in the therapist–patient relationship, and problems in which the therapy itself seems not to be working.  Therapist–Patient Relationship Difficulties  The first set of problems concerns the therapist–patient relationship itself. When the therapist first perceives a patient to be dissatisfied, oppositional, angry, or hostile, it is imperative that he/she present these observations to the patient in an empathic manner. It is important that the therapist refrain from responding to the patient simply with an increased and rigid adherence to prescribed techniques or the therapeutic rationale. It also is important that the therapist refrain from self-critical statements. Research indicates that such responses have detrimental effects on the therapeutic relationship (Castonguay et al., 1996; Henry, Strupp, Butler, Schact, & Binder, 1993; Piper et al., 1999). Instead, preliminary research (Castonguay et al., 2004; Safran, Muran, Samstag, & Stevens, 2002) indicates that  the therapist’s use of metacommunication skills (open discussion about the patient’s negative reaction, exploration of the patient’s experience, recognition and acknowledgment of the therapist’s contribution to those negative reactions) is significantly more likely to repair and restore—and even improve—the therapeutic bond.  It is essential for therapists to be aware that many interventions can be misinterpreted in a negative way by depressed patients. Therapists approach problems of misinterpretation in the same way that they approach other thoughts: They work with patients to gather data and search for alternative accounts of the evidence. Difficulties in the therapist–patient relationship can generally be resolved through dialogue. There are times when a therapist may need to tailor behavior to the particular needs of an individual patient. For instance, a therapist may become freer with appropriate self-disclosure and personal reactions to meet the needs of a patient who persists in seeing the therapist as impersonal. Similarly, the therapist can make a point of checking formulations of the patient’s thoughts more frequently to meet the needs of a patient who continues to believe that the therapist does not understand him/her.  It is imperative in situations like these for the therapist not to assume that the patient is being stubbornly resistant or irrational. Therapeutic reactance (“a motivational state characterized by the tendency to restore or re-assert one’s ability to engage in freedoms perceived as lost or threatened” [Arnow et al., 2003,  p. 1026]) was found to be a positive predictor of treatment outcome in directive therapy with chronically depressed patients. Arnow and colleagues found that treatment was enhanced when therapists responded in a flexible manner to such patient behaviors. Cognitive therapists collaborate with patients to achieve a better understanding of patients’ responses. The reactions themselves often provide data regarding the kinds of distortions patients make in their other social and personal relationships. Therefore, patients’ responses give therapists the opportunity to work with them on their maladaptive interpretations in relationships. Unsatisfactory Progress  A second set of problems occurs when the therapy appears not to be working, even when the patient conscientiously completes homework assignments and the collaborative relationship seems successful. Sometimes problems stem from inappropriate expectations   Cognitive Therapy for Depression  on the part of the patient—or unrealistic expectations on the part of the therapist—regarding the rapidity and consistency of change. When therapy seems not to be progressing as quickly as it “should,” both patient and therapist must remember that ups and downs are to be anticipated in the course of treatment. It is important for therapists to keep in mind that some patients simply progress more slowly than others. The therapist or patient, or both, may be minimizing small changes that have indeed been taking place. In this case the therapist can emphasize the small gains that have been made and remind the patient that large goals are attained through small steps toward them.  At times, hopelessness can lead patients to invalidate their gains. Therapists should seek to uncover the maladaptive automatic thoughts, cognitive distortions, and early schemas that contribute to the pervasive hopelessness. In these cases, therapists must work to correct mistaken notions about the process of change and the nature of depression before further progress in therapy can occur.  In some cases in which therapy seems not to be working successfully, it may be that some of the therapeutic techniques have not been correctly used. Problems often arise when patients do not really believe the rational responses or are not able to remember them in times of emotional distress. It is important for a therapist to determine the amount of a patient’s belief in the rational responses and help him/her use the new responses as closely as possible to the moment when the automatic thoughts occur. To the patient who does not fully believe a rational response, the therapist can suggest an experimental stance—taking the new belief and “trying it on for size.” The patient who cannot think of answers because of emotional upset should be told that states of emotional distress make reasoning more difficult, and that thoughts such as “If this doesn’t work, nothing will” can only aggravate the problem. Patients should be assured that they will be able to think of rational responses more readily with practice.  Another problem that derives from the misapplication of cognitive therapy techniques occurs when the therapist uses a particular technique inflexibly. It is often necessary for the therapist to try out several behavioral or cognitive techniques before finding an approach to which a patient responds well. The cognitive therapist must stay with a particular technique for a while to see whether it works, but he/she must also be willing to try an alternative technique when  it becomes apparent that the patient is not improving. To give a specific example, behavioral homework assignments are sometimes more helpful with particular patients, even though the therapist has every reason to predict in advance that cognitive assignments will be more effective.  In some instances in which it appears that little progress is being made in therapy, it turns out that the therapist has selected a tangential problem. The cognitive therapist should be alert to this possibility, especially during the early stages of therapy. When there appears to be little or no significant change in depression level, even when the patient seems to have made considerable progress in a problem area, the therapist should consider the possibility that the most distressing problem has not yet been uncovered. A typical example of this kind of difficulty is the patient who presents difficulty at work as the major problem, when it turns out that relationship problems are contributing significantly to the work difficulties. The real issue may be avoided by the patient because it seems too threatening.  Finally, cognitive therapy is not for everyone. If the therapist has tried all available approaches to the problem and has consulted with other cognitive therapists, it may be best to refer the patient to another therapist with either the same or a different orientation.  Regardless of why therapy is not progressing satisfactorily, cognitive therapists should attend to their own affect and cognitions. They must maintain a disciplined, problem-solving stance. If the cognitive therapist finds him/herself unduly influenced by a patient’s despair or begins to notice that his/her own schemas are triggered by therapeutic interactions, then he/she should seek supervision. Hopelessness in patients or therapists is an obstacle to problem solving. If therapists can effectively counteract their own negative self-assessments and other dysfunctional thoughts, then they will be better able to concentrate on helping patients find solutions to their problems.  Case Study of Denise: Nonchronic Depression  In the case study that follows, we describe the course of treatment for a nonchronically depressed woman seen at our Center. Through the case study, we illustrate many of the concepts described earlier in this chapter, including elicitation of automatic thoughts, the cognitive triad of depression, collaborative empiricism, structuring a session, and feedback.   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  Assessment and Presenting Problems  At the initial evaluation, Denise, a 59-year-old widow, reported that she had been living alone for the last year. Denise’s husband had been diagnosed with brain cancer three years earlier and had died approximately 1 year ago. She had two grown, unmarried children (27 and 25 years old) who were pursuing careers in other parts of the country. Denise had an undergraduate degree and had worked until age 30 but stopped after marrying. Denise described her major problems as depression (over the last year and a half), difficulty coping with daily life, and loneliness. She reported one prior episode of major depression around age 25, following the death of her father.  Denise said she had become increasingly socially isolated with the onset of her husband’s illness (brain cancer). She reported having had normal friendships as a child, teenager, and young adult. She and her husband had led a relatively quiet life together, with a focus on raising their children and their respective work. When they had free time, they had enjoyed intellectual and cultural activities together (museums, lectures, concerts, and fine restaurants). The few close friends with whom they socialized had retired to Florida and Arizona during the time of the husband’s illness.  Denise was diagnosed with a major depressive disorder, recurrent. Her test scores verified the diagnosis of depression. Denise’s BDI-II score was 28, placing her in the moderate to severe range of depression. Her most prominent depressive symptoms included loss of pleasure, irritability, social withdrawal, inability to make decisions, fatigue, guilt, difficulty motivating herself to perform daily functions, and loneliness.  Session I  The session began with Denise describing the “sad feelings” she was having. The therapist almost immediately started to elicit Denise’s automatic thoughts during these periods.  tHeraPist: What kind of thoughts went through your mind when you had these sad feelings this past week?  Denise: Well, I guess I’m thinking what’s the point of all this. My life is over. It’s just not the same. I have thoughts like “What am I going to do?” Sometimes I feel mad at him, you know, my husband. How could he leave me? . . . Isn’t that terrible of me? What’s  wrong with me? How can I be mad at him? He didn’t want to die a horrible death. I should have done more. I should have made him go to the doctor when he first started getting headaches. . . . Oh, what’s the use?  tHeraPist: It sounds like you are feeling quite bad right now. Is that right?  Denise: Yes.  tHeraPist: Keep telling me what’s going through your mind right now?  Denise: I can’t change anything. It’s over. I don’t know. . . . It all seems so bleak and hopeless. What do I have to look forward to . . . sickness and then death?  tHeraPist: So one of the thoughts is that you can’t change things, and that it’s not going to get any better?   Denise: Yes.  tHeraPist: And sometimes you believe that completely? Denise: Yeah, I believe it, sometimes.  tHeraPist: Right now do you believe it?  Denise: I believe it—yes.  tHeraPist: Right now you believe that you can’t change things and it’s not going to get better? Denise: Well, there is a glimmer of hope, but it’s mostly . . . tHeraPist: Is there anything that you kind of look forward to in terms of your own life from here on?  Denise: Well, what I look forward to . . . I enjoy seeing my kids, but they are so busy right now. My son is a lawyer and my daughter is in medical school. So, they are very busy. They don’t have time to spend with me.  By inquiring about Denise’s automatic thoughts, the therapist began to understand her perspective—that she would go on forever, mostly alone. This illustrates the hopelessness about the future that is characteristic of most depressed patients. A second advantage to this line of inquiry is that the therapist introduced Denise to the idea of looking at her own thoughts, which is central to cognitive therapy.  As the session continued, the therapist probed Denise’s perspective regarding her daily life. The therapist chose to focus on her inactivity and withdrawal. This is   Cognitive Therapy for Depression  frequently the first therapeutic goal in working with a severely depressed patient.  In the sequence that follows, the therapist guided Denise to examine the advantages and disadvantages of staying in her house all day.  Denise: Usually I don’t want to leave my house. I want to stay there and just keep the shades closed; you know, I don’t want to do anything. I just want to keep everything out, keep everything away from me.  tHeraPist: Now, do you feel better when you stay in the house all day trying to shut everything out? Denise: Sort of . . .  tHeraPist: What do you mean?  Denise: Well, I can watch TV all day and just lose myself in these silly shows. I feel better when I see other people and their problems on these shows. It makes me feel less lonely and like my problems aren’t so bad.  tHeraPist: And so how much time do you spend doing that?  Denise: Now, lately? . . . Most of the time. Staying inside and watching TV feels safe, sort of secure, everything . . . like my loneliness, feels more distant.  tHeraPist: Now, after you have spent some time like this, how do you feel about yourself? Denise: Afterwards? I usually try not to pay much attention to how I’m feeling.  tHeraPist: But when you do, how do you feel?  Denise: I feel bad. I feel bad for wasting the day. I don’t get to things that I need to take care of . . . like my bills, like cleaning, like taking a shower. I usually end up feeling kind of pathetic . . . and guilty.  tHeraPist: On the one hand you seem to feel soothed and on the other hand, afterwards, you’re a bit critical of yourself?  Note that the therapist did not try to debate or exhort Denise to get out of the house or become involved with necessary daily tasks. Rather, through questioning, the therapist encouraged her to examine more closely her assumption that she was really better off watching TV all day in her house. This is the process we call “collaborative empiricism.” By the second session, Denise had reexamined her hypothesis about watching TV and remaining in the house all day.  Denise: About watching TV in the house versus getting out, I thought about that the other day. I remember telling you that it made me feel better to stay there. When I paid attention to what I really felt, it didn’t make me feel better. It just kind of blocked out feeling bad, but I didn’t feel better.  tHeraPist: It is funny then that when you talked about it, your recollection of the experience was more positive than it actually was, but that sometimes happens with people. It happens to me, too. I think that something is good that’s not so hot when I actually check it out.  We now return to the first session. After some probing by the therapist, Denise mentions that it sometimes feels like cognitive therapy “is my last hope.” The therapist uses this as an opportunity to explore her hopelessness and suicidal thinking.  tHeraPist: What was going through your mind when you said, “This is my last hope”? Did you have some kind of vision in your mind?  Denise: Yeah, that if this doesn’t work, I feel like I couldn’t take living like this the rest of my life.  tHeraPist: If it doesn’t work out, then what?  Denise: Well, I don’t really care what happens to me . . .  tHeraPist: Did you have something more concrete in mind?  Denise: Well, right this minute I don’t think I could commit suicide, but if I keep feeling this way for a long time, maybe I could. I don’t know, though— I’ve thought about suicide before, but I have never really thought about how I would do it. I know certain things stop me, like my kids. I think it would really hurt them and some other people, too, like my mother. My mom is in good health now, but she may need me someday. . . . Yeah, those are the two things that stop me, my children, and my mother.  tHeraPist: Now those are the reasons for not committing suicide. Now what are some of the reasons why you might want to, do you think?  Denise: Because sometimes it just feels so empty and hopeless. There’s nothing to look forward to—every day is the same. My life is such a waste, so why not just end it?   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  The therapist wanted Denise to feel as free as possible to discuss suicidal thoughts; thus, he tried hard to understand both the reasons for her hopelessness and the deterrents to suicide. After determining that she had no imminent plans to make an attempt, the therapist said that he would work with her to make some changes. He then asked her to select a small problem that they could work on together.  tHeraPist: Now are there any small things that you could do that would affect your life right away?  Denise: I don’t know. Well, I guess just calling my friend Diane in Florida. She called about a month ago and then again last week. Both times I told her I was busy and would call her back, but I haven’t. I’ve felt so down. I have nothing to say to her.  tHeraPist: Well, when she lived in the area, what kinds of things did you talk about?  Denise: We have kids about the same age, so we would talk about our kids. We both like to read and we used to go to a book club together—so we would talk about the books we were reading. Both of us liked art. We used to attend lectures at the museum during the week, so we would talk about art and the lectures. We would spend time making plans to do things together in our free time. It always was very interesting when I spent time and with her. We had so much in common. I do miss her.  tHeraPist: It sounds like you used to be involved in a number of interesting activities. What about now?  Denise: After my husband got sick and then my friends moved, I just stopped. I haven’t done any of those things in quite a while.  tHeraPist: What do you think about attending a lecture series now?  Denise: I don’t know.  tHeraPist: Well, what do you think about that idea?  Denise: It’s an OK idea, but it just seems like too much. I don’t think I’ll enjoy it . . . the way I feel . . . I don’t know.  tHeraPist: Would you be willing to test out that thought that you won’t be able to enjoy it now?  Denise: I don’t know . . . I guess so.  tHeraPist: Is that a “yes”?  Denise: Yes, but I don’t see how I’m going to get myself to do it.  tHeraPist: Well, how would you go about finding out about a lecture series?  Denise: You look online at the museum’s website to see what’s available.  tHeraPist: OK. Do you have a computer?  Denise: Yes.  tHeraPist: Is it working?  Denise: Yes.  tHeraPist: How do you feel about doing that?  Denise: I guess I could do that. . . . I’m so pathetic, I know what to do. I don’t need you to spell it out for me. Why didn’t I just do this before?  tHeraPist: Well, you probably had good reasons for not doing it before. Probably you were just so caught up in the hopelessness.  Denise: I guess so.  tHeraPist: When you are hopeless you tend to deny, as it were, or cut off possible options or solutions.  Denise: Right.  tHeraPist: When you get caught up in hopelessness then, there is nothing you can do. Is that what you think?  Denise: Yeah.  tHeraPist: So, then, rather than be down on yourself because you haven’t looked this up online before, why don’t we carry you right through?  This excerpt illustrates the process of graded tasks that is so important in the early stages of therapy with a depressed patient. The therapist asked the patient a series of questions to break down the process of attending a lecture series into smaller steps. Denise realized that she had known all along what to do, but, as the therapist pointed out, her hopelessness prevented her from seeing the options.  Denise: Taking this step is going to be hard for me.  tHeraPist: First steps are harder for everybody, but that’s why there is an old expression: “A journey of a thousand miles starts with the first step.”  Denise: That’s very true.  tHeraPist: It’s the first step that is so very important, and then you can ready yourself for the second step, and then the third step, and so on. Eventually, you build up some momentum, and each step begins to   Cognitive Therapy for Depression  follow more naturally. But first, all you have to do is take one small step. You don’t have to take giant steps.  Denise: Well, yeah, I can see that. I guess I was thinking every step was just as hard as the first. Maybe it will get easier.  In the second session, Denise reported success.  Denise: I checked online about the lecture series and I surprised myself. One actually sounded interesting, and I’m thinking that I might just register for it online. I really didn’t think any of those feelings were still there. I’m kind of looking forward to that next step.  At the end of the first session, the therapist helped Denise fill out the Weekly Activity Schedule for the coming week. The activities were quite simple, such as getting up and taking a shower, fixing meals, going out shopping, and checking out the lecture series online. Finally, the therapist asked Denise for feedback about the session and about her hopelessness.  tHeraPist: Do you have any reactions?  Denise: I’m still feeling down, but I’m also feeling a little better. It’s interesting that just the idea of looking at what lectures might be available is making me feel a little lighter. I even had the thought of calling Diane to talk over the options. . . . Is this a sign of better things to come?  tHeraPist: What do you think?  Denise: Maybe.  Session 2  In the second session, the therapist began by collaborating with Denise to set an agenda. Denise wanted to discuss the fact that she had not been attending to her bills or to her housework and was still spending a good part of the day alone in front of the TV; the therapist utilized this as an opportunity to discuss the issue of activity versus inactivity on the agenda. They then reviewed the previous homework. Denise had carried out all the scheduled activities and had also listed some of her negative thoughts in between sessions. Her BDI-II score had dropped somewhat. (Patients routinely fill out the BDI-II before each session, so that both patient and therapist can monitor the progress of treatment.)  Denise then shared her list of negative thoughts with the therapist. One concern was that she had expressed angry feelings about her husband during the first session.   Denise: I don’t like revealing things about myself, but you told me to write down my thoughts. So here it is. When I went to bed the night after of our first session, I thought about what I said to you, you know, about being angry at my husband. I was thinking that you probably think I am this really harsh and cold person. I mean, here my husband died this horrible death and I have this hard, insensitive reaction. I started thinking that now you probably feel really negatively toward me because of that statement and that you don’t want to work with me.  tHeraPist: I’m really glad you’re telling me these thoughts. Let me start by asking you who is having these negative thoughts?  Denise: You? Well, no. Actually, it’s me.  tHeraPist: Right. Do you think that someone like me might have another reaction to what you said?  Denise: I don’t know. I mean it is pretty harsh being angry at someone who had no control over what was happening.  The therapist then offered Denise an alternative perspective:   tHeraPist: Do you think that someone might react to your statements with empathy?  Denise: How could they?  tHeraPist: I imagine it would be very upsetting and annoying to have lost both your husband and your friends—all around the same time. Even though you love and care about all of them, feeling angry is understandable. It sounds like a basic human reaction to some very difficult life events.  Denise: Yeah, I guess that does make sense. Thanks.  This illustrates how a cognitive therapist can utilize events during the session to teach a patient to identify automatic thoughts and to consider alternative interpretations. In addition, the therapist provided a summary of a key theme he had identified from listening to Denise’s automatic thoughts about her husband and about therapy. The theme was her fear of being harshly judged and potentially punished for her statement (pu    CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  nitiveness schema). Cognitive therapists often identify  and begin to correct EMSs during the first phase of  treatment. More intensive work on changing schemas  in a later phase of treatment may be required to inocu   late against relapse. We elaborate on this process in the  next section of this chapter. In the segment that follows, the therapist explained  how he arrived at the conclusion that punitiveness was  an important schema for Denise.  tHeraPist: When you said that you thought I would have a negative opinion about you and not want to work with you because you said you felt angry at your husband, it sounded as though you were really concerned that you would be harshly judged and punished for your statements.  Denise: Yes, that’s right.  tHeraPist: I don’t want to make too much out of this at the moment, but you also said that after your friends had moved, you felt angry at them and judgmental of their decision. Even though you knew that each set of friends had to move for specific financial or health reasons and had been in the process of completing their moves over several years, part of you still felt very angry with them. You mentioned that you strongly believe that friends should be there for each other, especially in times of great need, and if a friend lets another friend down, that relationship should end. Is that right?  Denise: Right.  tHeraPist: So here, you largely have withdrawn from these important relationships and now you’re feeling quite lonely. The thought of talking to these friends again brings fears that they will now be angry and punitive with you for your reaction to them. You’re caught in a no-win situation. Is that right?  Denise: Yes, that sounds right.  tHeraPist: So one of the things that can really grab hold of you—and make you feel terrible—is this notion that people, including yourself, should behave in specific ways, and if they or you don’t behave the “right” way, then harsh punishment should result. Is that correct?  Denise: Yes, that sounds right. But hearing you say it makes me realize that it doesn’t really sound right.  tHeraPist: What do you mean?  Denise: It’s too extreme. It’s too harsh. People are  human and they have limitations, and they make mistakes sometimes.  tHeraPist: It’s good that you are starting to notice and evaluate these thoughts rather than just responding to them automatically. What this tells us is that you have to be alert for whenever you have the sense that either you or others should be strongly punished for not behaving in a specified way. The idea that people should not be cut a break, even under very difficult circumstances, may not work very well in real life with real people. You mentioned that both friends told you they felt terrible about leaving you at this time, and both have called you regularly since leaving the area. Do you think that if you begin to respond to and return their calls, they might react differently—in the same way that I reacted differently from what you expected?  Denise: Yes, that is very likely.  About halfway through the session, the therapist asked the patient for feedback thus far.  tHeraPist: Now, at this point, is there anything that we have discussed today that bothered you? Denise: That bothered me?  tHeraPist: Yeah.  Denise: I feel like I’m a bit of a freak.  tHeraPist: That is important. Can you . . .  Denise: Well, I’m trying not to feel that way, but I do.  tHeraPist: Well, if you are, you are. Why don’t you just let yourself feel like a freak and tell me about it?  Denise: Well, I’m feeling like I’m just so different from everyone else. Other people don’t seem to have my problems. They’re still happily married and carrying on with life. I just feel so different from everyone.  This comment led to identification of a third theme, the social isolation/alienation schema. Denise had been viewing herself as increasingly different for the past couple of years. By this point, however, she was beginning to catch on to the idea of answering her thoughts more rationally. After the therapist pointed out the negative thought in the preceding excerpt, the patient volunteered:  Denise: I know what to do with the thought “I’m a freak.”   Cognitive Therapy for Depression  tHeraPist: What are you going to do with it right this minute?  Denise: I am going to say to myself, “I’m not so different from other people. Other people have lost their mates. I’m not the only one. I’m just the first one in my group of friends. Eventually, they will all have the same situation as me. It’s just a part of life.” Seeing you for help doesn’t mean I’m a freak. You probably see lots of people and help them with problems like mine.  tHeraPist: Right.  The same automatic thoughts arose later in the session, when Denise noticed the therapist’s wedding ring. In the extended excerpt below, the therapist helped her set up an experiment to test the thought “I’m so different from him.”  tHeraPist: OK, now let’s just do an experiment and see if you yourself can respond to the automatic thought, and let’s see what happens to your feeling. See if responding rationally makes you feel worse or better.  Denise: OK. tHeraPist: OK. “I’m so different from him.” What is the rational answer to that? A realistic answer? Denise: You are wearing a wedding ring and that is different from me because I’m alone, without a mate.  tHeraPist: Yes. And?  Denise: And? . . . I don’t really know much about you, other than you’re married. I guess from what I do know, that information could also be viewed as a similarity. We both have gotten married and know what it’s like to be married. I assume that you’ve never lost a mate, but maybe that is not true. You may have lost a mate as well.  tHeraPist: So, is it that you’re different or that I’m different? Or is it that we just have different situations with respect to our mates at this point in time?  Denise: We just have different situations right now.  The preceding exchange demonstrates the use of reattribution. At first, Denise interpreted the therapist’s ring as evidence that they were very different. As a result of the guided discovery approach, she reattributed the difference to one of two factors: that either she or the therapist was different or that the situation with re   spect to mates was different for each. At the end of the experiment, Denise expressed satisfaction that she was finally recognizing this tendency to distort her appraisals.   Denise: Right now I feel glad. I’m feeling a little better that at least somebody is pointing these things out to me. I never realized I was so judgmental of myself and other people, and that I’m assuming I’m so different from everyone.  tHeraPist: So you feel good that you have made this observation about yourself?  Denise: Yes.  After summarizing the main points of the second session, the therapist assigned homework for the coming week: to fill out the Daily Record of Dysfunctional Thoughts (see Figure 7.4) and the Weekly Activity Schedule (with mastery and pleasure ratings; see Figure 7.3).  Session 3  By the beginning of the third session, Denise’s mood had visibly improved. She had registered for a lecture series at the museum and was looking forward to attending the first lecture. She also had called her friend Diane, with very positive results. She was catching negative and punitive thoughts toward others and herself and challenging these thoughts. The primary agenda item Denise chose to work on was “how I back away from other people,” an aspect of her unrelenting standards, punitiveness, and social isolation/alienation schemas.  Denise: I want to stop withdrawing from people. I want to be more accepting and engaged with others.  tHeraPist: What holds you back?  Denise: I guess I believe that I have to be a bit removed and strict in relation to others or they’ll just behave in whatever way they want. People have to know my rules and abide by them if they want to have a relationship with me.  The therapist continued probing to understand why Denise believed she had to have others adhere to such a strict set of rules to have a relationship. As the discussion progressed, it became obvious that, in the abstract,   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  she could see that such hard-and-fast rules were not necessarily conducive to having a good relationship— in fact, such rules sometimes put others off. But in reallife situations, Denise never felt she was wrong.  The therapist’s next task was to help Denise bring her rational thinking to bear on her distorted thinking in the context of a concrete event. At the therapist’s request, Denise then described a conversation with her friend Diane, and how her intolerance for Diane’s deviation from her rules created distance. Denise had wanted Diane and her husband to come for a visit the following summer. Diane, however, told her that their dog had been quite sick, and that if the dog was still alive she could not leave it. Denise thought this was ridiculous. She believed a relationship with a pet should never take precedence over a human relationship. This occurred when Denise actually had wanted and hoped to get closer to Diane again. The therapist helped her use logic to evaluate her maladaptive schema.  tHeraPist: You had the thought “I’m right to set the record straight with her. She can’t put me in second place to her dog. She can’t do that without consequence.” It seems likely that you believed that thought, and that you believed the thought was right. And since you believed that thought was right, you then felt you had to withdraw your affection from her if she didn’t abide by your wishes.  Denise: Right.  tHeraPist: Now, let’s look at it. Do you think that thought is correct?  Denise: Well, yes, it’s insulting.  tHeraPist: What’s insulting?  Denise: She’s putting her dog in a higher priority position.   tHeraPist: Have you ever had a pet?  Denise: No.  tHeraPist: Do you think that maybe Diane feels like her dog is a part of her family? Denise: I never thought of it that way.  tHeraPist: If you look at the situation from that perspective, how do you feel?  Denise: I feel like I’m being a little insensitive. . . . That’s not right. I’m not allowing for any other perspective. I’ve never had a pet, so I don’t really know what it’s like to have a pet. It’s not right for me to be  so judgmental of Diane. I need to be more understanding. I wasn’t very caring. I am actually behaving in a way that goes directly against my deepest values.  tHeraPist: So, according to your own values, was this right?  Denise: No, it’s not right. I wasn’t respecting her feelings. I was just demanding that she respect mine. That wasn’t right.  tHeraPist: OK, now this is one of the problems. If you want to get over this sense that you should never give in or bend your rules for others, one of the things you can do is look for this thought, “I’m right and you should have a negative consequence for your ‘wrong’ decision”—and refer back to this conversation we are having now and decide for yourself whether, indeed, you were right. Now, if every time you approach a conflict in a relationship and allow for the possibility that you might not fully understand, but really think underneath, “But I know I’m right,” you are going to feel put out, and then you are not going to want to engage with that person. Is that right?  Denise: Yeah, that sounds right.  tHeraPist: So we have to decide here and now. Do you indeed think that you are right to suspend your initial negative judgment to leave open the possibility of re   evaluating your reaction to her behavior?  Denise: Yes.  tHeraPist: Now, the next time you get the thought, “I’m right and I’m going to make sure this other person knows it,” how are you going to answer that thought?  Denise: If I’m right? But I’m not necessarily right. I need to consider the other person’s perspective. I need to try to understand them and then see if what I’m thinking fits.  tHeraPist: Now are you saying that because that is the correct answer, or because you really believe it?  Denise: No, I really believe it.  The therapist followed this discussion with a technique called “point–counterpoint” to help Denise practice rational responses to her automatic thoughts even more intensively. In this excerpt, the therapist expressed Denise’s own negative thinking as Denise tried to defend herself more rationally.   Cognitive Therapy for Depression  tHeraPist: Now I am going to be like the prosecuting attorney, and I’ll say, “Now I understand you let your friend violate one of your rules of friendship. Is that true?”  Denise: Yes.  tHeraPist: “Now it seems to me that that was a very bad thing for you to do.”  Denise: No, it wasn’t.  tHeraPist: “You don’t think it was?”  Denise: No, I should try to understand her perspective.  tHeraPist: “Well, you can sit there and say you should be more understanding, but I thought you said before that you wanted people to respect you.”  Denise: I do, but I also need to respect others.  tHeraPist: “I know, but now you are saying that you are going to let her get away with this. What’s next?”  Denise: What’s next can only be a better understanding of one another. We’ll feel closer.  tHeraPist: “But how can you feel closer if she’s not respecting your rules of friendship?”  Denise: Maybe my rules are not appropriate in this situation. I need to learn to be more understanding, flexible, and tolerant of some deviations from my rules.  tHeraPist: “But then you’ll lose control of the situation.”   Denise: No, that’s an exaggeration. I don’t need to control the whole situation. I can still decide what makes sense. I am still in control of what’s important.  tHeraPist: “How can that be?”  Denise: Because I can respect myself and respect my friend as well. I don’t have to turn everything into an either–or situation to try to make her see and do it my way. That just makes it difficult for her to get along with me, and I’ll lose out on the relationship in the long run if I keep on insisting that she either do it my way or we do nothing.  Finally, the therapist returned to the schema and  asked the patient how much she believed the new per   spective.  tHeraPist: If you’re flexible, you’ll lose control. Now do you believe that?  Denise: No.  tHeraPist: Do you believe it partially?  Denise: No. In fact, I’m more likely to lose control of any possibility of getting what I want if I’m so inflexible. It’s like I lose sight of the importance of the relationship when I get so stuck on thinking that I have to be in control and that the other person has to do it my way.  tHeraPist: OK, so right now, how much do you believe that?  Denise: Completely.  tHeraPist: 100%?  Denise: Yes.  tHeraPist: You are sure 100%, not 90 or 80%?  Denise: No, 100%.  For the remainder of Session 3, Denise and the therapist reviewed other instances in which she noticed that her standards were not flexible and felt the urge to be punitive when her rules were not met. The session ended with a summary of the main issues raised in the first three sessions.  Summary of Initial Sessions  In the first three sessions, the therapist laid the groundwork for the remainder of treatment. He began immediately by teaching Denise to identify her negative automatic thoughts. By doing this, the therapist began to understand her feelings of hopelessness and to explore her isolation. By identifying her thoughts in a variety of specific situations, he was able to deduce several key schemas that later proved central to Denise’s thinking: (1) unrelenting standards, (2) punitiveness, and  (3) social isolation/alienation. All appeared to be contributing to Denise’s social isolation and depression. The therapist made especially skillful use of Denise’s thoughts during the second therapy session to help her see that she was distorting evidence about the therapeutic interaction and coming to the inaccurate conclusion that the therapist would be judgmental and punitive with her, and withdraw positive feelings for her, in the same way that Denise tends to respond to others. Beyond identifying thoughts and distortions, the therapist guided Denise to take concrete steps to overcome her inactivity and withdrawal. He asked her to weigh the advantages and disadvantages of staying in the house all day watching TV; he broke down the task   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  of attending a lecture series at the museum into small, manageable steps; and he worked with her to develop an activity schedule to follow during the week.  Finally, the therapist employed a variety of strategies to demonstrate to Denise that she could test the validity of her thoughts, develop rational responses, and feel better. For example, during the course of the three sessions the therapist set up an experiment, used reattribution, offered alternative perspectives, and practiced the point–counterpoint technique.  One final point we want to emphasize is that the primary therapeutic mode was questioning. Most of the therapist’s comments were in the form of questions. This helped Denise to evaluate her own thoughts outside of the session and prevented her from feeling attacked by the therapist.  By the end of these initial sessions, Denise reported being more optimistic that her life could change.  Later Sessions  Denise continued to fill out the Daily Record of Dysfunctional Thoughts and gathered evidence that she could relax her standards and be more tolerant of others’ viewpoints and foibles. She discovered that she felt happier, both with herself and others, as a result.  The therapist set up several experiments with Denise to test a series of beliefs: that her friends would become punitive with her when she did not behave perfectly, and that her relationships would become unpleasant and undesirable if she relaxed any of her rigid standards regarding how others should behave in relationships.  Through graded tasks, Denise counteracted her tendency to withdraw by gradually approaching new and sometimes unfamiliar situations. When she noticed herself imposing her standards of behavior on others, or noticed in herself the urge to become punitive, Denise practiced more open and accepting behaviors (by asking open-ended questions that reflected back her understanding of others’ responses, and by inhibiting harsh and judgmental statements). She practiced tolerating the discomfort associated with these new behaviors until they began to feel more comfortable and natural.  When Denise terminated therapy, her BDI-II score was in the normal range. The symptom reduction phase of treatment was successfully completed in 20 sessions.  The next section describes and includes a case example of ST for chronic depression.  st for chroNic DePressioN  ST, developed by Young (1990/1999; Young et al., 2003), can be used with patients who present with recurrent depressive episodes; dysthymic disorder; early age onset of depression; early life trauma or adverse family relations (e.g., the loss of a parent in childhood; sexual, physical or verbal abuse, neglect, and overprotection); comorbid personality disorders; or a large number of EMSs (identified with the YSQ [Young, 2005]).Young and Klosko (1994) have published a self-help book to help patients better understand their schemas.  Beck and colleagues (1990, p. 10) have noted that  schemas are difficult to alter. They are held firmly in place by behavioral, cognitive, and affective elements. The therapeutic approach must take a tripartite approach. To take a strictly cognitive approach and try to argue patients out of their distortions will not work. Having the patients abreact within the session to fantasies or recollections will not be successful by itself. A therapeutic program that addresses all three areas is essential. A patient’s cognitive distortions serve as signposts that point to the schema.  As a result, ST represents a significant expansion of traditional CBT. It places more emphasis on early developmental patterns and origins, long-term interpersonal difficulties, the patient–therapist relationship, and emotion-focused or experiential exercises.  Case Study of Barbara: Chronic Depression  The second case study demonstrates the use of ST with a chronically depressed patient.  History and Presenting Problems  The patient “Barbara” was an extremely attractive, 46-year-old woman who had been married for the past 20 years to George, a functional alcoholic working on Wall Street in investment banking. It was the first marriage for both, but it had been extremely rocky throughout. Barbara had wanted children in the marriage but had been unable to conceive naturally. Although fertility treatments and adoption had been discussed, Barbara reported that George resisted following through on these options because he questioned her ability to be an adequate parent.  At the beginning of George and Barbara’s relationship, Barbara reported extremely strong sexual chem    Cognitive Therapy for Depression  istry. However, she stated that the chemistry had been erratic and often disappeared for long periods over the course of their relationship. She said that she had only felt real happiness with George in the first few months of the relationship, when he was extremely generous and attentive. Her decision to marry George was based on a feeling that they were meant for each other. They initially met at a high-end bar, where Barbara had worked as a cocktail waitress. Once their relationship was established, however, George continued to spend most of his free time in cocktail lounges without her, as she did not like to drink.  At the time she came in for her first interview, Barbara was spending most of her time in bed or watching TV. She rarely left the house except to go shopping. Outings with her mom or friends “to lift her spirits” often culminated in shopping sprees, followed by extended verbal berating by George, drunk upon his return home from the bar, because of what he perceived as her lack of taste, judgment, and intelligence regarding purchases. Barbara entered treatment because her husband told her that she “was driving him crazy with all her ridiculous behavior” and that she should “go get fixed.” Barbara acknowledged feeling very depressed. She stated that this latest episode of depression started after a particularly upsetting fight with her husband over adopting a child.  Barbara reported having mild to moderate depression most of her life, interspersed with multiple episodes of major depression. She first became aware of feeling moderately depressed around age 11. An only child, she initially described her childhood family as “fine.” Barbara described her mother as extremely attentive and devoted, a “very good mother who did everything for me.” Barbara stated that her mother lived for her, but she also remembered her mother occasionally falling into depressions. As early as age 6, she recalled that her mother was emotionally unavailable when depressed.  Barbara described her father as a workaholic who was almost never home. When he did come home, he was remote, preferring the solitude of his study over interacting with her and her mother. If Barbara tried to engage him as a child, he would upbraid her by calling her “an annoying simpleton” and demand that she leave him alone.  Barbara described her first major depressive episode, which occurred around age 16, after a breakup with her first serious boyfriend. Later episodes were triggered by other breakups and the fertility problems.  Barbara scored 29 on the BDI-II, placing her in the  severe range of depression. She also completed the third edition of the YSQ (Long Form; Young, 2005), and received very high scores on the Emotional Deprivation, Defectiveness, Abandonment, Dependence/ Incompetence, Entitlement, Failure, Subjugation, Approval Seeking, and Negativity/Pessimism schemas. Her Schema Mode Questionnaire (Young et al., 2008) indicated that she primarily functioned in the following modes: Detached Protector, Compliant Surrender, Punitive Parent, and Vulnerable Child.  At Barbara’s initial consultation, the therapist conducted additional assessment work through imagery (a standard assessment procedure for ST). During this assessment, Barbara was instructed: “Close your eyes and let your mind float to your earliest memories of your mother.” Barbara reported painful recollections of being 6 years old with her mother in bed, depressed and emotionally unavailable. She reported feeling very scared and lost at these times. The same imagery exercise was utilized in a subsequent session in which Barbara was asked to retrieve an early memory of her father. In this image, Barbara’s father displayed intolerant, demeaning, and rejecting behavior toward her as a child. During the exercise, she reported feeling unacceptable, ashamed of herself, and unwanted by him.  On the Multimodal Life History Inventory (Lazarus & Lazarus, 1991), a 15-page assessment tool covering a wide range of issues dealing with feelings, thoughts, behaviors, and a variety of other psychotherapeutic issues, Barbara reported her main problems as depression, being unhappy with herself, feeling empty and unloved, and feeling unappreciated. She also listed the following behaviors as applicable: procrastination, withdrawal, concentration difficulties, sleep disturbance, crying, and occasional outbursts of temper. She further indicated that she often felt sad, depressed, unhappy, hopeless, useless, and lonely. She endorsed the following statements: “I don’t know what to do with my life,” “Life is empty, a waste,” and “There is nothing to look forward to.”  Based on the initial interview, Barbara was diagnosed with major depressive disorder, recurrent episode on Axis I, and dependent personality disorder on Axis II.  Schema Mode Work  This section demonstrates the use of schema mode work—an important component of the ST approach— with Barbara.   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  The therapist shifted to ST because Barbara’s depression was not lifting with standard cognitive therapy. Although Barbara had learned how to challenge her automatic thoughts, identified and challenged her core beliefs with rational responses, and followed through on graded behavioral assignments to test her thoughts and beliefs, she never emotionally accepted the rational viewpoint, despite much concrete evidence. Barbara remained convinced that she was worthless, useless, and hopeless. Her EMSs continued to be stubbornly entrenched. The therapist decided that the next step would be to introduce emotion-focused exercises to access Barbara’s schemas on a deeper emotional level, utilizing the schema mode approach.  There are seven general steps in schema mode work:  (1) Increase awareness of modes by identifying and labeling modes with the patient; (2) explore the origins of modes in childhood and adolescence, and discuss their adaptive value; (3) link current problems and symptoms to the patient’s maladaptive modes; (4) uncover the advantages and disadvantages of each mode; (5) use imagery to access the Vulnerable Child mode; (6) conduct dialogues between modes; and (7) generalize the results from mode work in session to the patient’s life outside of sessions. The following sections illustrate each step of mode work in helping Barbara. Step 1: Increase Awareness of Modes by Identifying and Labeling Modes with the Patient  This first step helps both therapist and patient conceptualize the problems in terms of different parts of the self or modes. From the Schema Mode Questionnaire, the therapist already was aware that Barbara primarily functioned in the Detached Protector, Compliant Surrenderer, Punitive Parent, and Vulnerable Child modes. The session reveals how the therapist queries the patient, so that she can begin to recognize and differentiate these parts within herself.  Throughout this section, the patient is encouraged to label modes with terms that feel right—rather than simply applying generic terms from the Schema Mode Questionnaire. Patients are encouraged to find terms that best capture the thoughts, emotions, and/or behaviors associated with each mode. A primary goal with this first step is to help the patient observe these parts, and decenter him/herself from them. This step begins the process of interrupting the automaticity of the modes.  tHeraPist: I’m noticing in our sessions that sometimes you seem very sad and upset and critical of yourself, and other times you seem a bit distracted from what you’re feeling, like when you were telling me about the great pair of shoes that you found on your shopping trip.  BarBara: Yeah, I guess that’s true. Talking about my purchases makes me feel better.  tHeraPist: When you say “better,” what do you mean?  BarBara: I feel good.  tHeraPist: Like happy, peaceful, and content?  BarBara: I feel pleasure.  tHeraPist: In what way is it pleasurable?  BarBara: I feel pleasure when I look at pretty things with my mom or my friends, and I like buying those things. It takes my mind off of everything else.  tHeraPist: Like you’re temporarily distracted from other feelings?  BarBara: Yeah, that’s right.  tHeraPist: What are those other feelings?  BarBara: Just feeling real bad. I can’t stand those feelings.   tHeraPist: So, sometimes there is this one part of you that just wants distance from this other part of you that feels bad?  BarBara: Yes.  tHeraPist: Are there other things you do besides  shopping that help you distance from bad feelings?  BarBara: Well, yeah, I sleep a lot.  tHeraPist: Anything else?  BarBara: I watch TV, but TV doesn’t always work.  tHeraPist: This part of you that wants distance from  feeling bad—what could we call that part of you? BarBara: That part of me? I don’t know. I don’t know  what to call it.  tHeraPist: What does it feel like?  BarBara: It feels like I’m escaping.  tHeraPist: OK. So should we call that part “the Es   capist”?  BarBara: I guess so. . . . That sounds right.  tHeraPist: And the part of you that you’ve escaped  from—can you tell me more about that part of you?   Cognitive Therapy for Depression  BarBara: That part feels bad . . . really bad and terrible.   tHeraPist: Let me hear that part speak about those feelings.  BarBara: I’m just a bad person (Starts to cry.) ... I’m a useless good for nothing. I feel so hopeless. I don’t know what to do. I can’t figure anything out. I’m such a zero, such a failure. . . . Do we really have to talk about this?  tHeraPist: Barbara, I know that it feels bad to be in touch with this part of yourself, but if you can hang in there for just a bit, it will help me to understand why you’re feeling so bad. Do you know what this part of you wants?  BarBara: I want to feel good.  tHeraPist: What do you think would help you feel better?  BarBara: I don’t know. I really don’t know. I just want you to fix me. My husband is right. I am a ridiculous person.  tHeraPist: It sounds like there is one part of you that feels really awful. It sounds like this part is listening and taking in what your husband says about you— that “you’re ridiculous.” I want you to hold back on agreeing with your husband, and I want to hear more about this part of you that feels awful—the part of you who wants everything fixed. That part . . . do you feel it?  BarBara: Yes, I feel it.  tHeraPist: Tell me more. What are the things you want to fix?  BarBara: I don’t know. I just want to feel good about myself, proud of myself, but I just don’t. I want to have a child, but my husband doesn’t think I can handle it. He’s probably right. I need so much help with just everyday living. I don’t know how to handle anything.  tHeraPist: So this part of you, this part that feels awful and helpless but also wants to feel better, what could we call this part?  BarBara: I don’t know. What do you think?  tHeraPist: Well, what does it feel like?  BarBara: It feels helpless—ashamed and helpless.  tHeraPist: How old do you feel when you’re in touch with this part of yourself?  BarBara: I feel young, very young.  Therapist: Do you want to call that part “Ashamed Little Barbara” [Vulnerable Child mode with associated EMSs of Defectiveness, Dependence/Incompetence, and Enmeshment/Undeveloped Self]?  BarBara: Sure.  tHeraPist: OK. And now this other part—the one that is agreeing with your husband and calling yourself ridiculous . . .  BarBara: Well, I am ridiculous and silly. I can’t cope with anything.  tHeraPist: Before you agree with that part, I want you to just notice how that part sounds. How does that part sound to you? Does it sound critical?  BarBara: Yes, but I deserve it. I’m so useless.  tHeraPist: It sounds like you are having a hard time just listening to that part without automatically agreeing with it?  BarBara: Yeah, I guess that’s true.  tHeraPist: So, what do you want to call that part?  BarBara: I don’t know. . . . But . . . you’re not going to tell me what to call it, are you?  tHeraPist: Right.  BarBara: OK. I guess “the Critic” [Punitive Parent mode with associated EMSs of defectiveness and subjugation].  In this part of the session, the therapist has helped Barbara begin to recognize and label the modes: the Detached Protector as “the Escapist,” the Punitive Parent as “the Critic,” and the Vulnerable Child as “Ashamed Little Barbara.” Although not fully illustrated here, the therapist also used a similar sequence of questions to help Barbara identify other modes. From this portion of the session, it is clear that “the Critic” (Punitive Parent mode) is generating a tremendous amount of negative affect in Barbara. Barbara’s only apparent way to cope with the onslaught of punitive statements from this mode is “the Escapist” (Detached Protector mode), in which she sleeps away much of her life. Otherwise, Barbara’s primary experience of herself rests with “Ashamed Little Barbara” (the Vulnerable Child mode), where she feels defective, useless, hopeless, and helpless.   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  Step 2: Explore Origins of Modes in Childhood and/or Adolescence  This section illustrates how the therapist helps Barbara recognize the origins of these modes. In addition, the therapist assesses the strength of her Healthy Parent mode.  tHeraPist: Does “the Critic” sound like anyone else you know or have known in your life?  BarBara: Yes, it sounds like George.  tHeraPist: Anyone else?  BarBara: Yeah, it also sounds like my Dad . . . just like my Dad.  tHeraPist: In what way?  BarBara: My Dad used to talk like that to me . . . whenever I tried to get his attention.  tHeraPist: How old were you?  BarBara: Young, very young . . . 3 or 4 . . . as far back as I remember.  tHeraPist: Can you close your eyes and try to let yourself feel like that young child again with your dad?  BarBara: (Closes her eyes.)  tHeraPist: Tell me what’s happening.  BarBara: He’s yelling at me because I pulled on his coat jacket.  tHeraPist: Let me hear what he’s saying to you.  BarBara: “Stop it, you little pest. You’re such a simpleton. Can’t you find anything better to do than pull on my coat? Get out of here!”  tHeraPist: And how are you feeling as he is yelling these things at you?  BarBara: I feel stupid, like I’m a jerk. I’m nothing—a useless pest, an annoyance.  tHeraPist: Does it feel like he’s right, or are you angry at him?  BarBara: No. I don’t feel angry. I just feel bad (starts to cry)—I’m just bad.  tHeraPist: So there is part of you agreeing with him, punishing yourself—like your dad—thinking you’re bad.  BarBara: Yeah.  tHeraPist: And where is your mom?  BarBara: She’s telling me to shush and leave him  alone. She says he’s tired from working so hard all day.  tHeraPist: And what are you thinking and feeling when she says this?  BarBara: I’m thinking that I’m a terrible person.  tHeraPist: So, you’re getting the message that you are the problem from both of your parents. It feels like both parents are saying you deserve this harsh treatment, and there is a part of you that believes them— you deserve to be punished because you’ve bothered your father. Is that right?  BarBara: Yes, that’s right.  tHeraPist: So there is also this punishing part of you, this part that accepts that message from your parents— this punitive message that you’re bad and a  problem, a pest.  BarBara: Yes.  tHeraPist: What is your mom doing?  BarBara: After a while, she takes me out. She sees I’m sad and wants me to feel better. She tries to make me feel better by giving me something, like a toy, or something to eat. A lot of times she takes me out shopping and buys me something special.  tHeraPist: And how do you feel when she does this?  BarBara: I feel a little better while we are out . . . but later, I feel bad. I still feel shame because I’m so bad and useless.  tHeraPist: So there is still the “Ashamed Little Bar   bara” underneath?  BarBara: Yes. That is it.  tHeraPist: If you could have rewritten the script for  your family, a family with ideal parents, what would you have happen?  BarBara: I have no idea. They weren’t bad. They were doing their best.  tHeraPist: Yes, but what if you had had a daddy who was excited to see you at the end of his work day . . . a daddy who enjoyed coming home to his family . . . who found pleasure in talking with you and getting to know you, and played with you?  BarBara: You mean . . . a daddy who loved me?  tHeraPist: Yes. I mean a daddy who was able to show you his love through all sorts of actions.  BarBara: Wow . . . that would have been so different.   Cognitive Therapy for Depression  tHeraPist: Do you feel any angry feelings at him now as you think about how he spoke to you—this very young child simply trying to get his attention?  BarBara: No, I was in his way. He worked hard. I had to leave him alone.  tHeraPist: What you just said—does that sound like anyone you know?  BarBara: Yes. It sounds like my mother.  tHeraPist: And what do you think of that now?  BarBara: Well. She was just trying to keep the peace and fill in for him.  tHeraPist: But what about you, this sweet innocent little child simply wanting what all children want— love and attention from her father?  BarBara: It’s sad. I feel sad for me.  tHeraPist: Right. It is sad for you. You are a child doing what all children do—children try to get their parents’ attention; children want to know they are loved, valued, appreciated. You were no different from any other child, but what is happening here?  BarBara: (Cries.)  tHeraPist: No one’s calling your dad on his horrible behavior toward you. Everyone’s accommodating him and speaking to you as if you are the problem, when all that you are doing is what every young child does. And yet your father and your mother are responding as if you are the problem.  BarBara: Yeah. You’re right. Why did they do that?  tHeraPist: Do you think there was something wrong with you, or do you think there was something wrong with the way they were behaving with you?  BarBara: The way they were behaving with me. . . . It’s a problem with the way they treated me.  tHeraPist: Right. They are the ones who should feel shame about their behavior. There was nothing shameful about you or your behavior.  In the preceding section, the therapist helps Barbara to realize the origin of “the Critic,” the part of herself that has accepted her “Punitive Parent” message that she was the problem. The therapist’s questions and comments also help Barbara realize that the problem was actually her parents’ behavior toward her rather than an inherent defect in herself.  The therapist now turns Barbara’s attention to the origin of “the Escapist” mode—the part that was seek   ing relief from these terrible feelings about herself as a child. The therapist also helps Barbara become more aware that “the Escapist” was only able to provide short-term relief.  tHeraPist: Now when you had this bad feeling about yourself as a child, the “Ashamed Little Barbara” feeling, how did you cope with that feeling? What did you do?  BarBara: A lot of the time, I did nothing. I just sat on my bed in my room daydreaming, wishing everything could be different. I would fantasize being a star, a beautiful person that everyone adored. People would dote on me and give me expensive gifts and clothes that made me look even more beautiful. Sometimes when my mom would take me out and buy me things, it kind of felt like she was making this dream come true.  tHeraPist: Is that “the Escapist” part of you trying to help you feel better?  BarBara: Yes, it definitely is.  tHeraPist: And then what would happen?  BarBara: I would feel better, especially as I got older and I got a lot of attention from the way I looked, but eventually my dad always would start yelling again. I remember him yelling at my mom for “spending too much money” simply to turn me into “a pretty Bimbo.”  tHeraPist: So the efforts to feel better eventually backfired. BarBara: Right. I never felt very good for long. I never felt good inside.  Step 3: Link Current Problems and Symptoms to Maladaptive Modes  In this section, the therapist asks Barbara questions that help her to recognize how these modes that developed in childhood are still operating in the present. Barbara begins to connect these modes with why she is feeling so depressed, and she begins to see the repetitive patterns in her life.  tHeraPist: Let’s look at what is happening now in your life. Do you recognize any relationship between what we have been talking about—these different parts of you—and how you are thinking and feeling about yourself and coping with your life now?   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  BarBara: Yeah, I’m still trying to feel good—or just not feel—by being “the Escapist.” When I go on these shopping sprees and let my mom and my friends dress me up, it still doesn’t work any better than it ever did. And sleeping all the time doesn’t work either.  tHeraPist: What do you mean?  BarBara: Well, I only feel good for a short while. Then, instead of my dad coming home, now I’m coming home to George or he’s coming home to me. George is just as mean and unavailable as my Dad.  tHeraPist: And then what happens?  BarBara: I start to feel really bad again, really depressed. I feel like I’m not worth spending time with, like I’m boring and useless. I’m saying all sorts of bad things about myself and I agree with everything George says about me. I’m my worst “Critic.” In the end, I still feel like the same old “Ashamed Little Barbara” inside who never ever really feels better. Then, I just want to go to sleep to get away from it all. I’m finally starting to see it more clearly, going around and around the same old circle—nothing has changed and nothing changes. I’ve been miserable my whole life.  tHeraPist: But there is one very important change.  BarBara: What is that?  tHeraPist: You’re starting to see and understand what’s been happening for a long time instead of just being on the treadmill without any awareness.  Step 4: Uncover Advantages and Disadvantages of Each Mode  The therapist now begins to ask Barbara questions regarding the advantages and disadvantages of listening and acting on these different parts of herself. This helps Barbara to gain more distance from the modes and increases her awareness of a choice in how she responds.  tHeraPist: When these different parts of yourself or modes developed, they served a purpose. Why don’t we talk about each of them and explore their advantages and disadvantages, both in the past and present? Let’s start with “the Escapist.”  BarBara: Well, that part lets me feel good—or at least not feel bad.  tHeraPist: For how long?  BarBara: For a while.  tHeraPist: And in the long run? Does that part help you feel better?  BarBara: No, not really. I can’t really escape feeling bad. I can’t say I feel any better in the long run.  tHeraPist: So, is there any advantage to this part of  you—“the Escapist”?  BarBara: I’m mixed about it.  tHeraPist: Sure. I can understand that. If you don’t  know of any other way to feel better, any relief is better than no relief at all.  BarBara: Yeah.  tHeraPist: But sometimes it’s good to let yourself feel bad because when you let yourself stay in touch with your feelings, you often can begin to recognize what feels better in the long run . . . like finding activities that are truly interesting to you, or that give you a sense of accomplishment and purpose, or that bring out a feeling of deep enjoyment.  BarBara: That makes sense, but I have no idea how to find those things.  tHeraPist: Well, that is something we can work on together.  BarBara: That sounds good.  tHeraPist: And what about “the Critic”? Is there any advantage to listening to “the Critic”?  BarBara: That part tells me what’s wrong with me.  tHeraPist: And what does “the Critic” say is wrong with you?  BarBara: That I’m stupid and silly, useless and annoying.   tHeraPist: Do you think “the Critic” is right?  BarBara: Of course.  tHeraPist: But if you put the words of “the Critic” back in your dad’s mouth and listen to him speak to little 3-year-old Barbara as she excitedly greets him coming home from work, what do you think?  BarBara: When you put it that way, I think he’s a jerk. I mean, what does he think he is doing to this poor little girl? What’s wrong with him?  tHeraPist: Right. So is there any advantage to listening to these critical words?  BarBara: No . . . no, definitely not.   Cognitive Therapy for Depression  tHeraPist: Are there any disadvantages of listening to “the Critic”?  BarBara: Yes. It’s getting clearer now why that part is making me feel so bad. I have to stop listening to that part. When I accept what my dad said as the truth, I feel bad, really bad, about myself.  tHeraPist: You mean it brings up that “Ashamed Little Barbara” feeling?  BarBara: Yes.  tHeraPist: And what about her? What does she need?  BarBara: She needs to feel good about herself. She needs to hear good things about herself. She needs someone to listen to her and pay attention to her—to love her.  tHeraPist: I agree.  Step 5: Use Imagery to Access the Vulnerable Child Mode  The therapist now begins to engage Barbara in the Vulnerable Child mode. By accessing this mode, the therapist and patient can begin to work on the core schemas that are part of “Ashamed Little Barbara.”  tHeraPist: I know it’s sometimes unpleasant to let yourself be in touch with “Ashamed Little Barbara,” but would you be willing to go there, so that we can get to know that part of you to find out what you need to truly feel better and to find out what is getting in the way?  BarBara: I guess . . . (Closes her eyes.)  tHeraPist: Tell me what you are feeling and thinking right now.  BarBara: It’s the same old feelings—I feel bad . . . and useless. (Visibly begins to look upset, then opens her eyes.)  tHeraPist: Can you go back there to “Ashamed Little Barbara,” can you let yourself feel her?  BarBara: OK. (Closes her eyes again.)  tHeraPist: Where are you? What are you doing?  BarBara: I’m sitting on my bed in my room. My daddy just told me to go away.  tHeraPist: And how are you feeling?  BarBara: Awful.  tHeraPist: And what do you want?  BarBara: I want my mommy to come in and make me feel better.  tHeraPist: Where is she?  BarBara: She’s in her room, lying on her bed. She doesn’t feel good either.  tHeraPist: If you could bring in a healthy mommy to be with you right now, what would she say to you? Let me hear her speak to Little Barbara.  BarBara: You know he’s just tired from work. If you just leave him alone, everything will be all right.  tHeraPist: Let me hear what Little Barbara thinks about this?  BarBara: That doesn’t help much. I still feel upset and bad.  tHeraPist: How about if I come in to help?  BarBara: OK.  tHeraPist: You are such a loving little girl. So many fathers would relish coming home to such a greeting from their little girl. Something is wrong with your daddy. Why doesn’t he recognize that you’re offering him something that is precious—so special? . . . How does little Barbara feel as she hears this?  BarBara: Better.  tHeraPist: Let me talk to your father now.  BarBara: OK.  tHeraPist: How can you speak to your daughter that way? She’s done nothing but welcome you home with joy and love. And look at how you are responding. Your response to her is completely inappropriate. You are so closed off and removed from everything. What is going on with you? Why can’t you see that you have a beautiful, creative, and loving daughter? Barbara does not deserve this type of treatment. I’m not going to stand for this and let you hurt her anymore. . . . How does little Barbara feel as she hears this?  BarBara: A lot better. I wish my mom had spoken to my dad that way. But you know, if you really tried to say anything like that to him, he wouldn’t listen. He never listened to my mom. He’d probably just say something mean to you and then shut the door.  tHeraPist: OK. Well if that happened, what would you want to happen next?  BarBara: I don’t know.  tHeraPist: Let me step in again and say this to him   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  through the door. Whether or not you choose to listen, there is a limit, a limit as to how long we will stay here for you. If you choose not to be here for us, we will not stay here for you.  BarBara: I don’t think he’ll change.  tHeraPist: Then you and I, together, will leave him and create a better life.  BarBara: Is that really possible?  tHeraPist: Do you want to make it happen?  BarBara: Yes, but what about him? He’ll be so lonely.  tHeraPist: Who will be lonely?  BarBara: He will, unless we stay.  tHeraPist: But if you stay, who will be lonely then?  BarBara: Me.  tHeraPist: Do you want to continue to be there for someone who chooses not to be there for you?  BarBara: Well, no—no, that isn’t right.  tHeraPist: So what do you want to do?  BarBara: I want to leave.  In this part of the session, the therapist has taken on the “Healthy Parent” mode for Barbara because she does not have a strong template for this mode. This is one example of what is meant by “limited reparenting.” In this role, the therapist temporarily steps in to support the client in relation to unmet basic needs for safety; stability or predictability; love, nurturance, and attention; acceptance and praise; empathy; realistic limits; and validation of feelings and needs. The therapist also counters and challenges any unreasonable messages or beliefs that such needs should remain unfulfilled. As she begins to feel safer and more protected by the “Healthy Parent” through this work, “Little Barbara” no longer feels so ashamed of herself.  Step 6: Conduct Dialogues between Modes  Once patients begin to internalize the Healthy Parent mode demonstrated by the therapist, their own Healthy Adult mode becomes stronger. The patient’s Healthy Adult mode can now actively challenge and combat the Punitive Parent mode, thereby supporting, protecting, and healing the Vulnerable Child, with the help of the therapist.  The therapist now addresses the Escapist, or Detached Protector, mode. In the segment that follows,  the therapist sets up a dialogue between the Vulnerable Child and Escapist modes.  tHeraPist: How about having “Little Barbara” talk with “the Escapist” about things that she really enjoys?   BarBara: OK . . . but how do we do that?  tHeraPist: First, I want you to sit on this side of the couch. When you’re on this side of the couch, I want you to let yourself get in touch with and speak for “Little Barbara.” Have “Little Barbara” talk about all those things that interest her—those things that interest and excite her and help her feel alive. And then, I want you to get up and sit on the other side of the couch. When you’re on this side of the couch, I want you to let yourself get in touch with and speak for “the Escapist.” We’ll go back and forth between those two parts of yourself to see what comes out. I’ll help out “Little Barbara” if she needs me.  BarBara: [as “Little Barbara”] You know, I once made a dress at school, and I noticed that I really liked sewing. It was a really simple pattern, nothing special, but I had so much fun making it. I think I might want to take a class to try sewing again.  [as “the Escapist”] Why do you want to do that? If it doesn’t turn out, you’ll just feel bad about yourself. People might think you’re ridiculous at this age, trying to learn to sew. Why take the chance that you’ll feel bad or stupid? Why don’t you just lie down and forget about it?  [as “Little Barbara”] But I might like it. If I don’t start trying the things that I think I might enjoy, I’ll never know what I like or what makes me happy . . . If I keep listening to you, I’ll do nothing but sleep away the rest of my life. I want to have a life.  [as “the Escapist”] I don’t know if it’s worth the risk of feeling bad.  [as “Little Barbara”] Even if I feel bad at first, it will only be temporary. Either I’ll get good at sewing or I can find something else that I’m good at. I’ll eventually find something if I just keep at it.  [as “the Escapist”] Well OK, suit yourself.  [as “Little Barbara”] I will.   Cognitive Therapy for Depression  At this point, the therapist is focused on helping Barbara discover what gives her an inner sense of joy and accomplishment. This task is difficult for Barbara because she spent so many of her early years dependent on her mother, not developing any special skills or talents, and surrendering to what others wanted her to be. Nevertheless, as previous segment illustrates, Barbara has begun to recognize the importance of trying out new activities that interest her, in spite of the temporary discomfort she may feel about the possibility of failing and feeling stupid again. The final step in therapy is to take these lessons she has learned in the sessions and integrate them into her everyday life experiences.  Step 7: Generalize Results from Mode Work to Real Life  Barbara decided to enroll in one sewing class and surprised herself by doing quite well. She then decided to take two more classes—a more advanced sewing class and a course in costume design. Following these classes, she started to volunteer for a local theater group, working on costumes. Barbara received much attention, praise, and appreciation from her teachers and theater friends. At this point in treatment, Barbara commented to her therapist, “You know, I think this is the first time I have ever really felt good and proud of myself.”  As Barbara’s confidence and her network of friends grew, she became less accepting and less tolerant of George’s neglectful and demeaning behaviors toward her. She also became increasingly annoyed with her mother’s pattern of excusing George’s behavior for the sake of “being financially comfortable.” This was in stark contrast to Barbara’s unquestioning acceptance of her relationship with George at the beginning of treatment.   As she began to see parallels between how she felt with George and how she felt as a child with her parents, Barbara began to question whether this was a healthy marriage for her. She recognized that many of George’s behaviors were damaging to her, just as her parents’ behaviors had been. Although Barbara still wanted to adopt a child, she began questioning George’s ability to be a good parent.  The following vignette from a later session in Barbara’s treatment illustrates how much healthier and assertive she has become in relation to George:  BarBara: I’m noticing that when George speaks to me in such a condescending tone, I feel like a little girl  with my father again. I don’t want this. I want to be treated with love and respect, and as an equal. It isn’t right for me to accept his behavior—being ignored and demeaned by someone who is supposed to love me.  tHeraPist: So what do you want to do?  BarBara: I think I’m ready to confront George about his drinking and abusive behavior. I can’t even imagine adopting a child and bringing that child into our home if he continues to behave this way.  tHeraPist: What do you want to happen?  BarBara: I want him to stop drinking and start treating me with love and respect.  tHeraPist: And if he doesn’t? Then what?  BarBara: I guess I’ll leave him and seek a divorce.  tHeraPist: And how will that be for you—in the worst case scenario you might imagine?  BarBara: In the worst case . . . you know, I think I’ll be OK. I mean, I have my own life now. I have my own friends. And I have you, if things really get rough.  tHeraPist: I’ll be here for you whenever you need my support.  BarBara: Yeah, I think I’ll be OK.  At this point in treatment, Barbara has fully incorporated the Healthy Adult mode and has healed the most damaging schemas that had been part of her Vulnerable Child mode. Along with these changes, Barbara’s depression went into full remission. Soon after this session, Barbara confronted her husband. Despite couple therapy, George refused to make any changes, and Barbara filed for divorce.  Barbara did experience one relapse of major depression as her divorce was finalized. “Ashamed Little Barbara” and “the Escapist” temporarily returned during this period. Barbara, however, was able to recognize the reappearance of the Punitive Parent mode and successfully overcame it with her now stronger Healthy Adult mode. She was able to empathize with and forgive herself, and to mourn the lost opportunity to have her own family. She decided to go back to school and succeeded in becoming a certified teacher at the high school level, teaching costume design and drama in the theater department. She also developed a lasting relationship with a caring, emotionally available man who shared her passion for theater. Barbara’s chronic   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  depression lifted, and she has, for the most part, been symptom free since.  coNclusioN  Evidence demonstrating the efficacy of cognitive therapy in the treatment of unipolar and bipolar depression continues to mount. Adolescents, adults, and geriatric patients have all been shown to benefit from cognitive therapy.  Cognitive therapy helps patients understand the relationships among their thoughts, behaviors, and feelings. Cognitions are “put to the test” by examining evidence, setting up in vivo experiments, weighing advantages and disadvantages, trying graded tasks, and employing other intervention strategies. Through this process, patients begin to view themselves and their problems more realistically, to feel better, to change their maladaptive behavior patterns, and to take steps to solve real-life difficulties. These changes take place as a direct result of carefully planned, self-help homework assignments—one of the hallmarks of cognitive treatment. Cognitive therapy reduces symptoms by helping patients to identify and modify automatic thoughts, and the behaviors associated with them.  An expansion of cognitive therapy called schema therapy has been developed to deal with the deeper psychological structures that predispose patients to chronic depression. After utilizing interventions aimed at initial symptom reduction, a great deal of subsequent attention and effort are directed toward identifying and modifying the underlying schemas and modes that often predispose individuals to chronic depression.  Following a thorough assessment, an extensive change component is implemented. During this phase of treatment, patients come to understand their own schemas and modes, their developmental origins, and how these dysfunctional schema patterns are triggered, reinforced, and maintained.  Throughout the treatment, cognitive therapists maintain a collaborative alliance with their patients. They are very active in structuring sessions, yet go to considerable lengths to help patients reach conclusions on their own. Cognitive therapists serve as guides, helping patients maneuver through a labyrinth of dysfunctional cognitions and life patterns. As a result, patients develop the psychological tools they need to become more proactive in making the cognitive, affective, interper   sonal, and behavioral changes that serve to minimize future episodes of depression.  notes  1. Some researchers have found it useful to differentiate between “relapse” (the return of symptoms within 6 months after termination of treatment) and “recurrence” (a whole new episode of depression, occurring at least 12 months after treatment has ended; Gelder, 1994; see also Overholser, 1998). However, this distinction has not been uniformly incorporated into the literature. 2. Reported relapse rates for patients treated with medication have varied depending on the definition of “relapse,” the duration of the follow-up period, and the severity of depression within the patient population (Williams, 1997). Because of these differences, some of the estimates have ranged from 34 to 92% (Frank, 1996; Overholser, 1998; Versiani, 1998; Williams, 1997), though lower rates have also been reported (Keller & Boland, 1998). 3. The book by Young (1990/1999) cited here and throughout the chapter, Cognitive Therapy for Personality Disorders: A Schema-Focused Approach, refers to the third edition. However, the ideas expressed were developed in 1990, for the original edition. Similarly, the Young Schema Questionnaire was developed in 1990, then reprinted in the third edition. 4. Currently, the concept of a schema domain is not a component of schema theory. Although early factor-analytic research supported the grouping of 18 EMSs into five broader domains, later studies have been inconsistent regarding how schemas cluster together, and some domains have not been supported at all. Nevertheless, we have included research studies that focus on these five domains because the findings do shed light on the relationship between schemas and other constructs. We are in the process of reviewing all of the research available so that we can reexamine the question of how schemas cluster together. 5. For the remainder of the chapter, we use the term “schema” to refer specifically to Young’s “early maladaptive schemas.” 6. Many cognitive therapists also focus on “underlying assumptions,” which represent cognitions that are “deeper” than automatic thoughts but less central than schemas or core beliefs. Underlying assumptions are considered conditional beliefs, whereas most schemas are unconditional. In our own work, we have not found this distinction to be necessary in working with most patients. Thus, conditional and unconditional beliefs that are enduring and pervasive can be merged into the broader construct of a schema.  Cognitive Therapy for Depression  referenCes  Albon, J. S., & Jones, E. E. (2003). Validity of controlled clinical trials of psychotherapy: Findings from the NIMH Treatment of Depression Collaborative Research Program. American Journal of Psychiatry, 159(5), 775–783.  American Psychiatric Association. (1987). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (3rd ed., rev.). Washington, DC: Author.  American Psychiatric Association. (1994). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (4th ed.). Washington, DC: Author.  American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.). Arlington, VA: Author.  Antonuccio, D. O., Danton, W. G., & DeNelsky, G. Y. (1995). Psychotherapy versus medication for depression: Challenging the conventional wisdom with data. Professional Psychology: Research and Practice, 26(6), 574–585.  Antonuccio, D. O., Thomas, M., & Danton, W. G. (1997). A cost-effectiveness analysis of cognitive behavior therapy and fluoxetine (Prozac) in the treatment of depression. Behavior Therapy, 28, 187–210.  Arnow, B. A., Manber, R., Blasey, C., Klein, D. N., Blalock,  J. A., Markowitz, J. C., et al. (2003). Therapeutic reactance as a predictor of outcome in the treatment of chronic depression. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 71(6), 1025–1035. Bailleux, S., Romo, L., Kindynis, S., Radtchenko, A., & Debray, Q. (2008). Study of the bonds between early maladaptive schemas and strategies of coping (among alcoholdependent patients and depressed patients). Journal de Therapie Comportementale et Cognitive, 18(1), 19–25.  Ball, J. R., Mitchell, P. B., Corry, J. C., Skillecorn, A., Smith, M., & Malhi, G. S. (2006). A randomized controlled trial of cognitive therapy for bipolar disorder: Focus on longterm change. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 67, 277–286.  Barber, J. P., & DeRubeis, R. J. (1989). On second thought: Where the action is in cognitive therapy for depression. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 13(5), 441–457.  Barlow, D. H., & Hofmann, S. G. (1997). Efficacy and dissemination of psychological treatments. In D. M. Clark &  C. G. Fairburn (Eds.), Science and practice of cognitive behaviour therapy (pp. 95–117). Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. Barnhofer, T., Crane, C., Hargus, E., Amarasinghe, M., Winer, R., & Williams, J. M. (2009). Mindfulness-based cognitive therapy as a treatment for chronic depression: A preliminary study, Behaviour Research and Therapy, 47(5), 366–373.  Basco, M. R., & Rush, A. J. (1996). Cognitive-behavioral therapy for bipolar disorder. New York: Guilford Press. Beck, A. T. (1967). Depression: Causes and treatment. Phil   adelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.  Beck, A. T. (1976). Cognitive therapy and the emotional disorders. New York: International Universities Press.  Beck, A. T. (1988). Love is never enough. New York: Harper & Row.  Beck, A. T., & Alford, B. A. (2009). Depression: Causes and treatment. Philadephia: University of Pennsylvania Press.  Beck, A. T., Freeman, A., & Associates. (1990). Cognitive therapy of personality disorders. New York: Guilford Press.  Beck, A. T., Rush, A. J., Shaw, B. F., & Emery, G. (1979). Cognitive therapy of depression. New York: Guilford Press.  Beck, J. S. (2011). Cognitive therapy: Basics and beyond (2nd ed.). New York: Guilford Press.  Bellino, S., Zizza, M., Rinaldi, C., & Bogetto, F. (2007). Combined therapy of major depression with concomitant borderline personality disorder: Comparison of interpersonal and cognitive psychotherapy. Canadian Journal of Psychiatry, 52(11), 718–725.  Berger, T., Hammerli, K., Gubser, N., Andersson, G., & Caspar, F. (2011). Internet-based treatment of depression: A randonmized controlled trial comparing guided with unguided self-help. Cognitive Behavioral Therapy, 40(4), 251–266.  Berndt, E. R., Koran, L. M., Finkelstein, S. N., Gelenberg, A. J., Kornstein, S. G., Miller, I. M., et al. (2000). Lost human capital from early-onset chronic depression. American Journal of Psychiatry, 157, 940–947.  Beutler, L. E., Scogin, F., Kirkish, P., Schretlen, D., Corbishley, A., Hamblin, D., et al. (1987). Group cognitive therapy and alprazolam in the treatment of depression in older adults. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 55(4), 550–556.  Bhar, S. S., Gelfand, L. A., Schmid, S. P., Gallop, R., DeRubeis, R. J., Hollon, S. D., et al. (2008). Sequence of improvement in depressive symptoms across cognitive therapy and pharmacotherapy. Journal of Affective Disorders, 110 (1–2), 161–166.  Biggs, M. M., & Rush, A. J. (1999). Cognitive and behavioral therapies alone or combined with antidepressant medication in the treatment of depression. In D. S. Janowsky (Ed.), Psychotherapy indications and outcomes (pp.121– 172). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press.  Blackburn, I. M., Bishop, S., Glen, A. I. M., Whalley, L. J., & Christie, J. E. (1981). The efficacy of cognitive therapy in depression: A treatment trial using cognitive therapy and pharmacotherapy, each alone and in combination. British Journal of Psychiatry, 139, 181–189.  Bledsoe, S. E., & Grote, N. K. (2006). Treating depression during pregnancy and the postpartum: A preliminary meta-analysis. Research on Social Work Practice, 16(2), 109–120.  Bockting, C. L. H., Schene, A. H., Spinhoven, P., Koeter, M.  W. J., Wouters, L. F., Huyser, J., et al. (2005). Preventing  CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  relapse/recurrence in recurrent depression with cognitive therapy: A randomized controlled trial. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 73, 647–657.  Bowers, W. A. (1990). Treatment of depressed in-patients: Cognitive therapy plus medication, and medication alone. British Journal of Psychiatry, 156, 73–58.  Bromet, E., Andrade, L. H., Hwang, I., Sampson, N. A., Alonso, J., de Girolamo, G., et al. (2011). Cross-national epidemiology of DSM-IV major depressive episode. BMC Medicine, 9, 90.  Burns, D. D., & Spangler, D. L. (2000). Does psychotherapy homework lead to improvements in depression in cognitive-behavioral therapy or does improvement lead to increased homework compliance? Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 68(1), 46–56.  Castonguay, L. G., Goldfried, M. R., Wiser, S., Raue, P. J., & Hayes, A. M. (1996). Predicting the effect of cognitive therapy for depression: A study of unique and common factors. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 64(3), 497–504.  Castonguay, L. G., Schut, A. J., Aikens, D., Constantino, M. J., Laurenceau, J. P., Bolough, L., et al. (2004). Integrative cognitive therapy: A preliminary investigation. Journal of Psychotherapy Integration, 14(1), 4–20.  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). (2010). Current depression among adults—United States, 2006 and 2008. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 59(38), 1229–1235.  Chapman, D. P., Perry, G. S., & Strine, T. W. (2005). The vital link between chronic disease and depressive disorders. Preventing Chronic Disease, 2, A14. Retrieved from www.csc.gov/pdc/issues/jan/04_0066.htm.  Chapman, D. P., Whitfield, C. L., Felitti, V. J., Dube, S. R., Edwards, V. J., & Anda, R. F. (2004). Adverse childhood experiences and the risk of depressive disorders in adulthood. Journal of Affective Disorders, 82(2), 217– 225.  Cipriani, A., Santilli, C., Furukawa, T. A., Signoretti, A., Nakagawa, A., McGuire, H., et al. (2009). Escitalopram versus other antidepressant agents for depression. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 2, CD006532.  Clark, D. A., & Beck, A. T. (2010). Cognitive therapy of anxiety disorders: Science and practice. New York: Guilford Press,  Colom, F., Vieta, E., Martinez, A., Jorquera, A., & Gastó, C. (1998). What is the role of psychotherapy in the treatment of bipolar disorder? Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics, 67, 3–9.  Cong, E., Li, Y., Shao, C., Chen, J., Wu, W., Shang, X., et al. (2012). Childhood sexual abuse and the risk of recurrent major depression in Chinese women. Psychological Medicine, 42, 409–417.  Connolly, K. R., & Thase, M. E. (2012). Emerging drugs for major depressive disorder. Expert Opinion on Emerging Drugs, 17(1), 105–126.  Conte, H. R., Plutchik, R., Wild, K. V., & Karasu, T. B. (1986). Combined psychotherapy and pharmacotherapy for depression. Archives of General Psychiatry, 43, 471–479.  Craighead, W. E., Miklowitz, D. J., Vajk, F. C., & Frank, E. (1998). Psychological treatments for bipolar disorder. In P.  E. Nathan & J. M. Gorman (Eds.), A guide to treatments that work (pp. 240–248). New York: Oxford University Press. Crews, W. D., Jr., & Harrison, D. W. (1995). The neuropsychology of depression and its implications for cognitive therapy. Neuropsychology Review, 5(2), 81–123.  Curry, J. F. (2001). Specific psychotherapies for childhood and adolescent depression. Biological Psychiatry, 49, 1091–1100.  de Oliveira, I. R. (1998). The treatment of unipolar major depression: Pharmacotherapy, cognitive behaviour therapy or both? Journal of Clinical Pharmacy and Therapeutics, 23, 467–475.  DeRubeis, R. J., & Feeley, M. (1990). Determinants of change in cognitive therapy for depression. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 14(5), 469–482.  DeRubeis, R. J., Gelfand, L. A., Tang, T. Z., & Simons, A.  D. (1999). Medications versus cognitive behavior therapy for severely depressed outpatients: Mega-analysis of four randomized comparisons. American Journal of Psychiatry, 156(7), 1007–1013. DeRubeis, R. J., Hollon, S. D., Amsterdam, J. D., Shelton,  R. C., Young, P. R., Salomon, R. M., et al. (2005). Cognitive therapy vs. medications in the treatment of moderate to severe depression. Archives of General Psychiatry, 62, 409–416. DeRubeis, R. J., Hollon, S. D., Grove, W. M., Evans, M. D., Garvey, M. J., & Tuason, V. B. (1990). How does cognitive therapy work?: Cognitive change and symptom change in cognitive therapy and pharmacotherapy for depression. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 58(6), 862–869.  Dobson, K. S., Hollon, S. D., Dimidjian, S., Schmaling, K. B., Kohlenberg, R. J., Gallon, R., et al. (2008). Randomized trial of behavioral activation, cognitive therapy, and antidepressant medication in the prevention of relapse and recurrence in major depression. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 76(3), 468–477.  Dobson, K. S., & Pusch, D. (1993). Towards a definition of the conceptual and empirical boundaries of cognitive therapy. Australian Psychologist, 28(3), 137–144.  Dougherty, L. R., Klein, D. N., & Davila, J. (2004). A growth curve analysis of the course of dysthymic disorder: The effects of chronic stress and moderation by adverse parent– child relationships and family history. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 72(6), 1012–1021.  Dube, S. R., Anda, R. F., Felitti, V. J., Chapman, D. P., Williamson, D. F., & Giles, W. H. (2001). Childhood abuse, household dysfunction, and the risk of attempted suicide throughout the life span: Findings from the adverse child    Cognitive Therapy for Depression  hood experiences study. Journal of the American Medical Association, 286, 3089–3096.  Eberhart, N. K., Auerbach, R. P., Bigda-Peyton, J., & Abela,  J. R. Z. (2011). Maladaptive schemas and depression: Tests of stress generation and diathesis–stress models. Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 30(1), 75–104. Eifert, G. H., Beach, B. K., & Wilson, P. H. (1998). Depression: Behavioral principles and implications for treatment and relapse prevention. In J. J. Plaud & G. H. Eifers (Eds.), From behavior theory to behavior therapy (pp. 68–97). Boston: Allyn & Bacon.  Eisendrath, S., Chartier, M., & McLane, M. (2011). Adapting mindfulness-based cognitive therapy for treatmentresistant depression: A clinical case study. Cognitive Behavioral Practice, 18(3), 362–370.  Elkin, I., Gibbons, R. D., Shea, M. T., & Shaw, B. F. (1996). Science is not a trial (but it can sometimes be a tribulation). Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 64(1), 92–103.  Elkin, I., Shea, M. T., Watkins, J. T., Imber, S. D., Sotsky, S. M., Collins, J. F., et al. (1989). National Institute of Mental Health Treatment of Depression Collaborative Research Program: General effectiveness of treatments. Archives of General Psychiatry, 46, 971–982.  Evans, M. D., Hollon, S. D., DeRubeis, R. J., Piaseki, J. M., Grove, W. M., Garvey, M. J., et al. (1992). Differential relapse following cognitive therapy and pharmacotherapy for depression. In D. S. Janowsky (Ed.), Psychotherapy indication and outcomes (pp. 802–808). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press.  Farrell, J., & Shaw, I. A. (2012). Group schema therapy for borderline personality disorder: A step-by-step treatment manual with patient workbook. Malden, MA: Wiley- Blackwell.  Farrell, J., Shaw, I. A., & Webber, M. (2009). A schemafocused approach to group psychotherapy for outpatients with borderline personality disorder: A randomized control trial. Journal of Behavior Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry, 40, 317–328.  Fava, G. A., Rafanelli, C., Grandi, S., Canestrari, R., & Morphy, M. A. (1998). Six-year outcome for cognitive behavioral treatment of residual symptoms in major depression. American Journal of Psychiatry, 155(10), 1443–1445.  Fava, G. A., Rafanelli, C., Grandi, S., Conti, S., & Belluardo,  P. (1998). Prevention of recurrent depression with cognitive behavioral therapy: Preliminary findings. Archives of General Psychiatry, 55(9), 816–820. Feldman, G., Harley, R., Kerrigan, M., Jacobo, M., & Fava,  M. (2009). Change in emotional processing during a dialectical behavior based skills group for major depressive disorder. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 47(4), 316– 321. Feng, C. Y., Chu, H., Chen, C. H., Chang, Y. S., Chen, T. H. Chou, Y. H., et al. (2012). The effect of cognitive behav   ioral group therapy for depression: A meta-analysis 2000– 2010. Worldviews Evidence Based Nursing, 9(1), 2–17.  Floyd, M., Scogin, F., McKendree-Smith, N. L., Floyd, D. L., & Rokke, P. D. (2004). Cognitive therapy for depression: A comparison of individual psychotherapy and bibliotherapy for depressed older adults. Behavior Modification, 28(2), 297–318.  Fournier, J. C., De Rubeis, R. J., Shelton, R. C., Gallop, R., Amsterdam, J. D., & Hollon, S. D. (2008). Antidepressant medications versus cognitive therapy in depressed patients with or without personality disorder. British Journal of Psychiatry, 192(2), 124–129.  Frank, E. (1996). Long-term treatment of depression: Interpersonal psychotherapy with and without medication. In C. Mundt & M. J. Goldstein (Eds.), Interpersonal factors in the origin and course of affective disorders (pp. 303–315). London: Gaskell/Royal College of Psychiatrists.   Frank, E., & Thase, M. E. (1999). Natural history and preventative treatment of recurrent mood disorders. Annual Review of Medicine, 50, 453–468.  Free, M. L., Oei, T. P. S., & Appleton, C. (1998). Biological and psychological processes in recovery from depression during cognitive therapy. Journal of Behavior Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry, 29, 213–226.  Freeman, A., & Davison, M. R. (1997). Short-term therapy for the long-term patient. In L. Vandecreek, S. Knapp, &  T. L. Jackson (Eds.), Innovations in clinical practice: A source book (pp. 5–24). Sarasota, FL: Professional Resource Press. Futterman, A., Thompson, L., Gallagher-Thompson, D., & Ferris, R. (1995). Depression in later life: Epidemiology, assessment, etiology, and treatment. In E. E. Beckham & W. R. Leber (Eds.), Handbook of depression (2nd ed., pp. 494–525). New York: Guilford Press.  Gallagher-Thompson, D., Hanley-Peterson, P., & Thompson,  L. W. (1990). Maintenance of gains versus relapse following brief psychotherapy for depression. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 58(3), 371–374. Garyfallos, G., Adarnopoulo, A., Karastergiou, A., Voikli, M., Sotiropoulo, A., Donias, S., et al. (1999). Personality disorders in dysthymia and major depression. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 99(5), 332–340.  Geddes, J. R., Carney, S. M., Davies, C., Furukawa, T. A., Kupfer, D. J., Frank, E., et al. (2003). Relapse prevention with antidepressant drug treatment in depressive disorders: A systematic review. Lancet, 361, 653–661.  Gelder, M. G. (1994). Cognitive therapy for depression. In  H. Hippius & C. N. Stefanis (Eds.), Research in mood disorders: An update (Vol. 1, pp. 115–124). Goettingen, Germany: Hogrefe & Huber. Giesen-Bloo, J., van Dyck, R., Spinhoven, P., van Tilburg, W., Dirksen, C., van Asselt, T., et al. (2006). Outpatient psychotherapy for borderline personality disorder: A randomized trial of schema-focused therapy vs. transference    CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  focused therapy. Archives of General Psychiatry, 63, 649–658.  Gilson, M., Freeman, A. M., Yates, J., & Freeman, S. M. (2009). Overcoming depression: A cognitive therapy approach (2nd ed.). New York: Oxford University Press.  Gloaguen, V., Cottraux, J., Cucherat, M., & Blackburn, I. M. (1998). A meta-analysis of the effects of cognitive therapy in depressed patients. Journal of Affective Disorders, 49, 59–72.  Halvorsen, M., Wang, C. E., Eisemann, M., & Waterloo, K. (2010). Dysfunctional attitudes and early maladaptive schemas as predictors of depression: A 9-year follow-up study. Cognitive Therapy Research, 34, 368–379.  Halvorsen, M., Wang, C. F., Richter, J., Myrland, I., Pedersen, S. K., Eisemann, M, et al. (2009). Early maladaptive schemas, temperament and character traits in clinically depressed and previously depressed subjects. Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy, 16(5), 394–407.  Hardeveld, F., Spijker, J., de Graaf, R., Nolen, W. A., & Beekman, A. T. F. (2010). Prevalence and predictors of recurrence of major depressive disorder in the adult population. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavia, 122,184–191.  Harley, R., Sprich, S., Safren, S., Jacob, M., & Fava, M. (2008). Adaptation of dialectical behavior therapy skills training group for treatment-resistant depression, Journal of Nervous and Mental Diseases, 196(2), 136–143.  Harrington, R., Wood, A., & Verduyn, C. (1998). Clinically depressed adolescents. In P. J. Graham (Ed.), Cognitivebehaviour therapy for children and families (pp. 156– 193). New York: Cambridge University Press.  Hawke, L. D., & Provencher, M. D. (2011). Schema theory and schema therapy in mood and anxiety disorders: A review. Journal of Cognitive Psychotherapy: An International Quarterly, 25(4), 257–276.  Hayden, E. P., & Klein, D. N. (2001). Predicting outcome of dysthymic disorder at a 5-year follow-up: The impact of familial psychopathology, early adversity, personality, comorbidity, and chronic stress. American Journal of Psychiatry, 158, 1864–1870.  Hayes, A. M., & Strauss, J. L. (1998). Dynamic systems theory as a paradigm for the study of change in psychotherapy: An application to cognitive therapy for depression. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 66(6), 939–947.  Heim, C., & Nemeroff, C. B. (2001). The role of childhood trauma in the neurobiology of mood and anxiety disorders: Preclinical and clinical studies. Biological Psychiatry, 49, 1023–1039.  Henry, W. P., Strupp, H. H., Butler, S. F., Schacht, T. E., & Binder, J. L. (1993). The effects of training in time-limited dynamic psychotherapy: Changes in therapist behavior. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 61, 434– 440.  Hollon, S. D. (1998). What is cognitive behavioural therapy and does it work? Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 8, 289–292.  Hollon, S. D., DeRubeis, R. J., & Evans, M. D. (1996). Cognitive therapy in the treatment and prevention of depression. In P. M. Salkovskis (Ed.), Frontiers of cognitive therapy (pp. 293–317). New York: Guilford Press.  Hollon, S. D., DeRubeis, R. J., Evans, M. D., Weimer, M. J., Garvey, M. J., Grove, W. M., et al. (1992). Cognitive therapy and pharmacotherapy: Singly and in combination. Archives of General Psychiatry, 49, 774–781.  Hollon, S. D., DeRubeis, R. J., Shelton, R. C., Amsterdam, J. D., Salomon, R. M., O’Reardon, J. P., et al. (2005). Prevention of relapse following cognitive therapy vs. medications in moderate to severe depression. Archives of General Psychiatry, 62, 417–422.  Hollon, S. D., & Shelton, R. C. (2001). Treatment guidelines for major depressive disorder. Behavior Therapy, 32, 235– 258.  Hollon, S. D., Shelton, R. C., & Loosen, P. T. (1991). Cognitive therapy and pharmacotherapy for depression. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 59(1), 88–99.  Hollon, S. D., Thase, M. E., & Markowitz, J. C. (2002). Treatment and prevention of depression. Psychological Science in the Public Interest, 3, 39–77.  Howland, R. H. (1993). Chronic depression. Hospital and Community Psychiatry, 44, 633–639.  Ingram, R. E., & Holle, C. (1992). Cognitive science of depression. In D. J. Stein & J. E. Young (Eds.), Cognitive science and clinical disorders (pp. 187–209). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.  Jacobson, N. S., & Hollon, S. D. (1996). Cognitive-behavior therapy versus pharmacotherapy: Now that the jury’s returned its verdict, it’s time to present the rest of the evidence. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 64(1), 74–80.  Jarrett, R. B. (1995). Comparing and combining short-term psychotherapy and pharmacotherapy for depression. In E.  E. Beckham & W. R. Leber (Eds.), Handbook of depression (2nd ed., pp. 435–464). New York: Guilford Press. Jarrett, R. B., Kraft, D., Doyle, J., Foster, B. M., Eaves, G. G., & Silver, P. C. (2001). Preventing recurrent depression using cognitive therapy with and without continuation phase. Archives of General Psychiatry, 58(4), 381–388.  Jarrett, R. B., & Nelson, R. O. (1987). Mechanisms of change in cognitive therapy of depression. Behavior Therapy, 18, 227–241.  Jarrett, R. B., Schaffer, M., McIntire, D., Witt-Browder, A., Kraft, D., & Risser, R. C. (1999). Treatment of atypical depression with cognitive therapy or phenelzine: A double- blind, placebo-controlled trial. Archives of General Psychiatry, 56, 431–437.  Jarrett, R. B., & Thase, M. E. (2010). Comparative efficacy and durability of continuation phase cognitive therapy for preventing recurrent depression: Design of a doubleblinded, fluoxetine-and pill-placebo-contolled, randomized trial with 2-year follow-up. Contemporary Clinical Trials, 31(4), 355–377.   Cognitive Therapy for Depression  Jarrett, R. B., Vittengl, J. R., & Clark, L. A. (2008). How much cognitive therapy, for which patients, will prevent depressive relapse. Journal of Affective Disorders, 111(2– 3), 185–192.  Joffe, R., Segal, Z., & Singer, W. (1996). Change in thyroid hormone levels following response to cognitive therapy for major depression. American Journal of Psychiatry, 153(3), 411–413.  Johansson, R., & Andersson, G. (2012). Internet-based psychological treatments for depression. Expert Review of Neurotherapeutics, 12 (7), 861–870.  Joyce, P. R., McKenzie, J. M., Carter, J. D., Rae, A. M., Luty,  S. E., Frampton, C. M. A., et al. (2007). Temperament, character and personality disorders as predictors of response to interpersonal psychotherapy and cognitivebehavioural therapy for depression. British Journal of Psychiatry, 190, 503–508. Keller, M. B., & Bolland, R. J. (1998). Implications of failing to achieve successful long-term maintenance treatment of recurrent unipolar major depression. Biological Psychiatry, 44(5), 348–360.  Keller, M. B., & Hanks, D. L. (1995). Course and natural history of chronic depression. In J. H. Kocsis & D. N. Klein (Eds.), Diagnosis and treatment of chronic depression (pp. 58–72). New York: Guilford Press.  Keller, M. B., McCullough, J. P., Klein, D. F., Arnow, B., Dunner, D. L., Gelenberg, A. J., et al. (2000). A comparison of nefazodone, the cognitive behavioral-analysis system of psychotherapy, and their combination for the treatment of chronic depression. New England Journal of Medicine, 342, 1462–1470.  Kendler, K. S., Kessler, R. C., Walters, E. E., MacLean, C., Neale, M. C., Heath, A. C., et al. (1995). Stressful life events, genetic liability, and onset of an episode of major depression in women. American Journal of Psychiatry, 152, 833–842.  Kessler, R. C., Akiskal, H. S., Ames, M., Birnbaum, H., Greenberg, P. A., Jin, R., et al. (2006). Prevalence and effects of mood disorders on work performance in a nationally representative sample of U.S. workers. American Journal of Psychiatry, 163(9), 1561–1568.  Kessler, R. C., Petukhova, M., Sampson, N. A., Zaslavsky, A. M., & Wittchen, H. U. (2012). Twelve-month and lifetime prevalence and lifetime morbid risk of anxiety and mood disorders in the United States. Internal Journal of Methods in Psychiatric Research, 21(3), 169–184.  Klein, D. N., Santiago, N. J., Vivian, D., Blalock, J. A., Kocsis,  J. H., Markowitz, J. C., et al. (2004). Cognitive-behavioral analysis system of psychotherapy as a maintenance treatment for chronic depression. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 72, 681–688. Kocsis, J. H., Gelenberg, A. J., Rothbaum, B. O., Klein, D. N., Trivedi, M. H., Manber, R., et al. (2009). Cognitive behavioral analysis system of psychotherapy and brief supportive psychotherapy for augmentation of antidepressant  nonresponse in chronic depression: the REVAMP Trial. Archives of General Psychiatry, 66(11), 1178–1188.  Koder, D. A., Brodaty, H., & Anstey, K. J. (1996). Cognitive therapy for depression in elderly. International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 11(2), 97–107.  Kupfer, D. J., Frank, E., & Wamhoff, J. (1996). Mood disorders: Update on prevention of recurrence. In C. Mundt, M.  M. Goldstein, K. Hahlweg, & P. Fiedler (Eds.), Interpersonal factors in the origin and course of affective disorders (pp. 289–302). London: Gaskell. Lam, D. H., Hayward, P., Watkins, E. R., Wright, K., & Sham,  P. (2005). Relapse prevention in patients with bipolar disorder: Cognitive therapy outcome after 2 years. American Journal of Psychiatry, 162(2), 324–329. Lazarus, A. A., & Lazarus, C. N. (1991). Multimodal Life History Inventory (2nd ed.). Champaign, IL: Research Press.  Leahy, R. L. (2010). Beat the blues before they beat you. New York: Hay House.  Lee, C. W., Taylor, G., & Dunn, J. (1999). Factor structure of the Schema Questionnaire in a large clinical sample. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 23(4), 441–451.  Levendusky, P. G., & Hufford, M. R. (1997). The application of cognitive-behavior therapy to the treatment of depression and related disorders in the elderly. Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 30(2), 227–238.  Linehan, M. M. (1993a). Cognitive-behavioral treatment of borderline personality disorder. New York: Guilford Press.  Linehan, M. M. (1993b). Skills training manual for treating borderline personality disorder. New York: Guilford Press.  Lizardi, H., Klein, D. N., Ouimette, P. C., Riso, L. P., Anderson, R. L., & Donaldson, S. K. (1995). Reports of the childhood home environment in early onset dysthymia and episodic major depression. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 104, 132–139.  Luoma, J. B., Hayes, S. C., & Walser R. D. (2007). Learning ACT: An acceptance and commitment therapy skillstraining manual for therapists. Richmond, BC, Canada: Raincoast Books.  Luty S. E., Carter, J. D., McKenzie, J. M., Rae, A. M., Frampton, C. M. A., Mulder, R. T. et al. (2007). Randomized controlled trial of interpersonal psychotherapy and cognitive-behavioural therapy for depression. British Journal of Psychiatry, 190, 496–502.  Ma, S. H., & Teasdale, J. D. (2004). Mindfulness-based cognitive therapy for depression: Replication and exploration of differential relapse prevention effects. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 72(1), 31–40.  Manicavasagar, V., Perich, T., & Parker, G. (2012). Cognitive predictors of change in cognitive behavior therapy and mindfulness-based cognitive therapy for depression. Behavioural and Cognitive Psychotherapy, 40, 227–232.  Mathew, K. L., & Whitford, H. S. (2010). The long-term ef    CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  fects of mindfulness-based cognitive therapy as a relapse prevention treatment for major depressive disorder. Behavioural and Cognitive Psychotherapy, 38, 561–576.  Mathys, M., & Mitchell, B. G. (2011). Targeting treatmentresistant depression. Journal of Pharmacological Practice, 24(6), 520–533.  Matthew, K. L., Whitford, H. S., Kenny, M. A., & Denson,  L. A. (2010). The long-term effects of mindfulness-bassed cognitive therapy as a relapse prevention treatment for major depressive disorder. Behavioural and Cognitive Psychotherapy, 38, 561–576. McCullough, J. P., Jr. (2000). Treatment for chronic depression: Cognitive behavioral analysis system of psychotherapy (CBASP). New York: Guilford Press.  McCullough, J. P., Jr. (2003). Treatment for chronic depression: Cognitive behavioral-analysis system of psychotherapy. Journal of Psychotherapy Integration, 13(3/4), 241–263.  McGinn, L. K., & Young, J. E. (1996). Schema-focused therapy. In P. M. Salkovskis (Ed.), Frontiers of cognitive therapy (pp. 182–207). New York: Guilford Press.  Meterissian, G. B., & Bradwejn, J. (1989). Comparative studies on the efficacy of psychotherapy, pharmacotherapy, and their combination in depression: Was adequate pharmacotherapy provided? Journal of Clinical Psychopharmacology, 9, 334–339.  Miller, I. W., Norman, W. H., Keitner, G. I., Bishop, S., & Dow, M. G. (1989). Cognitive-behavioral treatment of depressed inpatients. Behavior Therapy, 20, 25–47.  Mohr, D. C. (1995). Negative outcome in psychotherapy: A critical review. Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 2, 1–27.  Murphy, G. E., Simmons, A. D., Wetzel, R. D., & Lustman, P.  J. (1984). Cognitive therapy and pharmacotherapy, singly and together, in the treatment of depression. Archives of General Psychiatry, 41, 33–41. National Institute of Mental Health. (2006). The numbers count: Mental disorders in America (Publication No. 064584). Retrieved April 6, 2007, from www.nimh.nih.gov/ publicat/numbers.  Newman, C. F., Leahy, R. L., Beck, A. T., Reilly-Harrington,  N. A., & Gyulai, L. (2002). Bipolar disorder: A cognitive therapy approach. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. Nierenberg, A. A., Keefe, B. R., Leslie, V. C., Alpert, J. E., Pava, J. A., Worthington, J. J., III, et al. (1999). Residual symptoms in depressed patients who respond acutely to fluoxetine. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 60(4), 221–225.  Oei, T. P. S., & Free, M. L. (1995). Do cognitive behavior therapies validate cognitive models of mood disorders?: A review of the empirical evidence. International Journal of Psychology, 30(2), 145–180.  Oei, T. P. S., & Shuttlewood, G. J. (1996). Specific and nonspecific factors in psychotherapy: A case of cognitive therapy for depression. Clinical Psychology Review, 16(2), 83–103.  O’Leary, K. D., & Beach, S. R. H. (1990). Marital therapy: A viable treatment for depression and marital discord. American Journal of Psychiatry, 147(2), 183–186.  Olfson, M., Marcus, S. C., Druss, B., Elinson, L., Tanielian, T., & Pincus, H. A. (2002). National trends in the outpatient treatment of depression. Journal of the American Medical Association, 287, 203–209.  Overholser, J. C. (1998). Cognitive-behavioral treatment of depression, part X: Reducing the risk of relapse. Journal of Contemporary Psychotherapy, 28(4), 381–396.  Padesky, C. A., with Greenberger, D. (1995). A clinician’s guide to mind over mood. New York: Guilford Press.  Paykel, E. S. (2007). Cognitive therapy in relapse prevention in depression. International Journal of Neuropsychopharmacology, 10, 131–136.  Paykel, E. S., Scott, J., Teasdale, J. D., Johnson, A. L., Garland, A., Moore, R., et al. (1999). Prevention of relapse in residual depression by cognitive therapy. Archives of General Psychiatry, 56, 829–835.  Peeters, F., Huibers, M., Roelofs, J., van Breulkelen, G., Hollon, S. D., Markowitz, J. C., et al. (2013). The clinical effectiveness of evidence-based interventions for depression: A pragmatic trial in routine practice. Journal of Affective Disorders, 145(3), 349–355.  Pepper, C. M., Klein, D. N., Anderson, R. L., Riso, L. P., Ouimette, P. C., & Lizardi, H. (1995). DSM-III-R axis II comorbidity in dysthymia and major depression. American Journal of Psychiatry, 152(2), 239–247.  Persons, J. B., Burns, D. D., & Perloff, J. M. (1988). Predictors of dropout and outcome in cognitive therapy for depression in a private practice setting. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 12(6), 557–575.  Piper, W. E., Ogrodniczuk, J. S., Joyce, A. S., McCallum, M., Rosie, J. S., O’Kelly, J. G., et al. (1999). Prediction of dropping out in time-limited, interpretive psychotherapy. Psychotherapy, 36, 114–122.  Quilty, L. C., McBride, C., & Bagby, R. M. (2008). Evidence for the cognitive mediational model of cognitive behavioral therapy for depression. Psychological Medicine, 38(11), 1531–1541.  Randolph, J. J., & Dykman, B. M. (1998). Perceptions of parenting and depression-proneness in the offspring: Dysfunctional attitudes as a mediating mechanism. Cognitive Depressive Disorders, 21, 401–449.  Rehm, L. P. (1990). Cognitive and behavioral theories. In B.  B. Wolman & G. Stricker (Eds.), Depressive disorders: Facts, theories, and treatment methods (pp. 64–91). New York: Wiley. Reinecke, M. A., Ryan, N. E., & DuBois, D. L. (1998). Cognitive-behavioral therapy of depression and depressive symptoms during adolescence: A review and metaanalysis. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 37(1), 26–34.  Renner, F., Lobbestael, J., Peeters, F., Arntz, A., & Huibers,  M. (2012). Early maladaptive schemas in depressed pa  Cognitive Therapy for Depression  tients: Stability and relation with depressive symptoms over the course of treatment. Journal of Affective Disorders, 136, 581–590.  Riso, L. P., du Toit, P. L., Blandino, J. A., Penna, S., Dacey, S., Duin, J. S., et al. (2003). Cognitive aspects of chronic depression. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 112(1), 72–80.  Riso, L. P., Froman, S. E., Raouf, M., Gable, P., Maddux, R. E., Turini-Santorelli, N., et al. (2006). The long-term stability of early maladaptive schemas. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 30(4), 515–529.  Roberts, J. E., & Hartlage, S. (1996). Cognitive rehabilitation interventions for depressed patients. In P. W. Corrigan &  S. C. Yudofsky (Eds.), Cognitive rehabilitation for neuropsychiatric disorders (pp. 371–392). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press. Rush, A. J., Beck, A. T., Kovacs, M., & Hollon, S. (1977). Comparative efficacy of cognitive therapy and imipramine in the treatment of depressed outpatients. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 1, 17–37.  Rush, A. J., Trivedi, M. H., Wisniewski, S. R., Nierenberg,  A. A., Stewart, J. W., Warden, D., et al. (2006). Acute and longer-term outcomes in depressed outpatients requiring one of several treatment steps: A STAR*D report. American Journal of Psychiatry, 163, 1905–1917. Sacco, W. P., & Beck, A. T. (1995). Cognitive theory and therapy. In E. E. Beckham & W. R. Leber (Eds.), Handbook of depression (2nd ed., pp. 329–351). New York: Guilford Press.  Sachs-Ericsson, N., Verona, E., Joiner, T., & Preacher, K. J. (2006). Parental abuse and mediating role of self-criticism in adult internalizing disorders. Journal of Affective Disorders, 93(1–3), 71–78.  Safran, J. D., Muran, J. C., Samstag, L. W., & Stevens, C. (2002). Repairing alliance ruptures. In J. C. Norcross (Ed.), Psychotherapy relationships that work: Therapists contributions and responsiveness to patients (pp. 235– 254). New York: Oxford University Press.  Safran, J. D., & Segal, Z. V. (1990). Interpersonal processes in cognitive therapy. New York: Basic Books.  Safran, J. D., Segal, Z. V., Vallis, T. M., Shaw, B. F., & Samstag, L. W. (1993). Assessing patient suitability for shortterm cognitive therapy with an interpersonal focus. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 17(1), 23–38.  Salkovskis, P. M. (Ed.). (1996). Frontiers of cognitive therapy: The state of the art and beyond. New York: Guilford Press.  Sava, F. A., Yates, B. T., Lupu, V., Szentagotai, A., & David,  D. (2009). Cost-effectiveness and cost-utility of cognitive therapy, rational emotive behavioral therapy, and fluoxetine (Prozac) in treating depression: A randomized clinical trial. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 65 (1), 36–52. Schmidt, N. B. (1994). The Schema Questionnaire and the Schema Avoidance Questionnaire. Behavior Therapist, 17(4), 90–92.  Schmidt, N. B., Joiner, T. E., Young, J. E., & Telch, M. J.  (1995). The Schema Questionnaire: Investigation of psychometric properties and the hierarchical structure of a measure of maladaptive schemata. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 19(3), 295–321.  Schramm, E., Zobel, I., Dykierek, P., Kech, S., Brakemeier, E., Kutz, A., et al. (2011). Cognitive behavioral analysis system of psychotherapy versus interpersonal psychotherapy for early-onset chronic depression: A randomized pilot study. Journal of Affective Disorders, 129, 109–116.  Scott, J. (1996a). Cognitive therapy of affective disorders: A review. Journal of Affective Disorders, 37, 1–11.  Scott, J. (1996b). The role of cognitive behaviour therapy in bipolar disorders. Behavioural and Cognitive Psychotherapy, 24(3), 195–208.  Scott, J. (2000). New evidence in the treatment of chronic depression. New England Journal of Medicine, 342, 1518– 1520.  Scott, J., Palmer, S., Paykel, E., Teasdale, J., & Hayhurst, H. (2003). Use of cognitive therapy for relapse prevention in chronic depression. British Journal of Psychiatry, 182, 221–227.  Segal, Z. V., Williams, J. M. G., & Teasdale, J. D. (2002). Mindfulness-based cognitive therapy for depression: A new approach to preventing relapse. New York: Guilford Press.  Shaw, B. F., & Segal, Z. V. (1999). Efficacy, indications, and mechanisms of action of cognitive therapy of depression. In D. S. Janowsky (Ed.), Psychotherapy indications and outcomes (pp. 173–196). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press.  Shea, M. T., & Elkin, I. (1996). The NIMH Treatment of Depression Collaborative Research Program. In C. Mundt,  M. J. Goldstein, K. Hahlweg, & P. Fiedler (Eds.), Interpersonal factors in the origin and course of affective disorders (pp. 316–328). London: Gaskell/Royal College of Psychiatrists. Shea, M. T., Elkin, I., Imber, S. D., Sotsky, S. M., Watkins, J. T., Collins, J. F., et al. (1992). Course of depressive symptoms over follow-up: Findings from the National Institute of Mental Health Treatment of Depression Collaborative Research Program. Archives of General Psychiatry, 49(10), 782–787.  Shea, M. T., Pilkonis, P. A., Beckham, E., Collins, J. F., Elkin, I., Sotsky, S. M., et al. (1990). Personality disorders and treatment outcome in the NIMH Treatment of Depression Collaborative Research Program. American Journal of Psychiatry, 147(6), 711–718.  Simons, A. D., Murphy, G. D., Levine, J. L., & Wetzel, R.  D. (1986). Cognitive therapy and pharmacotherapy for depression: Sustained improvement over 1 year. Archives of General Psychiatry, 43, 43–48. Spanier, C. A., Frank, E., McEachran, A. B., Grochocinski,  V. J., & Kupfer, D. J. (1999). Maintenance interpersonal psychotherapy for recurrent depression: Biological and  CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  clinical correlates and future directions. In D. S. Janowsky (Ed.), Psychotherapy indications and outcomes (pp. 249– 273). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press.  Spirito, A., Esposito-Smythers, C., Wolff, J., & Uhl, K. (2011). Cognitive-behavioral therapy for adolescent depression and suicidality. Child and Adolescent Psychiatric Clinics of North America, 20(2), 191–204.  Stein, D. J., & Young, J. E. (1992). Schema approach to personality disorders. In Cognitive science and clinical disorders (pp. 271–288). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.  Stirman, S. W., Miller, C. J., Toder, K., Calloway, A., Beck,  A. J., Evans, A. C., et al. (in press). Perspectives on cognitive therapy training within community mental health settings: Implications for clinical satisfaction and skill development. Depression Research and Treatment. Strine, T. W., Mokdad, A. H., Balluz, L. S., Gonzalez, O., Crider, R., Berry, J. T., et al. (2008). Depression and anxiety in the United States: Findings from the 2006 Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System. Psychiatric Services, 59(12), 1383–1309.  Stuart, S., & Bowers, W. A. (1995). Cognitive therapy with inpatients: Review and meta-analysis. Journal of Cognitive Psychotherapy, 9(2), 85–92.  Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA). (2008). Results from 2007 National Survey on Drug Use and Health: National Findings (Office of Applied Studies, NSDUH Series H-34, DHHS Publication No. SMA 08-4343). Rockville, MD: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.  Sullivan, M. J. L., & Conway, M. (1991). Dysphoria and valence of attributions for others’ behavior. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 15(4), 273–282.  Teasdale, J. D. (1997a). Assessing cognitive mediation of relapse prevention in recurrent mood disorders. Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy, 4, 145–156.  Teasdale, J. D. (1997b). The relationship between cognition and emotion: The mind-in-place in mood disorders. In D.  M. Clark & C. G. Fairburn (Eds.), Science and practice of cognitive behavior therapy (pp. 67–93). Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. Teasdale, J. D., Moore, R. G., Hayhurst, H., Pope, M., Williams, S., & Segal, Z. V. (2002). Metacognitive awareness and prevention of relapse in depression: Empirical evidence. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 70(2), 275–287.  Teasdale, J. D., Segal, Z. V., & Williams, J. M. G. (1995). How does cognitive therapy prevent depressive relapse and why should attentional control (mindfulness) training help? Behaviour Research and Therapy, 33, 25–39.  Teasdale, J. D., Segal, Z. V., Williams, J. M. G., Ridgeway,  V. A., Soulsby, J. M., & Lau, M. A. (2000). Prevention of relapse/recurrence in major depression by mindfulnessbased cognitive therapy. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 68(4), 615–623. Thase, M. E. (1992). Long-term treatments of recurrent depressive disorders. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 53(Suppl. 9), 32–44.  Thase, M. E. (1999). How should efficacy be evaluated in randomized clinical trials of treatments for depression? Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 60(Suppl. 4), 23–32.  Thase, M. E. (2011). Antidepressant combinations: Widely used, but far from empirically validated. Canadian Journal of Psychiatry, 56(6), 317–323.  Thase, M. E., Bowler, K., & Harden, T. (1991). Cognitive behavior therapy of endogenous depression: Part 2. Preliminary findings in 16 unmedicated inpatients. Behavior Therapy, 22, 469–477.  Tolin, D. F. (2010). Is cognitive-behavioral therapy more effective than other therapies? A meta-analytic review. Clinical Psychology Review, 30(6), 710–720.  Treatment for Adolescents with Depression Study (TADS) Team. (2004). Fluoxetine, cognitive-behavioral therapy, and their combination for adolescents with depression: Treatment for adolescents with depression study (TADS) randomized controlled trial. Journal of the American Medical Association, 292(7), 807–820.  Treatment for Adolescents with Depression Study (TADS) Team. (2007). Long term effectiveness and safety outcomes. Archives of General Psychiatry, 64, 1132–1144.  Trivedi, M. H., Fava, M., Wisniewski, S. R., Thase, M. E., Quitkin, F., Warden, D., et al. (2006). Medication augmentation after the failure of SSRIs for depression. New England Journal of Medicine, 354, 1243–1252.  Truax, C. B., & Mitchell, K. M. (1971). Research on certain therapist interpersonal skills in relation to process and outcome. In A. E. Bergin & S. L. Garfield (Eds.), Handbook of psychotherapy and behavior change: An empirical analysis (pp. 299–344). New York: Wiley.  van Aalderen, J. R., Donders, A. R. T., Giommi, F., Spinhoven, P., Barendregt, H. P., & Speckens, A. E. M. (2012). The efficacy of mindfulness-based cognitive therapy in recurrent depressed patients with and without a current depressive episode: A randomized controlled trial. Psychological Medicine, 42, 989–1001.  Versiani, M. (1998). Pharmacotherapy of dysthymic and chronic depressive disorders: Overview with focus on moclobemide. Journal of Affective Disorders, 51(3), 323–332.  Vittengl, J. R., Clark, L. A., Dunn, T. D., & Jarrett, R. B. (2007). Reducing relapse and recurrence in unipolar depression: A comparative meta-analysis of cognitivebehavioral therapy’s effects. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 75(3), 475–488.  Vittengl, J. R., Clark, L. A., & Jarrett, R. B. (2009). Continuation- phase cognitive therapy’s effect on remission and recovery from depression. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 77(2), 367–371.  Vocisano, C., Klein, D., Arnow, B., Rivera, C., Blalock, J. A., Rothbaum, B., et al. (2004). Therapist variables that pre    Cognitive Therapy for Depression  dict symptom change in psychotherapy with chronically depressed outpatients. Psychotherapy: Theory, Research, Practice and Training, 41(3), 255–265.  Vos, T., Corry, J., Haby, M. M., Carter, R., & Andrews,  G. (2005). Cost-effectiveness of cognitive-behavioural therapy and drug interventions for major depression. Australian and New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry, 39(8), 683–692. Wang, C. E., Halvorsen, M., Eisemann, M., & Waterloo, K. (2010). Stability of dysfunctional attitudes and early maladaptive schemas: A 9-year follow-up study of clinically depressed subjects. Journal of Behavior Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry, 41(4), 389–396.  Wang, J. (2004). A longitudinal population-based study of treated and untreated major depression. Medical Care, 42(6), 543–550.  Wang, J., Patten, S. D., William, J. V., Currie, S., Beck, C. A., Maxwell, C. J., et al. (2005). Help seeking behaviors of individuals with mood disorders. Canadian Journal of Psychiatry, 50(10), 652–659.  Wells, A., Fisher, P., Myers, S., Wheatley, J., Patel, T., & Brewin, C. R. (2012). Metacognitive therapy in treatmentresistant depression: A platform trial. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 50(6), 367–373.  Whisman, M. A. (1993). Mediators and moderators of change in cognitive therapy of depression. Psychological Bulletin, 114, 248–265.  Wiersma, J. E., van Schaik, D. J. F., van Oppen, P., Mc- Cullough, J. P., Schoevers, R. A., Dekker, J. J., et al. (2008). Treatment of chronically depressed patients: A multisite randomized controlled trial testing the effectiveness of “cognitive behavioral analysis system of psychotherapy” (CBASP) for chronic depression versus usual secondary care. BMC Psychiatry, 8, 18.  Wierzbicki, M., & Bartlett, T. S. (1987). The efficacy of group and individual cognitive therapy for mild depression. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 11(3), 337–342.  Williams, J. M. G. (1997). Depression. In D. M. Clark & C.  G. Fairburn (Eds.), Science and practice of cognitive behaviour therapy (pp. 259–283). Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.  Wolpe, J. (1993). Commentary: The cognitivist oversell and comments on symposium contributions. Journal of Behavior Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry, 24(2), 141–147.  World Health Organization (WHO). (2004). The Global Burden on Disease 2004 update. Retrieved from www. who.int /healthinfo /global_ burden_ disease / GBD_ report_2004update_full.pdf.  Wright, J. H. (1996). Inpatient cognitive therapy. In P. M. Salkovskis (Ed.), Frontiers of cognitive therapy (pp. 208– 225). New York: Guilford Press.  Wright, J. H., & McCray, L. W. (2011). Breaking free from depression: Pathways to wellness. New York: Guilford Press.  Wright, J. H., Wright, A. S., Albano, A. M., Basco, M. R., Goldsmith, L. J., Raffield, T., et al. (2005). Computerassisted cognitive therapy for depression: Maintaining efficacy while reducing therapist time. American Journal of Psychiatry, 162, 1158–1164.  Young, J. E. (1999). Cognitive therapy for personality disorders: A schema-focused approach (3rd ed.). Sarasota, FL: Professional Resource Exchange. (Original work published 1990)  Young, J. E. (2005). Young Schema Questionnaire (3rd ed.). New York: Cognitive Therapy Center of New York.  Young, J. E., Arntz, A., Atkinson, T., Lobbestael, J., Weishaar, E., van Vreeswijk, M., et al. (2008). Schema Mode Questionnaire (Version 1.1). New York: Cognitive Therapy Center of New York.  Young, J. E., & Klosko, J. S. (1994). Reinventing your life: How to break free of negative life patterns. New York: Plume.  Young, J. E., Klosko, J. S., & Weishaar, M. E. (2003). Schema therapy: A practitioner’s guide. New York: Guilford Press.  Zettle, R. (2007). ACT for depression: A clinician’s guide to using acceptance and commitment therapy in treating depression. Richmond, BC, Canada: Raincoat Books.   CHaPter  8 interpersonal Psychotherapy for Depression  kathryN l. BleiBerG JohN c. Markowitz  Much evidence has emerged over the past decade supporting the clinical effectiveness of interpersonal psychotherapy (iPT) for a variety of problems, particularly depression. A substantial advantage of iPT is the relative ease with which clinicians can learn to administer this protocol with integrity. in this chapter, the process of iPT is illustrated in some detail in the context of the treatment of “sara,” who was suffering from a major depressive episode associated with grief following the death of her baby girl in utero at 27 weeks’ gestation, some 2 months earlier. The first author, kathryn l. Bleiberg, an international authority on training in iPT, was the therapist. Although iPT is relatively easy to comprehend, the twists and turns encountered in the administration of iPT (or any therapeutic approach) are particularly evident in this chapter. Here the therapist skillfully focuses on resolving grief, as well as on the patient’s social isolation and conflicts with her husband over emotional reactions to the loss. Also notable about iPT is the finding that the treatment is more successful when administered with fidelity to the goals of iPT and adherence to the protocol. The power of a therapist and patient working well together and staying on task provides some good evidence for the specific effects of an interpersonal focus to psychotherapy.—D. H. B.  interpersonal psychotherapy (IPT), a time-limited, diagnosis-targeted, pragmatic, empirically supported treatment, was originally developed to treat outpatients with major depression. IPT focuses on current or recent life events, interpersonal difficulties, and symptoms. Through use of the medical model and by linking mood symptoms to recent life events, the IPT therapist helps the patient to feel understood. IPT aids recovery from depression by relieving depressive symptoms, by helping the patient to develop more effective strategies for dealing with current interpersonal problems related to the onset of symptoms, and by mobilizing social support (Bleiberg & Markowitz, 2007). IPT’s success as  an individual treatment for major depression has led to its adaptation for subpopulations of patients with mood disorders, including depressed older patients (Reynolds et al., 2006, 2010; Sholomskas, Chevron, Prusoff, & Berry, 1983), depressed adolescents (Mufson, Moreau, & Weissman, 1993; Mufson, Weissman, Moreau, & Garfinkel, 1999; Mufson et al., 2004), and depressed HIV-positive patients (Markowitz, Klerman, Perry, Clougherty, & Mayers, 1992; Markowitz, Kocsis, et al., 1998; Ransom et al., 2008), and patients with antepartum (Spinelli & Endicott, 2003) and postpartum depression (O’Hara, Stuart, Gorman, & Wenzel, 2000), dysthymic disorder (Markowitz, 1998), and bipolar dis   332   Interpersonal Psychotherapy for Depression  order (Frank, 2005). IPT has been adapted for anxiety disorders, including social phobia (Lipsitz, Fyer, Markowitz, & Cherry, 1999), posttraumatic stress disorder (Bleiberg & Markowitz, 2005; Markowitz, Milrod, Bleiberg, & Marshall, 2009), bulimia nervosa (Fairburn, Jones, Peveler, Hope, & O’Connor, 1993; Fairburn et al., 1995) and binge-eating disorder (Wilfley, 2008; Wilson, Wilfley, Agras, & Bryson, 2010), and borderline personality disorder (Markowitz, Skodol, & Bleiberg, 2006). In addition to its adaptation to treat patients with different diagnoses, IPT has been increasingly practiced and studied among patients from different cultures (Markowitz & Weissman, 2012a). Furthermore, IPT’s demonstrated efficacy in the treatment of major depression has led to its incorporation into national treatment guidelines (American Psychiatric Association, 2010; Cuijpers et al., 2011).  This chapter describes the principles, characteristics, and techniques of individual IPT for major depression and illustrates how a clinician implements IPT techniques with an actual patient.  MaJor DePressioN  Major depressive disorder (MDD), the most common depressive illness, affects millions of Americans each year. The Global Burden of Disease Study, initiated by the World Health Organization (Murray & Lopez, 1996), estimated that depression is the fourth leading cause of disability and will become the second leading cause worldwide by the year 2020. Epidemiological studies of mood disorders have provided estimates of the prevalence and correlates of MDD. The National Comorbidity Survey Replication (NCS-R; Kessler et al., 2003) found a 16.2% lifetime and 6.6% annual prevalence of MDD in the United States, with the majority of cases of MDD associated with substantial symptom severity and impairment in functioning. National and international studies have consistently found higher prevalence of MDD in women than in men; women are twice as likely as men to experience an episode of MDD. The average age of onset of MDD is between ages 20 and 40 years (Blazer, 2000).  The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, fifth edition (DSM-5; American Psychiatric Association, 2013) defines MDD as a mood disorder characterized by one or more major depressive episodes. A major depressive episode entails a period of at least 2 weeks during which a person experiences  depressed mood or loss of interest or pleasure in nearly all activities most of the day, nearly every day, accompanied by at least four additional symptoms of depression present nearly every day. Symptoms of depression include the following:  •• Significant weight loss (not related to dieting), or  weight gain or decrease or increase in appetite.  •• Insomnia or hypersomnia.  •• Psychomotor agitation or retardation severe  enough to be observable by others.  •• Fatigue or loss of energy.  •• Feelings of worthlessness, or excessive or inappro   priate or excessive guilt.  •• Diminished ability to think or concentrate, or in   decisiveness.  •• Recurrent thoughts of death, recurrent suicidal  ideation without a specific plan, or a suicide at   tempt or a specific plan to commit suicide.  To meet full criteria for a major depressive episode, the patient’s symptoms must cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning. Depression is associated with social withdrawal and difficulty in social and occupational functioning. In some cases, a major depressive episode will be accompanied by symptoms of a manic episode, which is classified in DSM-5 using the specifier with mixed features. The symptoms may not be due to the direct physiological effects of a substance or a general medical condition.  the DeveloPMeNt of iPt  Klerman, Weissman, and colleagues developed IPT in the 1970s as a treatment arm for a pharmacotherapy study of depression (Markowitz & Weissman, 2012b). Being researchers, they developed a psychotherapy based on research data. Post–World War II research on psychosocial life events and the development of mental disorders had shown relationships between depression and complicated bereavement, role disputes (i.e., bad relationships), role transitions (e.g., losing or getting a new job, or any meaningful life change), and interpersonal deficits. Stressful life events can trigger depressive episodes in vulnerable individuals, and depressive episodes compromise interpersonal functioning, making it difficult to manage stressful life events, and often triggering further negative life events (Bleiberg & Markowitz, 2007).   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  IPT was also built on the interpersonal theory of Adolph Meyer (1957) and Harry Stack Sullivan (1953), and on the attachment theory of John Bowlby (1973). The interpersonalists broadened the scope of psychiatry by emphasizing social, cultural, and interpersonal factors. Sullivan stressed the role of interpersonal relationships in the development of mental illness and the use of interpersonal relationships to understand, assess, and treat mental illness. Sullivan also indicated that life events and relationships occurring after early childhood influenced psychopathology, in contradistinction to the then current focus on pre-Oedipal life events.  Bowlby (1973) posited that the disruption of secure attachments can contribute to the onset of depression, and that psychiatric disorders result from difficulties in forming and maintaining secure attachments. Indeed, social supports protect against depression. In psychiatry, the idea that mental illness was influenced by current life events and not (simply) due to early childhood experiences was novel in an era divided between psychoanalytic and biological approaches (Klerman, Weissman, Rounsaville, & Chevron, 1984).  PriNciPles of iPt: the iPt MoDel of DePressioN  Two basic principles of IPT explain the patient’s depression and situation. These principles are simple enough to grasp, even for a very depressed patient with poor concentration. First, the IPT therapist defines depression as a medical illness and explains that the patient has a common illness that comprises a discrete and predictable set of symptoms, thus making the symptoms seem less overwhelming and more manageable. The IPT therapist assumes that the etiology of depression is complex and multidetermined: The etiology may comprise biology, life experiences, and family history, among other factors. The IPT therapist emphasizes that  depression is a medical illness that is treatable and not the patient’s fault. Explaining that depression is treatable inspires in patients the hope that they can feel better. Hopelessness, a potentially deadly depressive symptom, distorts the generally good prognosis of the illness. Depressed patients often see their symptoms and consequent difficulties in functioning as reflections of a personal failure, character flaw, or weakness.  Defining depression as a blameless illness helps to combat the depressed patient’s guilt and self-criticism. The therapist diagnoses depression using DSM-5 or  International Classification of Diseases (ICD-10; World Health Organization, 1992) criteria and assesses symptoms using rating scales such as the Hamilton Depression Rating Scale (HDRS; Hamilton, 1960) or the Beck Depression Inventory–II (BDI-II; Beck, Steer, & Brown, 1996). IPT’s use of the medical model to define depression distinguishes it from other psychotherapies and makes it highly compatible with antidepressant medication in combination treatment.  The second IPT principle is that the patient’s depression is connected to a current or recent life event. Stressful life events can precipitate depressive episodes in vulnerable individuals and, conversely, depression can make it difficult for individuals to manage stressful life events. IPT focuses on solving an interpersonal problem in the patient’s life, a problem area—complicated bereavement, a role dispute, a role transition, or interpersonal deficits—connected to the patient’s current depressive episode. By solving an interpersonal crisis, the patient can improve her1 life situation and simultaneously relieve depressive symptoms.  characteristics of iPt  Several characteristics define IPT, sometimes distinguishing it from other psychotherapies.  •• IPT is time-limited and focused. Acute treatment at the start is set at 12 or 16 weekly sessions. Some studies have included continuation and maintenance phases, which involve biweekly and monthly sessions. IPT’s time limit provides hope for patients that their symptoms and life situation can rapidly improve; the time limit encourages patients to stay focused in treatment. It also pressures both patient and therapist to work hard and efficiently within the therapeutic window of opportunity. Therapist and patient agree to focus on one, or at most two, problem areas at the beginning of treatment.  •• IPT is empirically grounded. Because IPT has shown repeated efficacy in research studies, therapists can offer and deliver the treatment with confidence and optimism, and patients can feel hopeful about the treatment they are receiving.  •• IPT is diagnosis-targeted. IPT focuses on a specific diagnosis, its symptoms, and how symptoms interfere and interact with social functioning. IPT is not intended for all patients, but it has been tested in a series of randomized controlled trials to determine its efficacy.   Interpersonal Psychotherapy for Depression  •• IPT has a “here-and-now” focus. IPT focuses on the present and on improving the patient’s situation for the future—not on what happened in the patient’s past. The IPT therapist relates current symptoms and interpersonal difficulties to recent or current life events. Although past depressive episodes and relationships are reviewed and relationship patterns are identified, treatment focuses on current relationships—building social supports and resolving disputes—and social functioning.   •• IPT focuses on interpersonal problems. The IPT therapist may recognize intrapsychic defenses but does not see the patient’s current difficulties as a function of internal conflict. Instead, the therapist focuses on interpersonal relationships and functioning.  •• IPT focuses on the interrelationship between mood and current life events. The IPT therapist emphasizes that stressful life events can trigger episodes of major depression and, reciprocally, that depression compromises psychosocial functioning. This makes it difficult to manage life stressors, leading to further negative life events.  •• IPT emphasizes eliciting affect. Depressed patients often have difficulty understanding, identifying, and articulating what they are feeling. Whereas patients with depression tend to report feeling “bad,” they often have difficulty identifying negative feelings more specifically, such as anger, hurt, shame, rejection, disappointment. Furthermore, depressed patients who do recognize such negative affects tend to feel ashamed of having such “bad” emotions. The IPT therapist helps the patient to better identify what she is feeling, validates emotions such as anger and disappointment as normal and useful interpersonal signals, and helps the patient to use such emotion as a guide (Markowitz & Milrod, 2011). Patients in IPT learn to manage their feelings better and to use them in deciding how to behave and what to say in interpersonal encounters.  iPt coMPareD with other PsychotheraPies  Although IPT has a distinct rationale and is distinguishable from other psychotherapies (Hill, O’Grady, & Elkin, 1992; Weissman, Markowitz, & Klerman, 2000), it is an eclectic psychotherapy that uses techniques seen in other treatment approaches. IPT includes the so-called “common” factors of psycho   therapy (Frank, 1971). IPT shares the “here and now” diagnostic focus, time limit, and active approach with cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT). IPT and CBT both include role playing and skills building. However, IPT is much less structured and assigns no formal homework, although the IPT therapist does encourage activity between sessions to improve mood and as it relates to resolving the interpersonal problem area. Whereas the CBT therapist defines depression as a consequence of dysfunctional thought patterns and attributes the patient’s difficulties to them, the IPT therapist emphasizes that depression is a medical illness and relates difficulties to feeling depressed and to recent life events. IPT emphasizes eliciting affect rather than (“hot,” affectively charged) automatic thoughts. IPT addresses interpersonal issues in a manner similar to that in marital therapy. Much like a supportive therapist, IPT therapists provide support and encouragement (Bleiberg & Markowitz, 2007).  IPT has been termed a “psychodynamic” psychotherapy on occasion, but it is not (Markowitz, Svartberg, & Swartz, 1998). IPT employs the medical model of depressive illness, whereas psychodynamic psychotherapy uses a conflict-based approach. The IPT therapist does not address unconscious processes, or explore or interpret the transference, but instead focuses on current relationships outside of the treatment room. Childhood experiences are recognized but not emphasized. The IPT therapist relates current symptoms and interpersonal problems to recent life events, not to childhood experiences. IPT acknowledges the influence of past experiences on present difficulties, but only to identify patterns of interpersonal behavior and to empathize with the patient’s struggle. Unlike psychodynamic treatment, the goal in IPT is to reduce symptoms and improve social functioning, not to change character or personality. Like the psychodynamic psychotherapist, however, the IPT therapist emphasizes facilitating affect in the treatment room and helping patients become aware of feelings they may not have been aware of previously (Markowitz & Milrod, 2011; Weissman et al., 2000).  the iPt theraPist  The IPT therapist conducts treatment in an office in an academic, hospital, or private practice setting. The therapist typically does not consult with the patient’s family or friends.   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  The IPT therapist takes a non-neutral, active stance, providing psychoeducation about depression, emphasizing the IPT rationale, teaching social skills, and instilling hope. A somewhat directive approach is essential for adhering to the time limit in IPT and keeping the treatment focused on the interpersonal problem area. Taking an active stance may be challenging for therapists with psychodynamic orientations who are used to taking a neutral stance and offering little guidance in the session.  On the other hand, the IPT therapist does not want to reinforce the passivity and dependency that are characteristic of depression. A therapist who solves all problems may reinforce the patient’s sense of inadequacy. Hence, the IPT therapist encourages the patient to come up with ideas, explore options, and test them out between sessions. Hence, the patient deserves (and is given) credit for making the life changes that lead to improvement in treatment.  The IPT therapist needs to be supportive, enthusiastic, and optimistic to instill hope that the depression will improve and changes will be forthcoming, and to encourage and inspire the patient to make changes. The structure of the IPT manual (Weissman et al., 2000; Weissman, Markowitz, & Klerman, 2007) and the empirical validation of IPT in randomized controlled studies help to bolster therapist confidence. The IPT therapist frequently congratulates the patient on her progress in treatment and efforts to make changes.  Given the emphasis on helping the patient to identify and express feelings, the IPT therapist needs to feel comfortable encouraging expression of affect and tolerating intense negative affects. The therapist can show by example that feelings are indeed potent, but they are only feelings, and can be understood in an interpersonal context and will pass, if tolerated.  the iPt PatieNt  Research has demonstrated that a wide range of patients with major depression are good candidates for IPT. IPT has been validated with minor modifications as a treatment for adolescent, adult, peripartum, and geriatric depression. The patient should ideally report some recent life stressor and have some social contacts. Patients with depression who report no recent life events and lack basic social skills tend to do least well in IPT. IPT is not intended for patients with delusional depression, which requires antidepressant and antipsychotic pharmacotherapy or electroconvulsive therapy.  Patients with comorbid moderate or severe personality disorder may be less likely to respond to short-term psychotherapy (Weissman et al., 2000). Accordingly, the recent adaptation of IPT for borderline personality disorder allows up to 32 weeks of treatment (Markowitz et al., 2006).  the four iNterPersoNal ProBleM areas  Treatment with IPT focuses on solving one of the following four interpersonal problem areas related to the onset or maintenance of the patient’s current depressive episode. The IPT therapist follows strategies specific to each problem area.  Grief  This problem area addresses a patient’s complicated bereavement following the death of a significant other. The therapist facilitates the mourning process, encourages catharsis, and ultimately helps the patient to form new relationships and find new activities to compensate for the loss. The therapist explores the relationship and the associated feelings the patient had with the loved one. Patients with complicated bereavement often have had a conflicted relationship with the deceased, reporting unresolved feelings about and anger toward the person, and feeling guilty or uncomfortable with such feelings. Patients may feel guilty about what they did or did not say to or do for the person who died. The therapist encourages exploration of these feelings and validates and normalizes negative feelings, allowing the patient to let go of the guilt she experiences.  The release of negative affects in the therapy office can help to diminish the intensity of such feelings. The therapist also explores positive feelings the patient had for the person she lost and empathizes with the loss. Finally, the therapist helps the patient explore options for forming new relationships and finding new activities to help to substitute for the lost relationship and give the patient a new sense of direction. The loss may provide opportunities to meet people and engage in activities the patient might not otherwise have encountered.  Role Disputes  A “role dispute” is a conflict with a significant other: a spouse, friend, parent, relative, employer, coworker, or close friend. The therapist and patient explore the   Interpersonal Psychotherapy for Depression  relationship, the nature of the dispute, and options to resolve it. Patients with depression tend to put other people’s needs ahead of their own. They have difficulty asserting themselves, confronting others, and getting angry effectively, which makes it difficult for them to manage interpersonal conflicts. The therapist discusses these depressive tendencies with patients and explains: “It’s not your fault. You can learn how to assert yourself.”   The therapist validates the patient’s feelings in the relationship: recognizing anger as a natural response to someone bothering her, for example. The next question is how to express such feelings. The therapist helps the patient to conceive ways to communicate thoughts and feelings more effectively and role-plays potential interactions with her. If, after exploring and attempting to implement options to resolve the dispute, the conflict has reached an impasse, the therapist helps the patient to consider ways either to live with the impasse or end the relationship.  Role Transitions  A “role transition” is a change in life status, such as beginning or ending a relationship, starting or losing a job, a geographic move, graduation or retirement, becoming a parent, or receiving the diagnosis of a medical illness. The therapist helps the patient to mourn the loss of the old role, to explore positive and negative aspects of the new role, and to determine what positive aspects of the old role, if any, she can retain. Ultimately, the therapist helps the patient adjust to and gain a sense of mastery over the new role. Even if a new role is wanted or positive, the role may be accompanied by unanticipated loss. For example, getting married may involve having to spend less time with one’s family of origin due to having to spend time with the spouse’s family. Moving to a new, larger house in a better neighborhood may disrupt relationships with friends in the old neighborhood. If a new role is undesired, a patient may discover unseen benefits in therapy. A patient who has lost a job may come to see the loss as an opportunity to pursue a better job.  Interpersonal Deficits  Interpersonal deficits, the least developed of the four problem areas, are the focus of IPT for major depression only when a patient reports no recent life events and, therefore, lacks any of the first three problem areas. Patients in this category tend to be socially iso   lated, and to have few social supports and a history of difficulty forming and sustaining relationships or finding relationships unfulfilling. The goal of treatment in this problem area is to reduce the patient’s isolation. Because the patient lacks current relationships, treatment focuses on patterns in past relationships and starting to form new ones. The therapist reviews past significant relationships, exploring positive and negative aspects and identifying recurrent problems. The therapist helps the patient to explore options for meeting people and participating in activities that she used to enjoy.  Unlike treatment for the other problem areas, treatment for interpersonal deficits may focus on the relationship with the therapist. In the absence of other relationships, and with the understanding that the patient is likely to feel uncomfortable in the therapeutic situation, the therapist encourages the patient to discuss her feelings about the therapist and work on interpersonal problems that arise in their relationship. Ideally, the relationship with the therapist serves as model for the patient to form other relationships. Given that IPT usually focuses on a life event, it is not surprising that patients who lack such life events have been shown to respond least well to IPT. It is important to identify patients who have underlying dysthymic disorder because such patients often describe few recent life events. There is an IPT protocol adapted to the treatment of patients who are dysthymic (Markowitz, 1998; Weissman et al., 2000).  the Process of iPt treatMeNt  Acute IPT treatment for major depression comprises initial, middle, and termination phases. IPT techniques help the patient to pursue the goals of treatment for each interpersonal problem area. This section leads into a case example illustrating the implementation of these techniques.  The Initial Phase (Sessions 1–3)  Tasks of the initial sessions of IPT for major depression include eliciting the patient’s chief complaint; reviewing her symptoms and establishing a diagnosis; determining the interpersonal context for the current depressive episode; forming a therapeutic alliance; and setting the frame of the treatment, including the treatment goals and strategies. Although these tasks are common to other psychotherapeutic interventions, the techniques and process for accomplishing them are specific to IPT.   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  Diagnosing Major Depression  To diagnosis MDD, the therapist reviews current symptoms of depression using either DSM-5 or ICD-10 criteria, inquiring about each symptom and about any past history of depression. The therapist may administer a symptom severity scale such as the HDRS (Hamilton, 1960) or the BDI-II (Beck et al., 1996) and repeat the instrument every few weeks to monitor the patient’s progress. The therapist rules out other diagnoses, such as bipolar illness, depression due to general medical condition or substance, and other psychiatric disorders. If the patient meets criteria for MDD, the therapist tells her, describing explicitly each of the symptoms she reported:   “You have an illness called major depression. The symptoms you describe having had for the past couple of months—feeling down most of the time, having difficulty enjoying things, feeling like you have to push yourself to get things done, difficulty sleeping, loss of appetite, trouble concentrating, and feeling very self-critical and down on yourself and pessimistic about your future—are all symptoms of depression. Depression is a treatable illness. It is not your fault that you feel this way and have had difficulty functioning, any more than it would be your fault if you had asthma or high blood pressure, or any other medical problem. And although you’re feeling hopeless, that’s just a depressive symptom. Your prognosis with treatment is quite good. You can feel better.”  In the initial phase, and as needed throughout the treatment, the therapist provides psychoeducation about depression and how it affects social functioning. The therapist helps the patient to identify and understand her depressive symptoms and how better to manage them, and to distinguish between the illness and premorbid strengths and capabilities. The therapist determines the need for medication based on symptom severity, past response to medications, and patient preference.   The “Sick Role”  The IPT therapist gives the patient the “sick role” (Parsons, 1951), a temporary role intended to help the patient recognize that she suffers from an illness that comprises a distinct set of symptoms that compromise  functioning. Assuming the sick role relieves the patient of self-blame and exempts her from responsibilities that the depression compromises until she recovers. The therapist educates the patient about how depression can impair social functioning and how to explain the illness to family and friends to gain support. The sick role also gives the patient the responsibility of working on improving her symptoms in treatment.  The Interpersonal Inventory  In IPT the psychiatric history includes the “interpersonal inventory,” a thorough review of the patient’s past and current social functioning, close relationships, relationship patterns, expectations of others within relationships, and the perceived expectations that others have of the patient. The interpersonal inventory should give the therapist a sense of how the patient interacts with other people. It should also illuminate how relationships may have contributed to the current depressive episode and, conversely, how depressive symptoms may be affecting current relationships. Furthermore, the interpersonal inventory assesses actual and potential social support. To glean this information, the IPT therapist asks detailed questions about the patient’s past and current relationships. An inquiry about current relationships might include the following questions:   “Who is in your life currently? . . . Do you have a significant other? . . . Girlfriend/boyfriend? . . . What is your relationship like with him/her? . . . What do you like about him/her? . . . What don’t you like? . . . Do you and your spouse argue? . . . What do you argue about? . . . What happens when you argue—what do you do/say? . . . What do you expect of him/her? . . . What do you think he/she expects of you?”  Identification of Interpersonal Problem Areas  The primary goal of the interpersonal inventory is to determine which interpersonal issues are most related to the patient’s current depressive episode. The therapist should identify major interpersonal problem areas that can become the treatment focus. The therapist inquires about any changes in the patient’s life that occurred around the onset of current depressive symptoms: “What was going on in your life when you became depressed?” The therapist explores different areas in the patient’s life: home, work, relationships   Interpersonal Psychotherapy for Depression  with significant others, family members, and friends. The therapist should pick one problem area on which to focus, or at most two; too many treatment foci yield an unfocused treatment. The therapist relates the depression to a problem area and presents this to the patient in a formulation:  “It seems from what you have been telling me that the main problem has been your difficulty in getting along with your husband. Although the causes of depression are complex and not fully known, we do know that conflicts with significant others can be related to depression. Furthermore, depression can make it difficult to handle conflicts with other people. I suggest that we meet for the next 12 weeks to figure out how you can better deal with the problems with your husband you’ve described. In IPT, we call that conflict a ‘role dispute.’ As you solve your role dispute, both your life and your depression should improve. Does this make sense to you?”  Only with the patient’s explicit agreement to work on the chosen interpersonal problem area does the therapist proceed to the middle phase of treatment. The patient’s agreement on the focus allows the therapist to bring her back to this theme thereafter, maintaining a thematic flow for the treatment.  Explanation of the Treatment Contract and the IPT Approach  In addition to agreeing on a treatment focus in the initial sessions, the therapist and patient discuss and come to an understanding about other aspects of the treatment. The therapist discusses practical issues, including the time limit, the length and frequency of sessions, termination date, appointment time, fee, and so forth. The therapist explains that IPT is one of several empirically supported antidepressant treatments and describes the basic IPT principles. The therapist emphasizes the “here and now,” and the social and interpersonal focus of the treatment, explaining:  “We’ll work together to try to understand how current stresses and relationships may be affecting your mood. We will work on helping you to better manage these stresses and the problems you may be having in relationships. We’ll explore what you want and need in your relationships and help you figure out how to get what you want and need.  “I’ll be interested in hearing each week about what’s going on in your relationships with other people, how those interactions make you feel, and also how your feelings influence what happens with other people.”  The therapist encourages the patient to bring up any discomforts she has about the sessions.  “If anything bothers you, please bring it up. I do not intend to do anything to make you uncomfortable, but if you feel that way, please tell me, so that we can address the issue. It’s just the sort of interpersonal tension that we need to focus on in your outside life as well.”  The Middle Phase (Sessions 4–9)  Having made the treatment contract and chosen an interpersonal problem area as the focus of treatment, the therapist can proceed to the middle phase of sessions, in which the goal is to work on resolving the focal problem area.  Each session begins with the question, “How have you been feeling since we last met?” This question elicits an interval history of mood, events, and interpersonal interactions that transpired between sessions. It also keeps the patient focused on current mood and situation. The patient is likely to respond by describing a mood (“I felt really down”) or an event (“My husband and I had a huge fight”). After further inquiry, the therapist links the patient’s mood to a recent event, or an event to her mood (“No wonder you felt depressed after the fight you had with your husband!”).  Inquiring about emotionally laden interpersonal interactions, the therapist uses “communication analysis”— the reconstruction and evaluation of affectively charged interactions—to help the patient understand how she felt in the situation and what she might have done to communicate more effectively. The therapist explores the patient’s wishes and options, helping her to decide what she wants and exploring the options for achieving it.  “What did you want to happen in that situation? . . . What could you have done to get what you wanted in that situation? What other options do you have?”  Depressed patients often have difficulty seeing that they have options, and their tendency to deem their   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  own needs to be less important than others’ contributes to difficulty in asserting themselves. The therapist explains this to the patient and offers empathy, blaming the depressive syndrome for the patient’s difficulties where appropriate. To help the patient choose which options to pursue, the therapist uses decision analysis. The case example presented later in this chapter elaborates these techniques.  The therapist role-plays potential interactions with the patient to prepare her for interpersonal interactions in real life. Rather than supplying words for the patient during role play, the therapist instead encourages her to come up with her own words. This empowers the patient, fostering her independence from the therapist. The therapist points out that the patient is able to figure out what to say and do in interpersonal interactions, despite depression making her feel unable to do so. The therapist asks the patient how she felt during role play, whether the content and tone of voice felt comfortable, and how she imagines it will feel to say the words in reality. When a patient communicates effectively during role play—and, ultimately, in real life—the therapist reinforces the adaptive behavior with congratulations and encouragement. Real-life successes not only improve mood but also inspire patients to try to assert themselves in subsequent situations.  Depressed patients withdraw socially and to lose interest in activities they previously found pleasurable. The therapist encourages the patient to resume social activity and to explore options for new activities and opportunities to form new relationships, if applicable. The therapist empathizes with difficulty the patient feels in pushing herself to engage with others, but stresses that, once engaged, she will likely feel better. Indeed, the IPT therapist asks the patient to take risks—both in asserting herself with others and in pushing herself to reengage in social activities. The therapist explicitly acknowledges that he/she is asking the patient to take risks, yet assures her that these risks will likely lead to improvement of her mood and life situation. The therapist will be there to discuss anything that goes right or wrong.  The Termination Phase (Sessions 10–12)  In the final sessions, the therapist reviews the patient’s progress in symptom improvement, as well as the extent to which the patient has resolved the focal problem area. By reviewing why the patient is better, through the actions she has taken to resolve the interpersonal  focus, the therapist reinforces the patient’s growing self-esteem by pointing out that the patient’s actions have led to her gains. The therapist congratulates the patient on her progress and hard work, and expresses optimism that the patient can maintain that progress independent of the therapist.  The therapist addresses nonresponse in patients whose moods and life situations do not improve, or only partially improve. The therapist should explain that it is the treatment that failed—not the patient. The therapist gives the patient hope by emphasizing that depression is treatable and many other effective treatments exist, and by encouraging her to explore alternative treatments.  The therapist explores the patient’s feelings about the treatment and termination, acknowledging not only his/ her own sadness to be ending their relationship but also happiness about the patient’s improvement and confidence that she will be able to maintain the progress she made in treatment. Should symptoms recur, the patient has gained tools to manage symptoms of depression on her own. Furthermore, the patient can return to IPT for “booster” sessions as needed.  Using the IPT medical model, the therapist provides psychoeducation about relapse and recurrence of major depression and prepares the patient about potential for relapse. Patients who have experienced one or more episodes of major depression unfortunately remain vulnerable to future episodes. The therapist explains this and advises that given the link between stressful life events and mood, the patient can anticipate that she may have difficulty with future, stressful life events. Fortunately, the patient can use the coping skills gained in treatment to ward off a worsening of symptoms. If the patient has improved in IPT but has either significant residual symptoms or a history of multiple episodes, therapist and patient may contract for continuation or maintenance IPT, which has also demonstrated efficacy in forestalling relapse (Frank et al., 2007).  case stuDy  The following case demonstrates how a clinician (K. L. B.) implemented IPT for major depression in a 12-week acute treatment and illustrates how one works with the problem area of grief. In IPT, grief (complicated bereavement) is considered as a focal problem area when the onset of depression is related to the death of a significant other and the patient is experiencing an abnor   