Interpersonal Psychotherapy for Depression  mal grief reaction (Weissman et al., 2000). Although cases that focus on the grief problem area usually address complicated bereavement related to the death of a person who has actually lived, the following case involves complicated bereavement related to a stillbirth (Bleiberg, 2012). Indeed, the IPT problem areas can apply to a wide range of cases. IPT treatment goals and techniques specific to working with the grief problem area are demonstrated.  Background Information  Sara, a 35-year-old, married, childless woman, was referred for treatment of major depression 2 months after the death of her baby girl in utero at 27 weeks’ gestation. Her doctor considered a bacterial infection the most likely cause of the stillbirth. Sara’s chief complaint was “I feel like I should be over it.”  At 27 weeks, after not having felt the baby move for several hours, Sara called her doctor, who told her to come to the hospital. The doctor found no heartbeat and told Sara that he needed to deliver the fetus. Sara recalled feeling shocked, numb, and unable to cry at first. She was given medication to induce labor and an epidural, and delivered the baby vaginally. Despite efforts to revive her, the baby girl was pronounced dead shortly after delivery. Sara said that she wanted to hold her and was given the baby to hold, swaddled in a white-and-pink blanket. She recalled that she and her husband had cried uncontrollably while they took turns holding the baby, and for a long time after giving the baby back to the doctor. She remembered that the baby was “very cute” and looked like her husband. She was given pictures of the baby and footprints to take home. Sara and her husband decided not to have a funeral or memorial service for the baby.  Sara reported that since the stillbirth 2 months earlier, she had been feeling sad and irritable most of the day, nearly every day, and unable to enjoy previous pleasures such as reading fiction, cooking, going to the movies, and exercise. She worked as a nurse on an inpatient medical floor in a New York City hospital, and prior to the stillbirth had very much enjoyed her work. She now felt unable to enjoy work because of her mood, and she feared having to talk about her loss with coworkers who knew she had been pregnant. She was crying frequently, socially withdrawn, had low energy and difficulty concentrating, experienced decreased appetite, and felt very bad about herself. She denied ever having thoughts of suicide or feeling that life was not worth living.  Sara reported that despite trying not to think about the baby’s death, she nonetheless was frequently bothered by thoughts about the baby, often wondering what her life would have been like had she survived. Sara had returned to work 3 weeks after the stillbirth, hoping that work would distract her and help her “get over” her loss. She reported feeling very angry at and avoiding other pregnant women, including close friends and women with newborns, in addition to other reminders of her pregnancy. She felt angry at having had to go through pregnancy, labor, and delivery without gaining the pleasure of having a child.  Sara was plagued by inappropriate guilt. She felt guilty because she feared that she had done something to cause her loss, despite the doctor telling her that she could have done nothing to prevent it. He explained that when bacterial infections cause fetal death, they often cause no symptoms in the mother and go undiagnosed until they cause serious complications. Nevertheless, Sara felt that she should have recognized the infection, and she felt guilty about having waited until age 35 to try to conceive. She felt like a failure for having had a stillbirth. Sara felt guilty that she had disappointed and upset her husband by losing the baby, and she did not want to burden him with her feelings about the loss.  Sara had never sought treatment prior to her current evaluation. She described one prior episode of major depression in her late 20s, lasting 4–6 weeks, precipitated by a breakup with a boyfriend of several years, but reported feeling much worse since losing the baby. She reported that her mother had been treated for depression with antidepressant medication with good results.  Sara was an attractive woman of average height and weight who looked her stated age. She was casually but neatly dressed in jeans and a large sweater. Sara’s movements were slightly slowed; her speech was fluent. Her mood was depressed and anxious, and her affect, congruent and tearful. She denied current or past suicidal ideation and any history of substance abuse or psychotic symptoms. She denied current or past medical conditions, including thyroid dysfunction. She reported no known prior pregnancies, pregnancy losses, or fertility issues prior to the stillbirth. In fact, she had conceived after just a couple of months of trying to get pregnant.  Sara was good candidate for IPT: She met criteria for major depression and had experienced a recent life event proximate to the onset of her symptoms. Furthermore, IPT could address the interpersonal problems she was experiencing related to the onset of her   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  symptoms. Sara was also a potential candidate for CBT, pharmacotherapy, or (evidence-based antidepressant) psychotherapy combined with medication. She was uninterested in doing written homework and resistant to taking medication because she was hoping to conceive again in the near future.  IPT Treatment with Sara  Acute Phase (Sessions 1–3)  Treatment with Sara followed the IPT format for acute treatment. In the first three sessions, the therapist obtained a thorough psychiatric history and set the treatment framework. In the first session, she obtained a chief complaint and a history of Sara’s present illness. Because treatment occurred prior to the release of DSM-5, the therapist used DSM-IV criteria to determine that Sara met criteria for major depressive disorder. She administered the HDRS to assess the severity of Sara’s symptoms.  The therapist offered Sara empathy for her pregnancy loss, saying: “I am so sorry. You’ve suffered a terrible loss. No wonder you have been feeling so badly and having such a difficult time.” The therapist gave Sara her diagnosis of major depression, reviewed her specific symptoms, and gave her the “sick role,” and offered her hope:  “The symptoms you’ve described having in the past couple of months—depressed mood, not being able to enjoy things and your loss of interest in things, feeling very badly about yourself and guilty, your difficulty eating and sleeping, and difficulty concentrating—are all symptoms of major depression. Major depression is an illness that is treatable. It is not your fault that you have been feeling this way. And you have a very good chance of recovering.”   The therapist explained that Sara’s HDRS score of 24 indicated moderately severe depression and that she would readminister the HDRS at regular intervals to monitor Sara’s progress. Given the severity of Sara’s symptoms, her willingness to participate in psychotherapy, and her reluctance to take medication in anticipation of trying to conceive again, the therapist did not think medication was needed.  The therapist described IPT and the treatment rationale:   tHeraPist: I am trained in interpersonal psychotherapy, which I think could be helpful to you. Interpersonal psychotherapy—often called IPT—is a timelimited treatment that focuses on how recent life events and stresses—such as losing a baby—affect your mood, and how mood symptoms make it difficult to current life events and stresses, particularly problems in relationships. Although we will take the first few sessions to review your history, our sessions will focus on the here and now, on your current difficulties and relationships, not on the past. Does this make sense to you?  sara: Yes.  tHeraPist: Often, people respond to treatment with IPT in 12 weekly sessions. I propose that we meet once a week for a 50-minute session for the next 12 weeks. If it’s helpful, at the end of the 12 sessions, we can discuss whether it might be useful to have additional sessions to work on issues and maintain your progress. How does that sound to you?  sara: It sounds good. I hope I can feel better in 12 weeks.  tHeraPist: You can feel better in 12 weeks. IPT has been shown in numerous research studies to effectively treat symptoms like the ones you have described.   After the first session Sara felt somewhat more hopeful but stated that she did not like the idea that she had a diagnosis of major depression. Although she could understand that there was a relationship between her stillbirth and her mood, Sara still felt she should be feeling better after 2 months and did not want to think of herself as depressed, like her mother, and in need of help. Sara stated that she was always the “strong one” and was used to functioning at a very high level. The therapist was not surprised by Sara’s initial skepticism, as it can take time for patients to accept the medical model. Furthermore, patients with depression often feel uncomfortable about seeking help because they fear burdening others. Nevertheless, therapist and patient agreed to work together for 12 weeks, then decide whether further sessions were needed.  In obtaining Sara’s psychiatric history, the therapist conducted an interpersonal inventory, carefully reviewing Sara’s past and current social functioning and close relationships. She started the inventory by asking about Sara’s family.   Interpersonal Psychotherapy for Depression  “Where did you grow up? . . . Who was in your family? . . . How would you describe your relationship with your mother? . . . With your brother?”  Sara had grown up in Canada with her parents, now in their early 60s, and her younger brother, now age 33, all of whom still lived near Toronto where she had been raised. Her father had worked a lot while Sara was growing up, and although she was fond of him, she did not feel so close to him. Sara felt closer to her mother and spoke with her weekly but was easily irritated by her. It bothered Sara that her mother was not assertive and was intermittently depressed. She spoke weekly with her brother, who lived with his wife and 2-yearold son. She described her relationship with her brother as fairly close. She reported speaking to her brother less often since the stillbirth because she felt jealous that he had a child. When they did speak, Sara avoided asking about her nephew.  After exploring Sara’s relationships with family members, the therapist asked about other important people in her life and about her relationship with her husband. At age 33, Sara met her husband, Steve, who was 1 year her junior. She described Steve as warm and charming, and reported that he took great care of her. She felt she did not “deserve him” because he was “such a good guy.” She described her previous boyfriends as less emotionally available and “not very nice.” Both Sara and Steve had originally came from Canada but met in New York City, where mutual friends introduced them. Sara had moved to New York in her early 20s, whereas her husband had moved there 2 years before they met.  Since the stillbirth, Sara felt distant from Steve and argued with him about “little things.” She reported feeling guilty that she had let him down by losing the baby and feared that he blamed her for the baby’s death. She did not want to burden him further by sharing her own distress about the loss. She also felt that Steve would not be able to understand her fears about trying to conceive again.  Sara reported having a few close girlfriends who lived in the tristate area and, until the pregnancy loss, had spoken with them about once per week. She had several friends at work with whom she had chatted almost daily until the loss. She described herself as “independent,” “outgoing,” and “not one to lean on other people” prior to becoming depressed. Rather, her friends turned to her when they had problems. Sara said  that before the depression, her friends would describe her as hardworking and energetic. She rarely argued with friends because she felt “uncomfortable” with conflict. She avoided confronting friends and coworkers when she disagreed or felt angry with them.  The therapist asked Sara if there was anyone to whom she had turned for comfort after her loss because it is important to have someone in whom to confide after such a terrible loss or any stressful experience. Sara replied that she had been avoiding her friends and family since the loss. She had felt uncomfortable talking to friends, family, and coworkers about her pregnancy when she was pregnant because she did not like being the center of attention and felt guilty that she did not enjoy the first trimester of her pregnancy. She felt even more uncomfortable discussing her pregnancy loss. Her parents and in-laws came to see Sara and her husband after the loss, but she felt unable to talk with them about what had happened and how she was feeling. Her coworkers knew that she had been pregnant, and Sara felt obligated to say something to them about what had happened. The therapist noted that it sounded like Sara could trust no one with her feelings about the stillbirth. Sara did not want to reach out to family or friends, or let them know how bad she felt; she explained: “I don’t want to bother people with my problems. I don’t want to be weak.”  The therapist reframed Sara’s difficulty in reaching out to others, using the medical model to explain how depression affects social functioning:  tHeraPist: You are not weak—you are depressed— and that’s not your fault. People with depression tend to minimize their own needs and avoid seeking help from their friends, as you have, because they fear being a burden. However, it is not only appropriate to seek support from others but it also can be really helpful to get their support. In fact, support from others has been shown to help in recovery from depression. I appreciate your dilemma. Your depression makes you feel uncomfortable seeking support, yet support from others has been shown to reduce depression and protect people from becoming depressed. Does this make sense to you?  sara: Yes, but I also don’t want to hear what they have to say. It just makes me more upset. They don’t understand what I have been through.  tHeraPist: What kinds of things have people said to you?   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  Sara replied that it bothered her when people said things like “You’ll get pregnant again” or “I know someone who also lost a baby.” These statements made her feel angry. She felt that others could not understand what she had experienced. One close friend had recently given birth to her first child, and Sara had avoided calling and seeing her. It felt unfair that her friend had a baby when she did not. A coworker had been pregnant at the same time but had a relatively easy pregnancy. Sara felt that her coworker was not sympathetic to her physical discomfort during pregnancy.  By the end of the first phase of treatment, the therapist had connected Sara’s major depressive episode to her interpersonal situation in a formulation centered on an IPT focal problem area. Sara’s chief complaint reflected that she was still grieving the loss of her baby and unable to resume her normal level of functioning. Her situation was a clear example of the grief problem area: Sara was suffering from complicated bereavement. While it is normal to grieve for months after losing a loved one, the severity of Sara’s depressive symptoms—especially the excessive guilt, low self-esteem, and social isolation—and her avoidance of thoughts, feelings, and reminders of the baby and the baby’s death, reflected an abnormal grief reaction. She had not sought emotional support after the stillbirth and had not really mourned the loss of her baby. In fact, people often develop complicated bereavement when they lack or have not used their social network to help them mourn the loss of their loved one.  The therapist presented this formulation to Sara:  tHeraPist: From what you are telling me, it’s clear that the loss of your baby triggered your current depression. You have suffered a terrible loss and you are having trouble grieving. No wonder you are having such a hard time. This is not your fault. Furthermore, your loss and your depression have affected your relationships with people in your life, like your husband, your friends and coworkers, and you’re having difficulty expressing your feelings to them. I suggest that we focus our sessions on handling your grief over this terrible event. Grief is one of the problem areas that IPT has been shown to treat. I suggest we work on helping you to mourn the loss and to improve your relationships that have been affected by your loss. How does this sound to you?  sara: It sounds good.  With Sara’s explicit agreement about the treatment focus, the therapist began the middle phase of treatment.   Middle Phase (Sessions 4–9)  During the middle phase, therapist and patient worked on resolving Sara’s interpersonal problem area. In IPT, the strategy for working with grief is to help the patient to tolerate and manage the affect of loss, and to gather social support to help the patient through mourning. In addition, the therapist helps the patient to use existing social supports, to reestablish interests and relationships, and to form new relationships and explore new activities to compensate for the loss (Weissman et al., 2000, 2007).  The therapist continued providing psychoeducation about complicated bereavement and how depression affects social functioning, and repeatedly linked Sara’s depression to the identified problem area. She began each session with the opening question, “How have things been since we last met?” This question elicited affect and a history of Sara’s mood and events between sessions, and kept Sara focused on her current mood and life events.  To facilitate the mourning process, the therapist encouraged Sara to think about the loss. In fact, this process had begun during the initial phase, while the therapist took a history of the events related to the onset of Sara’s depression. The therapist asked Sara to describe the events prior, during, and after the baby’s death— often a source of patient guilt—and explored Sara’s feelings associated with these events. In helping a patient mourn the loss of a loved one, the IPT therapist asks the patient to describe her feelings about the death and about the person who died. The therapist explores what the patient and the deceased did together, what the patient liked and did not like about the person, and what the patient wished they had done together but did not have a chance to do. The therapist asks the patient to describe how the deceased died and how she learned about the death, and explores the patient’s related feelings. Because Sara’s baby died in utero, the therapist modified this inquiry somewhat by encouraging Sara to talk about her experience of being pregnant, about the baby, and what she imagined the baby would be like. The therapist asked Sara what she liked about carrying the baby, what she did not like, and what she had hoped to do with the baby.   Interpersonal Psychotherapy for Depression  Sara tearfully described having had mixed feelings about her pregnancy. She reported that she and Steve started trying to conceive 6 months after getting married and, to her surprise, she got pregnant after 2 months. When she discovered she was pregnant, Sara felt really happy but scared about becoming a parent. She questioned whether she was “ready.” Sara reported that she made a great effort to practice good prenatal care: She ate healthy, pregnancy-safe foods, took prenatal vitamins, and started prenatal yoga classes. Practicing good prenatal care made her feel good, “as if I was already a mom taking care of my baby.”  Sara quickly began to experience terrible fatigue and unrelenting nausea, which lasted for the first 12 weeks of the pregnancy. She described feeling as if she had been “taken over” by the pregnancy. She complained that she loved to cook but did not want to cook because she felt so sick. Despite the nausea, she ensured that she got the nutrients the baby needed. The fatigue and nausea were so debilitating that Sara could no longer meet the physical demands of her job as a nurse. As a result, she was unable to hide her pregnancy from her coworkers; she told her supervisor, who was happy to accommodate Sara by giving her more administrative responsibilities in lieu of patient care until she felt better. Sara resented having to give up clinical work with patients, which was the part of her job she enjoyed. She felt selfconscious about her symptoms and very guilty that her coworkers had to absorb her patient load, despite their being very supportive. It bothered her that others idealized pregnancy, whereas she found it so unpleasant. At the same time, she felt guilty and selfish that she had complained about the pregnancy: Sara felt that she should have just been grateful she was pregnant.  The therapist empathized with Sara’s discomfort during her first trimester and validated her need to complain:  tHeraPist: The first trimester of pregnancy can be really difficult and disruptive. Give yourself a break! It can be hard to appreciate being pregnant when you are feeling so terrible. It sounds like you did appreciate being pregnant—you made a great effort to take care of yourself. You watched your diet carefully and rearranged your work situation.  sara: I don’t know . . . I guess that’s true.  When the exhaustion and nausea subsided in her second trimester, Sara began to feel more optimistic and  excited about having a child. Seeing sonograms made the baby seem “more real” and helped Sara feel connected to the baby. At Week 16, Sara learned that the baby was a girl. Excited, she immediately began considering names and envisioning what the baby would look like. Sara imagined her as a combination of herself and her husband, with blue eyes and blond, curly hair. She thought the baby would be a kind person, like her husband. She imagined walking the baby to the park in a stroller and playing with her. At Week 20, Sara began to feel the baby move, which she very much enjoyed. When the baby moved, Sara would stop whatever she was doing to watch and feel her abdomen. She described feeling the movements as “some of the happiest moments in my life.” Neither she nor her husband had thought of a name for the baby, but referred to her as “Sweetie” in utero.  For weeks after the stillbirth, Sara struggled with physical reminders of the baby. After the delivery, she had leaky breasts for a few days and vaginal bleeding for several weeks. She reported that she still looked pregnant for weeks after delivering the baby, as her uterus slowly returned to its prepregnancy size. At the time of her initial evaluation, Sara reported that she still had to lose 5 pounds to return to her prepregnancy weight. Sara missed being pregnant and described feeling “empty” and “alone” without the baby inside her. She was eager and ready to be a parent, yet felt frightened about conceiving again because she feared losing another baby.  A couple of weeks after the stillbirth, Sara’s doctor determined that an undetected bacterial infection caused the stillbirth. The doctor explained that there was nothing Sara or her husband could have done to prevent the loss, and that this kind of loss was very rare. Despite her doctor’s explanation, Sara blamed herself for her baby’s death and feared that her husband blamed her too, although he repeatedly denied this. The therapist explored Sara’s guilt further:  tHeraPist: What could you have done to prevent your  baby’s death? sara: (tearfully) I don’t know. . . . I should have been  able to do something.  The therapist offered Sara empathy and support, and related her guilt to depression:  tHeraPist: It would be great if there were something you could have done to prevent this tragedy, but there   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  is generally nothing parents can do to prevent a pregnancy loss. It sounds like you did everything you could—you took very good care of yourself. You are struggling with inappropriate and excessive guilt— a symptom of depression. You are blaming yourself for something you didn’t do. Perhaps when you find yourself feeling guilty, you can try to label this as a symptom of depression.  sara: Yes. I guess I can try.  Talking about the pregnancy, the baby, and the baby’s death, and exploring related feelings enabled Sara to develop a more balanced and realistic perception of her relationship with the baby and her role in the baby’s death. She realized that she had not taken her pregnancy for granted. In fact, she had done everything she could to manage a difficult first trimester and take care of her baby. In addition, her experience with the pregnancy and the baby made Sara realize that, despite her initial anxiety, she was ready and excited to become a parent. By the end of the first month of treatment, Sara’s mood was somewhat improved and her HDRS score had fallen to 18. She was less self-critical and more hopeful.  An important part of treating grief is facilitating the expression of affect related to the loss of the loved one. The therapist explored Sara’s feelings as she spoke about the baby and her loss, giving Sara time to articulate what she was feeling and to cry. Although IPT therapists generally take an active stance, when facilitating the expression of painful feelings, it is important to allow for silences. By listening silently, the therapist showed that she could tolerate Sara’s painful feelings, and that catharsis was an important part of mourning her loss. Sara was able to express not only feelings she had been avoiding but also feelings of which she had previously been unaware.  Sara had avoided looking at the pictures and footprints of the baby from the hospital, which had been stored in a box under her bed. She and the therapist explored what it would be like for her to look at these items. Sara feared it would be scary, and that she would feel really bad. The therapist gently encouraged Sara to take a risk and look because it might make her feel better to experience the feelings she had been avoiding:  “Your feelings are not going to hurt you. You might actually feel better if you allow yourself to let out some of the feelings you have been trying to keep  inside. I know I am asking you to take a risk, but you might be pleasantly surprised.”  Between sessions, Sara looked at the pictures and the footprints. The therapist asked what it was like for her.  sara: I cried a lot. She was so cute. It wasn’t as hard as I thought it would be. It felt like a release. I was surprised that I felt a little better afterwards.  tHeraPist: I am so glad you took a risk and looked. It sounds like it made you feel better.  In fact, every few weeks before the end of treatment, Sara looked at the pictures and the footprints. She explained that the pictures were sort of comforting because they made her feel a connection to her baby.  In addition to encouraging catharsis, the therapist encouraged Sara to work on her interpersonal interactions, to reconnect with the people in her life, and to consider opportunities to form new relationships and start new activities to compensate for the loss. The therapist explained that people with depression tend to isolate themselves and stop engaging in previously pleasurable activities, both of which can perpetuate depression. Sara reported not wanting to talk to people because she feared that she would have to talk about the loss, or that things people said would make her feel worse. In fact, as Sara and the therapist discussed, she could guide the conversation in a way that made her feel comfortable. They explored and role-played options for maintaining control of such conversations. Furthermore, Sara could tell people what would be helpful to her. The therapist explained:  “People with depression often have difficulty asserting their needs. If you communicate your needs to others—like your husband, friends, coworkers, and your family—you might improve those relationships and your mood. The people in your life may not know what you need. If you tell them, you might not only get support from them, but you might enjoy their company again and feel better.”  Using communication analysis, the therapist asked Sara to recount arguments and unpleasant interactions with others: what she was feeling during the interaction, what she said or did, and what the other person said or did. They explored what Sara wished other people would say or do, what options she had for asking   Interpersonal Psychotherapy for Depression  them to do these things, and they role-played Sara asking for what she wanted. Sara reported that she hated running into people who knew she had been pregnant but did not know about the stillbirth. In fact, she avoided going places because she feared having to answer questions about the stillbirth. Sara and the therapist explored these interactions and how Sara could handle them more effectively:  tHeraPist: What kinds of things have people asked, or what are you afraid they will ask?  sara: People have asked “How’s your baby?” or “Weren’t you pregnant?”  tHeraPist: How does that make you feel?  sara: Awful!  tHeraPist: How do you handle it?  sara: I don’t know. . . . Sometimes I say “It didn’t work out” or “My baby died.”  tHeraPist: That sounds good. How does it feel for you to say that?  sara: It feels OK, but then they want to know what happened and say stupid things like “At least you know you can get pregnant” or “You can have another one.”  tHeraPist: What would you like them to say or do?  sara: I would like them to just say “I’m sorry,” and not ask any questions. I don’t want to talk about what happened.  tHeraPist: How could you convey that?  sara: I guess I could say, “I’m sorry, but I’d rather not talk about it.”  tHeraPist: How does that sound? How did it feel to say that? sara: It felt OK. Don’t you think that is rude to say that?  tHeraPist: No. You said it politely and it’s appropriate for you to assert your needs. It is an uncomfortable situation for both you and the person who asked the question. If you are polite and direct with people, they are likely to understand. But why not try it and see?  Sara reported that she had avoided returning calls from old friends. She explained that she felt uncomfortable seeing her friends who had babies because it would  remind her of the baby she had lost. Sara also did not want to have to talk about the loss. She did not want to tell them how she felt because she feared hurting their feelings. Sara and the therapist role-played Sara telling her friends about her discomfort and explaining that she did not want to offend them. Role play helped Sara feel prepared and less anxious about going to work, walking around her neighborhood, and talking to old friends. As a result, she gradually starting going out more and began returning phone calls. She returned to the yoga studio where she had taken prenatal yoga and started taking regular yoga classes, which helped her mood and provided an opportunity to be among other people. By midtreatment Sara’s HDRS had fallen to 13, consistent with mild depression.  Since the stillbirth, Sara had been bickering with her husband Steve “over stupid things” and felt “distant from him.” The therapist asked her to describe a recent incident. Sara said that Steve came home from work and told her that his friend’s wife had just had a baby. She felt it was insensitive for him to tell her about other people’s positive pregnancy experiences. It bothered her that Steve did not seem as uncomfortable as she was with this information, and that he no longer seemed as upset as she about the loss. The interaction made her feel “alone.” She had responded to him by saying, “That’s nice,” then leaving the room and ruminating for the rest of the evening about his insensitivity.  Sara reported that they often had similar interactions. The therapist once again related Sara’s difficulty in asserting herself with her husband to depression, and noted that keeping her feelings inside might actually be making Sara feel worse. They explored interpersonal options for handling this situation in a way that might make Sara feel better. The therapist helped Sara to explore what her husband’s intentions might have been in the situation she described. She wondered whether he was trying to make her feel better because his friend’s wife had experienced several miscarriages. They roleplayed Sara telling her husband how she felt. Subsequently, when Sara was able to express her feelings to him, she learned that Steve was, in fact, telling her these stories to give her hope. Furthermore, her husband revealed that he was still upset about the loss of their baby but did not want to upset her by sharing his feelings. Sara was relieved that she and Steve were “on the same page” and felt good that she was able to feel close to him again. They subsequently were able to share more of their mixed feelings about the pregnancy experience.   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  Termination Phase (Sessions 10–12)  During the final sessions, the therapist and Sara reviewed the progress Sara had made. She reported her mood was much improved. Her HDRS was now a 5, consistent with euthymia and remission. Sara’s affect was brighter, and she was less preoccupied with the loss of her baby: “I still get upset when I think about my baby, but I don’t get as upset. It doesn’t ruin my entire day. I am actually able to enjoy things again.” Furthermore, Sara no longer blamed herself for her baby’s death. She felt good about her ability to communicate her feelings more effectively with her husband, friends, and others, and to enjoy socializing and other activities again.  The therapist congratulated Sara on her hard work and achievements, and told her how happy she was that Sara felt so much better. They discussed the potential for relapse and how Sara could maintain her progress. Given Sara’s history of depression, the therapist explained that Sara was, unfortunately, vulnerable to future episodes; however, Sara could anticipate that she would be vulnerable in the setting of stressful life events—role disputes, role transitions, deaths—and use the coping skills she had learned during their work together. Sara anticipated trying to conceive again, and, she hoped, getting pregnant again—both role transitions. The therapist explored with Sara ways that she could take care of herself during this potentially stressful time. They discussed Sara’s reaching out to others for support, communicating with her husband about how she was feeling, and forgiving herself if she found herself having a hard time.  In the final session, Sara told the therapist that she had reread her diary entries from the days before beginning treatment and could not believe how far she had come, that her pregnancy loss had forced her to seek treatment for depression that she now realized had been a lifelong problem; in retrospect, she had suffered numerous episodes of mild to moderate depression. Sara admitted that she initially had felt very resistant to the medical model. Defining depression as a medical illness ultimately relieved Sara of her shame and guilt about her difficulty in functioning. Furthermore, being able to see depression as a set of discrete symptoms made it seem more manageable. Sara reported that she was getting along better with her mother; now that she understood depression, she felt more sympathy for her mother’s struggle with depression. She was grateful for the opportunity to learn coping skills that she felt  confident about maintaining. In addition, Sara said that she would not hesitate to seek treatment in the future should she find herself becoming depressed again.  The therapist’s frequent encouragement, the time limit, and the brief duration of IPT helped keep Sara motivated. Sara said that she appreciated the opportunity to talk about her feelings about her pregnancy, her baby, and her baby’s death, and that she felt the therapist understood and supported her. She recognized that her feelings, while powerful, made sense in context and had subsided with discussion. Sara confessed that she appreciated the therapist’s “pushing” her to reconnect with others. She had not thought she could handle socializing with others but was pleasantly surprised.  Although each patient is unique, Sara’s therapy resembled other IPT treatments for major depression and is a good example of working with the problem area of grief. The exploration and normalization of affect, communication analysis, exploration of options, use of role play, encouragement to take social risks, and other techniques employed in Sara’s treatment are characteristic of working with interpersonal difficulties related to any of the four IPT problem areas.  coMMoN ProBleMs that arise DuriNG treatMeNt  The problems that typically arise during IPT treatment for major depression are (1) those inherent to working with depressed patients and (2) those related to the therapeutic frame. Although these problems are not unique to IPT, how the therapist views and treats these issues distinguishes IPT from other psychotherapies. In keeping with important IPT themes, the therapist attributes problems to depression, and to the patient’s difficulties handling interpersonal interactions and communicating effectively outside of the treatment. The therapist continues to maintain an optimistic, supportive, and nonjudgmental stance and avoids transference interpretations.   For example, patients with major depression superimposed on dysthymic disorder (“double depression”) and their therapists are often discouraged by the chronicity of their depression. In these cases, the therapist should remain hopeful and optimistic. Some depressed patients feel that their depression is incurable despite reassurances from the therapist. In these cases, the IPT therapist employs the medical model, labeling the hopelessness as a symptom of depression, and empha    Interpersonal Psychotherapy for Depression  sizes that patients need not feel hopeless since depression is treatable. Depressed patients often view seeking treatment as a personal failure. The IPT therapist frames seeking treatment as the appropriate and smart way to treat a medical illness, and a positive step toward gaining mastery over their problems (Weissman et al., 2000, 2007).  The most serious problem to arise in any treatment for depression is when a patient expresses suicidal ideation. As in any treatment, the therapist determines whether hospitalization is necessary, based on the seriousness of the intent and the availability of the patient’s social supports. The therapist is as available as possible to the patient and schedules extra sessions as needed. The therapist assesses the circumstances in which the suicidal ideation developed, what the patient hoped to accomplish by ending her life, and reviews how the patient imagines others would react to her suicide. The therapist helps the patient explore alternative ways of expressing what she intended to communicate by committing suicide. The therapist provides psychoeducation about suicide, explaining that it is the most deadly symptom of depression, and that therapist and patient have to work together to keep the patient alive long enough to get through successful treatment—at which point the patient will again want to live. Augmenting the therapy with medication treatment should be considered for severely suicidal patients. The therapist remains optimistic that the patient’s depression will improve, and that she will no longer feel that life is not worth living (Weissman et al., 2000, 2007).  Problems may arise in the relationship with the therapist. For example, a patient who has poor social supports may come to view the therapeutic relationship as a substitute for relationships outside of the therapy. Because IPT focuses on relationships outside of the treatment, the therapist gently refocuses the patient to outside relationships. Whereas the therapist notes that the patient’s ability to connect within the treatment relationship reflects her ability to form intimate relationships, he/she clarifies that they are not friends or family and emphasizes the importance of the patient’s life outside of the treatment. The therapist helps the patient explore options for connecting with others in ways similar to the way she connected with the therapist (Weissman et al., 2000, 2007).  Missed and late sessions are also considered to be symptomatic of depression. The therapist calls attention to and empathizes with the fact that the patient has missed or is late to a session, and notes that difficulty  getting to sessions may reflect functioning that is characteristic of depression. It is likely that the patient is late to appointments outside of the therapy. The therapist can remind the patient of the time limit of IPT to motivate her to come to sessions. In the event that the patient misses or comes late to sessions because she is uncomfortable with the material being discussed in session, or because she has some other negative feeling about the treatment or the therapist, the therapist empathizes with the patient’s feelings and helps her to explore ways to express these feelings directly.  When a patient is silent to the extent that it seems she refrains from sharing thoughts and feelings, or when she changes or avoids subjects, or has problems with self-disclosure, the therapist notes this behavior and explores the patient’s feelings related to the behavior. These behaviors are particularly problematic in a time-limited, focused treatment such as IPT because they make it difficult to work on the chosen problem area. The patient may feel uncomfortable and ashamed to share her thoughts and feelings with the therapist. The therapist assures the patient that there is little that can surprise him/her, and that she does not have to talk about everything.  PreDictors of resPoNse  Although there is strong evidence that IPT is an efficacious treatment for major depression and other disorders, there are fewer data on factors that predict response to IPT. Data from comparative treatment studies involving IPT suggest some clinical predictors of response. In the multisite National Institute of Mental Health Treatment of Depression Collaborative Research Program (NIMH TDCRP; Elkin et al., 1989), 250 outpatients with major depression were randomly assigned to 16 weeks of imipramine (IMI), IPT, CBT, or placebo. The TDCRP dataset has been examined for predictors of response by several researchers. Sotsky and colleagues (1991) found that TDCRP subjects with low-baseline-level social dysfunction responded well to IPT, whereas those with interpersonal deficits responded less well. These findings support the discussion earlier in this chapter that IPT works least well for patients with few or no social contacts, who report no recent life events, and whose treatment, therefore, focuses on the IPT problem area of interpersonal deficits. High initial symptom severity and impaired functioning predicted superior response to IPT and to IMI compared to CBT   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  (Sotsky et al., 1991; Weissman et al., 2000). In another analysis, TDCRP subjects with symptoms of atypical depression, such as mood reactivity and reversed neurovegetative symptoms, responded better to IPT and CBT than to IMI or to placebo (Stewart, Garfinkel, Nunes, Donovan, & Klein, 1998).  Barber and Muenz (1996) found that among patients who completed treatment in the TDCRP study, IPT had greater efficacy than CBT for patients with obsessive– compulsive personality disorder, whereas CBT was better for patients with avoidant personality disorder, as measured by the HDRS. However, another study examining the relationship between personality traits and outcome in the same dataset found no significant differences among personality traits (Blatt, Quinlan, Pilkonis, & Shea, 1995; Weissman et al., 2000).  In another study, Thase and colleagues (1997) found that among 91 patients with depression, patients who had abnormal electroencephalographic (EEG) sleep profiles had significantly poorer response to IPT than did patients with normal profiles. In this study, unlike the Sotsky and colleagues (1991) study, symptom severity did not significantly predict response to IPT (Weissman et al., 2000). Additional potential predictors of response appear in the earlier section in this chapter describing the IPT patient Sara.  coNclusioN  IPT is a time-limited, diagnosis-targeted treatment with demonstrated efficacy for patients with major depression and other mood disorders. It has been adapted for the treatment of anxiety disorders, eating disorders, and, most recently, personality disorders. Although there is substantial evidence of IPT’s efficacy for the treatment major depression and other mood and psychiatric disorders, further evidence of predictors of response to IPT is warranted. This chapter has focused on the original IPT protocol: IPT as an individual treatment for major depression.  IPT employs the medical model and focuses on current or recent life events, interpersonal difficulties, and symptoms. IPT emphasizes the interrelationship between mood and life events: Negative or stressful life events affect mood and, conversely, mood symptoms affect how people manage negative or stressful life events. Treatment with IPT focuses on one of four interpersonal problem areas—grief, role disputes, role transitions, and interpersonal deficits. The therapist  helps patients recover from depression by relieving depressive symptoms and by helping them to resolve the chosen interpersonal problem area. The IPT therapist takes an active, optimistic, and supportive stance.  The case of Sara demonstrates the techniques used and the process of treatment with IPT. IPT is an eclectic treatment with proven efficacy that uses techniques employed by other psychotherapies. The combination of IPT’s main principles, techniques, strategies, and therapist and patient characteristics distinguishes it from other antidepressant treatments.  For further information about IPT and its adaptations, readers may consult the Comprehensive Guide to Interpersonal Psychotherapy by Weissman and colleagues (2000), the Clinician’s Quick Guide to Interpersonal Psychotherapy (2007), and the Casebook of Interpersonal Psychotherapy (Markowitz & Weissman, 2012a).  note  1. For stylistic simplicity, patients are referred to in the feminine. Indeed, most depressed patients are women. referenCes  American Psychiatric Association. (2000). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (4th ed., text rev.). Washington, DC: Author.  American Psychiatric Association. (2010). Practice guideline for the treatment of patients with major depressive disorder, third edition. American Journal of Psychiatry, 167(Suppl.), S1–152.  American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and Statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.). Arlington, VA: Author.  Barber, J. P., & Muenz, L. R. (1996). The role of avoidance and obsessiveness in matching patients to cognitive and interpersonal psychotherapy: Empirical findings from the Treatment for Depression Collaborative Research Program. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 64, 951–958.  Beck, A. T., Steer, R. A., & Brown, G. K. (1996). Beck Depression Inventory manual (2nd ed.). San Antonio, TX: Psychological Corporation.  Blatt, S. J., Quinlan, D. M., Pilkonis, P. A., & Shea, M. T. (1995). Impact of perfectionism and need for approval on the brief treatment of depression: The National Institute of Mental Health Collaborative Research Program revisited. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 63, 125–132.   Interpersonal Psychotherapy for Depression  Blazer, D. G., II. (2000). Mood disorders epidemiology. In B. J. Sadock & V. A. Sadock (Eds.), Kaplan and Sadock’s comprehensive textbook of psychiatry (7th ed., Vol. 1, pp. 1298– 1308). Philadelphia: Lippincott/Williams & Wilkins.  Bleiberg, K. L. (2012). Interpersonal psychotherapy for peripartum depression. In J. C. Markowitz & M. M. Weissman (Eds.), Casebook of interpersonal therapy (pp. 224–242). New York: Oxford University Press.  Bleiberg, K. L., & Markowitz, J. C. (2005). Interpersonal psychotherapy for posttraumatic stress disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 162, 181–183.  Bleiberg, K. L., & Markowitz, J. C. (2007). Interpersonal psychotherapy and depression. In C. Freeman & M. Power (Eds.), Handbook of evidence-based psychotherapies: A guide for research and practice (pp. 41–60). Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.  Bowlby, J. (1973). Attachment and loss. New York: Basic Books.  Cuijpers, P., Geraedts, A. S., van Oppen, P., Andersson, G., Markowitz, J. C., & van Straten, A. (2011). Interpersonal psychotherapy of depression: A meta-analysis. American Journal of Psychiatry, 168, 581–592.  Elkin, I., Shea, M. T., Watkins, J. T., Imber, S. D., Sotsky, S. M., Collins, J. F., et al. (1989). National Institute of Mental Health Treatment of Depression Collaborative Research Program: General effectiveness of treatments. Archives of General of Psychiatry, 46, 971–982.  Fairburn, C. G., Jones, R., Peveler, R. C., Hope, R. A., & O’Connor, M. (1993). Psychotherapy and bulimia nervosa: Longer-term effects of interpersonal psychotherapy, behavior therapy, and cognitive behavior therapy. Archives of General Psychiatry, 50, 419–428.  Fairburn, C. G., Norman, P. A., Welch, S. L., O’Connor, M. E., Doll, H. A., & Peveler, R. C. (1995). A prospective study of outcome in bulimia nervosa and the long-term effects of three psychological treatments. Archives of General Psychiatry, 52, 304–312.  Frank, E. (2005). Treating bipolar disorder: A clinician’s guide to interpersonal and social rhythm therapy. New York: Guilford Press.  Frank, E., Kupfer, D. J., Buysse, D. J., Swartz, H. A., Pilkonis, P. A., Houck, P. R., et al. (2007). Randomized trial of weekly, twice-monthly, and monthly interpersonal psychotherapy as maintenance treatment for women with recurrent depression. American Journal of Psychiatry, 164, 761–767.  Frank, J. (1971). Therapeutic factors in psychotherapy. American Journal of Psychotherapy, 25, 350–361.  Hamilton, M. (1960). A rating scale for depression. Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery, and Psychiatry, 2, 56–62.  Hill, C. E., O’Grady, K. E., & Elkin, I. (1992). Applying the Collaborative Study Psychotherapy Rating Scale to rate therapist adherence in cognitive-behavior therapy, interpersonal therapy, and clinical management. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 60, 73–79.  Kessler, R. C., Berglund, P., Demler, O., Koretz, D., Merikangas, K. R., Rush, A. J., et al. (2003). The epidemiology of major depressive disorder: Results of the National Comorbidity Survey Replication (NCS-R). Journal of the American Medical Association, 289, 3095–3105.  Klerman, G. L., Weissman, M. M., Rounsaville, B. J., & Chevron, E. S. (1984). Interpersonal psychotherapy of depression. New York: Basic Books.  Lipsitz, J. D., Fyer, A. J., Markowitz, J. C., & Cherry, S. (1999). An open trial of interpersonal psychotherapy for social phobia. American Journal of Psychiatry, 156, 1814–1816.  Markowitz, J. C. (1998). Interpersonal psychotherapy for dysthymic disorder. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press.  Markowitz, J. C., Klerman, G. L., Perry, S. W., Clougherty,  K. F., & Mayers, A. (1992). Interpersonal therapy of depressed HIV-seropositive patients. Hospital and Community Psychiatry, 43, 885–890. Markowitz, J. C., Kocsis, J. H., Fishman, B., Spielman, L. A., Jacobsberg, L. B., Frances, A. J., et al. (1998). Treatment of HIV-positive patients with depressive symptoms. Archives of General Psychiatry, 55, 452–457.  Markowitz, J. C., & Milrod, B. (2011). The importance of responding to negative affect in psychotherapies. American Journal of Psychiatry, 168, 124–128.  Markowitz, J. C., Milrod, B., Bleiberg, K. L., & Marshall,  R. D. (2009). Interpersonal factors in understanding and treating posttraumatic stress disorder. Journal of Psychiatric Practice, 15, 133–140. Markowitz, J. C., Skodol, A. E., & Bleiberg, K. (2006). Interpersonal psychotherapy for borderline personality disorder: Possible mechanisms of change. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 62, 431–444.  Markowitz, J. C., Svartberg, M., & Swartz, H. A. (1998). Is IPT time-limited psychodynamic psychotherapy? Journal of Psychotherapy Practice and Research, 7, 185–195.  Markowitz, J. C., & Weissman, M. M. (Eds.). (2012a). Casebook of interpersonal psychotherapy. New York: Oxford University Press.  Markowitz, J. C., & Weissman, M. M. (2012b). IPT: Past, present, and future. Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy, 19, 99–105.  Meyer, A. (1957). Psychobiology: A science of man. Springfield, IL: Thomas.  Mufson, L., Dorta, K. P., Wickramaratne, P., Nomura, Y., Olfson, M., & Weissman, M. M. (2004). A randomized effectiveness trial of interpersonal psychotherapy for depressed adolescents. Archives of General Psychiatry, 61, 577–584.  Mufson, L., Moreau, D., & Weissman, M. M. (1993). Interpersonal psychotherapy for depressed adolescents. New York: Guilford Press.  Mufson, L., Weissman, M. M., Moreau, D., & Garfinkel, R. (1999). Efficacy of interpersonal psychotherapy for de    CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  pressed adolescents. Archives of General Psychiatry, 56, 573–579.  Murray, C. L., & Lopez, A. D. (1996). The global burden of disease (Vol. 1). Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.  O’Hara, M. W., Stuart, S., Gorman, L. L., & Wenzel, A. (2000). Efficacy of interpersonal psychotherapy for postpartum depression. Archives of General Psychiatry, 57, 1039–1045.  Parsons, T. (1951). Illness and the role of the physician: A sociological perspective. American Journal of Orthopsychiatry, 21, 452–460.  Ransom, D., Heckman, T. G., Anderson, T., Garske, J., Holroyd, K., & Basta, T. (2008). Telephone-delivered interpersonal psychotherapy for HIV-infected rural persons with depression: A pilot trial. Psychiatric Services, 50, 871–877.  Reynolds, C. F., III, Dew, M. A., Martire, L. M., Miller, M. D., Cyranowski, J. M., Lenze, E., et al. (2010). Treating depression to remission in older adults: A controlled evaluation of combined escitalopram with interpersonal psychotherapy versus escitalopram with depression care management. International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 25, 1134–1141.  Reynolds, C. F., III, Dew, M. A., Pollock, B. G., Mulsant, B. H., Frank, E., Miller, M. D., et al. (2006). Maintenance treatment of major depression in old age. New England Journal of Medicine, 354, 1130–1138.  Sholomskas, A. J., Chevron, E. S., Prusoff, B. A., & Berry,  C. (1983). Short-term interpersonal therapy (IPT) with the depressed elderly: Case reports and discussion. American Journal of Psychotherapy, 36, 552–566. Sotsky, S. M., Glass, D. R., Shea, M. T., Pilkonis, P. A., Collins, J. F., Elkin, I., et al. (1991). Patient predictors of response to psychotherapy and pharmacotherapy: Findings  in the NIMH Treatment Of Depression Collaborative Research Program. American Journal of Psychiatry, 148, 997–1008.  Spinelli, M., & Endicott, J. (2003). Controlled clinical trial of interpersonal psychotherapy versus parenting education program for depressed pregnant women. American Journal of Psychiatry, 160, 555–562.  Stewart, J. W., Garfinkel, R., Nunes, E. V., Donovan, S., & Klein, D. F. (1998). Atypical features and treatment response in the National Institute of Mental Health Treatment of Depression Collaborative Research Program. Journal of Clinical Psychopharmacology, 18(6), 429–434.  Sullivan, H. S. (1953). The interpersonal theory of psychiatry. New York: Norton.  Thase, M. E., Buysse, D. J., Frank, E., Cherry, C. R., Cornes,  C. L., Mallinger, A. G., et al. (1997). Which depressed patients will respond to interpersonal psychotherapy?: The role of abnormal EEG profiles. American Journal of Psychiatry, 154, 502–509. Weissman, M. M., Markowitz, J. C., & Klerman, G. L. (2000). Comprehensive guide to interpersonal psychotherapy. New York: Basic Books.  Weissman, M. M., Markowitz, J. C., & Klerman, G. L. (2007). Clinician’s quick guide to interpersonal psychotherapy. New York: Oxford University Press.  Wilfley, D. E. (2008). Interpersonal psychotherapy for binge eating disorder (BED) therapist’s manual. Unpublished manuscript.  Wilson, G. T., Wilfely, D. E., Agras, W. S., & Bryson, S. W. (2010). Psychological treatments of binge eating disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry, 67, 94–101.  World Health Organization. (1992). The ICD-10 classification of mental and behavioral disorders: Clinical descriptions and diagnostic guidelines. Geneva, Switzerland: Author.   CHaPter  9 Behavioral Activation for Depression  soNa DiMiDJiaN christoPher r. Martell ruth herMaN‑DuNN saMuel huBley  The behavioral activation (BA) approach to treating depression has received very strong empirical support in the past few years, with results as good or better than cognitive therapy and antidepressant medications, even for the most severe cases of depression. seemingly counterintuitive at first blush, this treatment does not focus on the notion of “just do it” but takes a comprehensive look at contingent relationships in the patient’s life across the full range of behavior, cognition, and affect that may be maintaining the depression. As such, this very idiographic approach does not prescribe a set number of sessions to accomplish certain goals but is very adaptable to the individual with depression. in the detailed and very human description of the treatment of “Mark,” readers will also note a very up‑to‑date focus on the role of rumination in depression (or worry in anxiety) as a fundamentally avoidant technique. The illustration of creative therapeutic strategies for activating patients, and the very adaptable and flexible nature of BA will be of interest to all therapists treating depression, since it may be one of the easiest to learn and most disseminable of evidence‑based psychological treatments for depression.—D. H. B.  Behavioral activation (BA) is a structured, brief psychosocial approach that aims to alleviate depression and prevent future relapse by focusing directly on behavior change. BA is based on the premise that problems in vulnerable individuals’ lives, and their behavioral responses to such problems, reduce their ability to experience positive reward from their environment. The treatment aims to increase activation systematically in ways that help clients to experience greater contact with sources of reward in their lives and to solve life problems. The treatment procedures focus directly on activation, and on processes that inhibit activation, such as escape and avoidance behaviors and ruminative thinking, to increase experiences that are pleasurable or productive and improve life context. We believe that  BA is an important new treatment for depression for two main reasons. First, its efficacy is supported by recent empirical research; second, it is based on simple and easily grasped underlying principles and utilizes a small set of straightforward procedures.  Behavioral MoDels of DePressioN  Basic Concepts  The central premise in virtually all behavioral models is the assumption that depression is associated with particular behavior–environment relationships that evolve over time in a person’s life. “Behavior” is a very broad  353   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  construct in these models and includes everything from taking a walk to grieving over the loss of a loved one. Behaviors can be fairly circumscribed (e.g., lying on the couch watching television after dinner) or they can be part of a more general repertoire (e.g., avoidance of asserting one’s own needs and desires in conflictual interactions).   “Environment” is also a broad construct that can best be thought of as the settings in which behaviors currently occur, as well as those in which behaviors have evolved over time. The temporal nature of environments is crucial for understanding behavioral approaches to depression. Often, behavior that appears to serve no function in a person’s current environment has served a very important function in the past. Thus, when practitioners wonder why a depressed person is engaging in a particular set of behaviors, such as remaining in an unsatisfying job, it is often necessary to consider how particular repertoires (e.g., avoiding potential losses) have evolved over time.  Finally, all behavioral models of depression emphasize the importance of contingent relationships between behaviors and the environments in which they occur. Contingent relationships are “if–then” relationships between human activities and their (often interpersonal) environmental consequences. For example, practitioners working within a behavioral framework are probably less interested in the fact that a depressed client stays in bed each morning worrying, for example, about the future of a troubled marriage, than they are about the consequences of this behavior. What happens as a result? Does the client become more or less depressed? By staying in bed, does the client avoid something aversive, such as confronting a spouse about an issue in the marriage, or going to work and facing a pile of uncompleted tasks? Understanding contingent relationships is a central feature of behavioral models of depression and a requisite skill of BA therapists.  Behavioral Roots of BA  These general behavioral concepts were developed and refined into specific conceptual frameworks and treatments for depression by both Ferster (1973, 1981) and Lewinsohn and colleagues (Lewinsohn, 1974; Lewinsohn, Antonuccio, Steinmetz-Breckenridge, & Teri, 1984; Lewinsohn, Biglan, & Zeiss, 1976). Ferster’s primary assumption was that depression is the result of a learning history in which the actions of the individual do not result in positive reward from the environment,  or in which the actions are reinforced because they allow the individual to escape from an aversive condition. Over time, behavior that would typically produce positive consequences ceases to do so. For example, for a variety of different reasons, a person’s efforts to form close relationships with others might gradually fade away because they are not followed by positive reinforcement (e.g., reciprocal efforts from others).  Ferster (1973, 1981) reasoned that this decrease in response-contingent positive reinforcement produces two additional consequences that facilitate depression. First, when people’s efforts do not result in reward, they often become more focused on responding to their own internal state than to potential sources of positive reinforcement in the external environment. This is the classic “turning inward” that is often seen in depression, and that makes sense from a behavioral perspective; when individuals learn that their own behavior is an unreliable predictor of positive consequences in their environment, they naturally spend less time attending to contingencies in that environment.  The second consequence of decreased rates of positive reinforcement that Ferster (1973, 1981) observed was a narrowing of individuals’ repertoire of adaptive behaviors. This makes logical sense as well because fewer and fewer behaviors are being maintained by positive reinforcement. Individuals may adopt extremely passive repertoires (e.g., “doing nothing”) because their active attempts to become engaged in life are not rewarded.  Finally, Ferster (1973, 1981) observed that increases in aversive consequences following behavior typically lead depressed individuals to become preoccupied with escape and avoidance. In effect, more energy is expended attempting to avoid or escape from anticipated aversive consequences than attempting to contact potential positive reinforcers in the environment.  Lewinsohn’s (1974) early behavioral model of depression was very compatible with many of the ideas proposed by Ferster’s (1973) behavioral analysis of depression. Lewinsohn and colleagues similarly emphasized the importance of response-contingent reinforcement and conceptualized that its rate was influenced by three factors: the number of potentially reinforcing events for an individual; the availability of reinforcement in the environment; and the instrumental behavior of the individual required to elicit the reinforcement. Lewinsohn also identified social avoidance as a core part of his model. Importantly, Lewinsohn, Sullivan, and Grosscup (1980) developed the first stand    Behavioral Activation for Depression  alone behaviorally oriented treatment for depression. Later, Lewinsohn, Hoberman, Teri, and Hautzinger (1985) proposed an integrated model that was intended to explain the interactive and complex nature of depression, including dispositional factors such as cognition, with environmental factors. This model did not overemphasize or give precedence to either cognitive factors or environmental factors in the etiology and maintenance of depression; rather it attempted to account for the complexity of depression. Research initiated in Lewinsohn’s laboratory has continued through the work of former students and colleagues across diverse settings and populations (Dimidjian, Barrera, Martell, Muñoz, & Lewinsohn, 2011).  Beck, Rush, Shaw, and Emery (1979) also pioneered early work on BA. Incorporating BA strategies as a core component of cognitive therapy (CT) for depression, Beck and colleagues formalized and widely disseminated some of the principal BA strategies utilized within a larger framework emphasizing the importance of cognition in etiology and treatment of depression.  Contemporary BA  The work of Ferster, Lewinsohn, and Beck strongly influenced the development of contemporary BA in important ways. They were a direct influence on Jacobson and colleagues’ initial research and clinical development of BA (Jacobson, Martell, & Dimidjian, 2001; Martell, Addis, & Jacobson, 2001; Martell, Dimidjian, & Herman-Dunn, 2010). Their work similarly formed the context of other investigators, such as the team of Lejuez, Hopko, LePage, Hopko, and McNeil (2001; Lejuez, Hopko, Acierno, Daughters, & Pagoto, 2011), who articulated a BA approach that is convergent in both theory and clinical emphasis on targeting behavior change. This approach, BA treatment for depression, has been supported in multiple studies by their group (e.g., Hopko, Lejuez, LePage, Hopko, & McNeil, 2003).  With respect to a conceptual model of depression, the current conceptualization draws heavily on the work of Ferster (1973, 1981) and Lewinsohn (1974) in emphasizing the central importance of context and activity in understanding depression. While acknowledging that genetic, biological, and other distal factors may be causally related to depression, the current behavioral conceptualization focuses on the aspects of a person’s life context that may have triggered depression, and particular ways of responding to this context  that may be maintaining depression. Specifically, the model assumes that one reason people get depressed is because changes in the context of their lives provide low levels of positive reinforcement and high levels of aversive control. Lives that are “less rewarding” can lead to feelings of sadness and depressed mood. And when people get depressed, they often pull away from the world in important ways, and the basic routines of their lives become easily disrupted. Both of these processes can increase depressed mood and make it difficult to solve problems effectively in one’s life. In fact, these processes are conceptualized as “secondary problem behaviors,” because they frequently prevent people from (1) connecting with aspects of their lives that may provide some improvement in mood and (2) solving problems that may help to decrease stress and improve life context.  The BA approach to therapy addresses both of the factors that may be contributing to depression: those aspects of one’s life that need to be changed to reduce depression and the ways withdrawal from the world may be maintaining or increasing depression. BA accomplishes these aims through “guided activation,” which is the use of a series of behavior change strategies that the therapist and client develop together on the basis of a careful examination of what activities will be reinforcing for a given client and help to disrupt the relationships that are maintaining the depression. The point of BA is not to engage in increased activation at random or activities that are “generally” thought to be pleasing or to improve mood (e.g., seeing a movie); in contrast, activation strategies are highly individualized and “custom tailored.” The role of the BA therapist is to act as a “coach” while the client implements the activation strategies, providing expert help in setting achievable goals, breaking difficult tasks down into manageable units, troubleshooting problems that arise, and maintaining motivation during the process of change.  eMPirical coNtext  The first study to revitalize interest in a purely behavioral approach to treating depression was conducted by Jacobson and colleagues (1996), who proposed a simple but provocative question: Could the behavioral component of CT account for the efficacy that CT has demonstrated in previous clinical trials? Adults with major depression were randomly assigned to one of three treatment conditions, including BA only, BA plus   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  interventions designed to modify automatic thoughts, and the full CT package. Results suggested that BA was comparable to the full CT package in both acute efficacy (Jacobson et al., 1996) and prevention of relapse over a 2-year follow-up period (Gortner, Gollan, Dobson, & Jacobson, 1998).  On the basis of these findings, BA was developed into a more fully articulated behavioral intervention that included the behavioral aspects of CT and incorporated the early behavioral work of Ferster (1973, 1981) and Lewinsohn (1974), as described earlier. This expanded BA model has been articulated in published reports (Jacobson et al., 2001; Martell et al., 2001, 2010) and in a patient-oriented self-help manual (Addis & Martell, 2004). BA was further tested in a large, randomized, placebo-controlled clinical trial that compared its acute and long-term efficacy to both CT and antidepressant medication (ADM). Two hundred forty-one patients were randomly assigned to BA, CT, ADM, or pill-placebo, and severity was used as a stratification variable during randomization. The findings suggested that BA is a particularly promising treatment for depression (Dimidjian et al., 2006). Among more severely depressed patients, its performance was comparable to the current standard of care, ADM, and demonstrated better retention. Both BA and ADM were superior to CT among more severely depressed patients. Moreover, follow-up results indicate that BA appears to have promising enduring effects (Dobson et al., 2008). Finally, BA may demonstrate an important cost-effectiveness advantage compared to continuing patients on medication.  These results were consistent with a range of other studies suggesting that activation interventions are particularly important components of cognitive-behavioral treatments. In a classic study, Zeiss, Lewinsohn, and Muñoz (1979) reported comparable outcomes for depressed patients who received treatment focused on interpersonal skills, pleasant activities, or cognitive change. In addition, in a study with depressed older adults, Scogin, Jamison, and Gochneaur (1989) found no differences in outcome between a cognitive bibliotherapy treatment and a behavioral bibliotherapy treatment among mildly and moderately depressed older adults. The importance of behavioral strategies has also been reported in other studies across multiple diagnostic categories (e.g., Borkovec, Newman, Pincus, & Lytle, 2002; Foa, Rothbaum, & Furr, 2003; Gloaguen, Cottraux, Cucherat, & Blackburn, 1998). Other process-oriented research has similarly emphasized the  importance of BA components of CT (Bennett-Levy et al., 2004) and has suggested the possibility of negative outcomes when therapists work on changing clients’ thoughts about interpersonal relationships as opposed to changing actual interpersonal relationships (Hayes, Castonguay, & Goldfried, 1996).  In addition, Ferster’s early focus on avoidance has also been underscored by contemporary behavior therapists. Specifically, Linehan (1993) incorporated the use of “opposite action” for sadness as a means to target depression in dialectical behavior therapy. And Hayes and colleagues (1996) have emphasized the role of experiential avoidance in the development of a wide range of psychopathologies and in the conceptualization of acceptance and commitment therapy (ACT; Hayes, Strosahl, & Wilson, 1999). A study on an early precursor to ACT found significant treatment benefits for depressed clients in comparison to standard CT (Zettle & Rains, 1989).  Some preliminary studies also suggest that patient activation is an important element of the change process. In a substance use treatment study in which one condition was augmented with BA interventions, pre- to posttreatment increases in environmental reward were associated with reductions in depressive and anxiety symptoms for such patients, but not for those receiving substance use treatment only (Daughters et al., 2008). In a study of cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) for depression, increases from baseline in activation predicted posttreatment depression improvement (Christopher, Jacob, Neuhaus, Neary, & Fiola, 2009).  Recent enthusiasm for BA is fueled in large part by the broad dissemination potential of a straightforward, parsimonious intervention such as BA. The application of BA in novel settings and with diverse populations is a focus of much recent research (see below for detailed discussion of settings and client variables). Technology is playing an increasingly important role in the expansion of BA. Teletherapy over the phone and with videoconferencing technology has been shown to be effective for adolescent and late-life depression (Lazzari, Egan, & Rees, 2011; Quijano et al., 2007) as well as computerized adaptations of BA delivered via the Internet (Spates, Kalata, Ozeki, Stanton, & Peters, 2012; Spek et al., 2007, 2008; Van Voorhees et al., 2009; Warmerdam, Van Straten, Twisk, Riper, & Cuijpers, 2008). Finally, novel training methods are also being enhanced with technology. Based on pilot data from a preliminary computerized BA training program (Hubley, Woodcock, Dimeff, & Dimidjian, in press), our   Behavioral Activation for Depression  group is currently testing a fully developed computerassisted therapy program to train therapists in BA.  In summary, research on BA provides a strong foundation for clinical application with depressed patients and for extension to novel populations (Dimidjian et al., 2011). These conclusions are consistent with other meta-analyses that incorporate clinical trial data from over 30 studies (Cuijpers, van Straten, & Warmerdam, 2007; Ekers, Richards, & Gilbody, 2007; Mazzucchelli, Kane, & Rees, 2009) and with influential treatment guidelines (e.g., National Institute of Health and Clinical Excellence, 2009).  assessiNG DiaGNostic, cliNical, aND fuNctioNal DoMaiNs  The application of BA is based on a comprehensive diagnostic, clinical, and functional assessment. Some of these assessment activities are completed as a precursor to the initiation of therapy, and others are ongoing throughout the course of therapy.  In our treatment outcome research, we have used a number of structured diagnostic interview instruments to assess Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM) diagnoses, including the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV Axis I Disorders (SCID-I; First, Spitzer, Gibbon, & Williams, 1997), and the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV Axis II Personality Disorders (SCID-II; First, Spitzer, Gibbons, Williams, & Benjamin, 1996). In addition, we have used measures of depressive severity, including the clinician-administered Hamilton Depression Rating Scale (HDRS; Hamilton, 1960), the client self-reported Beck Depression Inventory–II (BDI-II; Beck, Steer, & Brown, 1996), and the nine-item Patient Health Questionnaire Depression Scale (PHQ-9; Kroenke, Spitzer, & Williams, 2001).  In routine clinical practice, we recommend conducting a baseline diagnostic interview (although it can be administered using a less structured format than a research-based interview), and the ongoing use of a measure to assess depressive severity is important. Typically, the most easily administered measure is a self-report measure (e.g., BDI-II; Beck et al., 1996). Also, a number of self-report instruments may serve as useful assessment measures of patient activity level and of the reward available in a client’s environment. The Behavioral Activation for Depression Scale (BADS; Kanter, Mulick, Busch, Berlin, & Martell, 2007; Kant   er, Rusch, Busch, & Sedivy, 2009), a 29-item measure of client activation, has been used in several studies (e.g., Weinstock, Munroe, & Miller, 2011) to measure changes in levels of activation and avoidance over the course of BA. The BADS has been validated in European Spanish (Barraca, Pérez-Álvarez, & Lozano Bleda, 2011), Persian (Mohammadi & Amiri, 2010), and Dutch (Raes, Hoes, Van Gucht, & Kanter, 2010). A recently developed nine-item short form of the BADS demonstrated improved psychometric properties compared to the original, and good internal consistency and predictive validity in the validation study (Manos, Kanter, & Luo, 2011).  In addition, self-report questionnaires have been developed to measure the construct of responsecontingent positive reinforcement, including the Environmental Reward Observation Scale (EROS; Armento & Hopko, 2007) and the Reward Probability Index (RPI; Carvalho et al., 2010). Both of these measures are brief, and initial psychometric studies indicate promising psychometric properties. Clinicians who want a nomothetic measure of pleasurable activities to augment the idiographic behavioral assessment (described in more detail below) can use the Pleasant Events Schedule (Lewinsohn & Graf, 1973). These measures may prove to be useful clinical tools that can be administered periodically throughout the course of treatment to assess change in activity and reward. For a full discussion of measures available and issues related to measuring the BA model, see Manos, Kanter, and Busch (2010).  Because functional capacity is such a key component of BA treatment, it is important to gather detailed information about the impact of the client’s depression on functional status across multiple life domains, including work, family, social activity, and so forth. These domains can be assessed using clinical interview or standard assessment instruments (e.g., the Social Adjustment Scale [Weissman & Bothwell, 1976] and the Medical Outcomes Study 36-Item Short Form Health Survey [Ware & Sherbourne, 1992]).  course of treatMeNt  BA is a theory-driven as opposed to a protocol-driven treatment and, as such, is highly idiographic in its application. Treatment does not follow a required sessionby- session format; however, it does follow a general course over time. This general course comprises the   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  following activities, which are described in greater detail below:  •• Orienting to treatment  •• Developing treatment goals  •• Individualizing activation and engagement targets  •• Repeatedly applying and troubleshooting activa   tion and engagement strategies  •• Reviewing and consolidating treatment gains  Orienting to Treatment  BA begins with orienting the client to the treatment, a process that is typically the focus of the first two sessions. The primary tasks to accomplish during this initial phase of treatment include discussing the BA model of depression and primary treatment strategies, and providing information about the structure of treatment, and the roles and responsibilities of the client and therapist.  The presentation of the treatment model includes describing the behavioral approach to depression and the process of change during treatment, discussing the specific ways the model fits with the client’s experiences, and encouraging and responding to questions and concerns about the model. The model is presented both  verbally during the first session and in a brief, written description that is given to the client at the end of the first session. In addition, many clients find the illustration provided in Figure 9.1 to be a helpful adjunct when orienting to the model. A detailed transcript illustrating the presentation of the treatment rationale is included in the case study below, and the key points to address are summarized in Table 9.1.  During the second session, therapist and client again discuss the treatment model and the client’s reactions, including questions that may have arisen following the first session. It is essential that the therapist obtain “buy in” from the client with the basic elements of the treatment model. Therapy works best if the client accepts and buys into the rationale for treatment and the case conceptualization (Addis & Carpenter, 2000). The therapist is advised to guard against moving too quickly if the client does not express agreement with the key tenets of the model. Thus, during the initial sessions, it is essential that the therapist encourage the client to ask questions and elicit the client’s potential doubts and concerns.  For instance, some clients may find it difficult to accept the idea that changing behavior directly is an effective way to work with depression. Often, clients are strongly committed to a biological explanation for their   What is the context? How do you feel? What do you do (or not do)?   Have any problems started, continued, or worsened?  figUre 9.1. The behavioral activation treatment model.   Behavioral Activation for Depression  table 9.1. 10 key Points to address when Presenting the treatment Model  1. Behavioral activation is based on the idea that the events in your life and how you respond to such events influence how you feel. 2. BA assumes that one reason people get depressed is that their lives are providing too few rewards and too many problems. Sometimes it is possible to identify easily stressors or problems; other times there are no clearly identifiable stressors but there is still not adequate reward from the environment. 3. When one’s life context is difficult, it is common to experience feeling sad, down, discouraged, anxious, fatigued, drained, and so forth. 4. When feeling these ways, it is also common to do (or not do) particular actions. People often pull away from the world around them and find that basic routines in their lives become disrupted. 5. Pulling away from the world when feeling down is natural and understandable. The problem is that it also can initiate downward spirals with how you feel (e.g., the less you do, the worse you feel, and the worse you feel, the less you do). 6. Acting (or not acting) in such ways also can maintain depression by making it hard to solve life problems effectively; this initiates another downward spiral in which what you do or don’t do makes the context of life harder or keeps you from improving it. 7. In this treatment, we will work together to focus on specific things you can do to help shift these downward spirals and help you become more active and engaged in your life. 8. BA is not just about “doing more.” If feeling better were that easy, you would have already done it. We can work together to identify the activities that would be most helpful and the small and manageable steps you can take to get started. You can think of me as a your coach or a consultant in the process of change. 9. Each session will involve developing practical and do-able steps to engage in activities that improve mood and to solve specific life problems. Between sessions, you will work on homework assignments that we develop together; these assignments are an essential part of therapy and will focus on re-connecting or building parts of your life that increase feelings of pleasure or accomplishment and bring you closer to important life goals. 10. Activating and engaging in specific ways can help you experience more reward and effectively solve life problems. When you are active, engaged, and solving problems effectively, it is likely that you will be moving toward important life goals and feeling better. depression. It is not advisable for therapists to debate this position; instead, therapists can explain that there are many sources of vulnerability to depression, and that one of the effective ways to change depression is by changing what one does. At times, clients also may think that the emphasis on behavioral change means that all they need to do is exercise more, go to a few more movies, or take a few more walks, and their depression will remit. If clients understand BA in this way, then it is not surprising when they feel that the treatment invalidates their degree of distress and the difficulty they face in overcoming depression. We often find it helpful to talk to clients about two points. First, behavior can have a powerful effect on our moods, and people are often unaware of this link, particularly when they are depressed. For example, subtly shifting the way someone approaches interactions with family members may not rid that person of depression, but it can reduce the severity of depressed mood, thereby setting the stage for other changes that collectively help to reverse the depression. The second point is that behavior change is not easy; if it were, we would all behave exactly as we think we should all the time (and we know this is not the case!). Changing behavior requires knowing what to change, and this can take some serious and sustained “detective work” in therapy. The therapist can again emphasize his/her role as a coach in helping the client to figure out what to change and how to do it.  In addition to presenting and discussing the treatment model, it is also important to discuss thoroughly the structure of treatment and the roles of therapist and client. It is necessary to emphasize three key elements: between-session practice, collaboration, and the structure of sessions.  1. It is important early in treatment to highlight the active nature of BA and establish the importance of between-session practice. The therapist sets the tone of therapy and expectations by highlighting that BA is a very action-oriented and problem-focused treatment in which the majority of the “work” of therapy goes on between sessions, as the client implements plans that therapist and client devise in session. Subsequent sessions examine what the client has learned, highlight relevant consequences of activities, and identify barriers and troubleshoot to maximize the likelihood of success on future attempts. The assignment of homework begins in the very first session, when the therapist asks the client to read the brief pamphlet that reviews the key ideas of the BA approach (see Martell et al., 2001).  CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  2. It also is important to emphasize that BA is a collaborative approach to therapy, in which therapist and client work together in the service of the client’s goals. 3. It is also helpful to orient clients to the structured nature of each treatment session. Although the specific foci of each session vary across clients and across time, each session nonetheless follows a similar general outline. Specifically, as in cognitive therapy for depression (Beck et al., 1979), each session begins with therapist and client setting an agenda in a collaborative fashion. The aim of the agenda is to organize the time effectively and to ensure that sessions address the client’s most important topics and have maximal likelihood of helping the client reach key goals. Because the goal of treatment is activation, the more control given to the client in setting the agenda, the better. In addition, given the integral role of homework in BA, the majority of each session is devoted to reviewing homework from the previous session and assigning homework for the next session. The ending of each session includes asking the client to reiterate a “take-home message” from the session, verifying that the client has a clear understanding of the assigned homework, and reviewing the time for the next scheduled session and methods to reach the therapist, if needed, in the interim. In attending to each of these specific tasks, the therapist establishes his/her credibility as an expert who can help the client and conveys a sense of hope. By establishing at the outset of treatment a strong foundation of collaboration, client and therapist can begin working together toward the client’s goals.  Developing Treatment Goals  The ultimate goal of BA is to help clients modify their behavior to increase contact with sources of positive reinforcement in their lives. Typically, this process involves first addressing basic avoidance patterns and areas of routine disruption and, second, addressing short- and long-term goals. A good deal of the therapist’s time in BA is spent helping clients to increase awareness of their escape and avoidance repertoires and to practice active coping responses. Often, part of this process also involves changing basic routines (e.g., sleeping, eating, and social contact). Thus, short-term goals are set to specify concrete accomplishments that can help clients shift their life situations in a less depressing direction. Often, therapists are uncertain about  how to sequence treatment targets; generally, we focus initially on behavior change that has the greatest likelihood of success, which may be based on ease of accomplishment or level of importance to client values and priorities. Common examples might include getting the house cleaned, spending time with friends and family, making headway on a large pile of paperwork on which the client has procrastinated, exercising more frequently, and so on. Often, behaviors necessary for progress on short-term goals can be scheduled and structured in such a way that they substitute for maladaptive avoidant or withdrawal responses. A therapist works with a client to make progress on short-term goals regardless of how the client is feeling. In other words, one of the therapist’s primary goals is to help the client change the pattern of having his/her behavior governed by mood. Rather, the objective is to make progress on goals regardless of how one feels at a particular point in time, under the assumption that progress on life goals is itself antidepressive. This is a crucial point because clients often judge the success of a particular behavior change based on how it makes them feel in the moment. Thus, it is important for therapists to remain mindful of the consequence of different behaviors specifically with respect to whether they help clients move toward or achieve treatment goals.  Once the short-term goals relating to avoidance, withdrawal, and routine disruption have been addressed, clients are assisted in addressing larger life circumstances that may be related to depression. Larger life goals are those shifts that take time to accomplish but have the potential to alter a person’s life situation in substantial ways. Common examples include finding a new job, getting out of a distressing relationship, starting a new relationship, or moving to a new city or town. BA can be helpful in teaching and encouraging clients to continue to make progress toward these goals even though their actual realization may take some time to accomplish. Essentially, in BA, clients learn basic change strategies that can be used to accomplish shortterm and larger life goals.  Individualizing Activation and Engagement Targets  No two people are the same, and no person is exactly the same from situation to situation. In the context of treating depression, this means that the particular activation strategies that work for one person may not work for another, and they may work for the same person some    Behavioral Activation for Depression  times, but not always. Whether activity–environment transactions shift someone’s mood in a positive or negative direction is an empirical question, and one that requires careful attention and assessment to answer. Much of the skill of doing competent BA relies on just this kind of careful examination. In BA, this process is referred to as “functional analysis,” which is the key to individualizing activation targets and the heart of BA. Functional analysis involves identifying for each client the variables that maintain the depression and are most amenable to change. This understanding forms the basis of the case conceptualization and guides the idiographic application of specific activation strategies. In general, the therapist must engage the client in a detailed examination of the following:  •• What is maintaining the depression? •• What is getting in the way of engaging in and enjoying life? •• What behaviors are good candidates for maximizing change?  This process sounds simple, yet in practice, it can be complicated given that we all frequently lack awareness of the contingencies that control our behavior. Given this reality, early in treatment, we talk explicitly about the goal (and the challenge!) of identifying these relationships.  Two key steps are involved in identifying the contingencies that control behavior. First, therapist and client must clearly and specifically define the behavior of interest; this includes defining the frequency, duration, intensity, and setting of the behavior. The behaviors of greatest interest are those most closely tied to changes in mood. For clients who are familiar with antidepressant treatment, we often explain that we want to identify the ingredients of a behavioral antidepressant that works for them. In order to do so, we need to define specifically the activities that maintain depression (e.g., “down activities”) and those that improve mood and functioning (e.g., “up activities”). For instance, for one client, difficulty completing basic household tasks was maintaining and exacerbating his experience of depression. It was important to specify the problems of (1) filling and closing bags of household trash, then leaving them in the pantry room rather than taking them to the dumpster behind the house for the past 6 weeks, and (2) receiving bills in the mail and placing them unopened in a file drawer for the past 4 months. Treatment with this client began with a series of graded tasks to  accomplish the goal of taking out the trash. This was identified specifically as a potential “up” activity (even though it was, admittedly, not a pleasurable one) and selected as an initial focus because therapist and client decided it was more easily accomplished than addressing the bills, which the client experienced as more overwhelming.  Second, therapist and client can begin to identify the antecedents and consequences of the behavior, with the goal of specifying variables that elicit or reinforce depression. In terms of the BA model, this is parallel to identifying the links between context and mood, between action and mood, and the downward spirals that can maintain depression over time. Understanding basic behavioral principles can often be of great value in identifying these contingent relationships. What does this mean in practical terms? For depressed clients, a number of contingent relationships are often observed. As we discussed earlier, negative reinforcement contingencies are often pervasive. “Negative reinforcement” means that the likelihood of a behavior occurring is increased by the removal of something from the environment, typically an aversive condition. Negative reinforcement contingencies can be a very adaptive part of human behavior. For instance, putting on a warm coat to avoid getting cold, stopping at stop signs to avoid getting in accidents, and being extra nice to a parent after crashing the car to avoid being punished are all examples of ways that negative reinforcement can serve one well. Unfortunately, however, when an individual becomes depressed, his/ her behavioral repertoires can become dominated by escape and avoidance behaviors that temporarily allow a person to escape from painful feelings or difficult interpersonal situations. In this way, many avoidant and escape behaviors may be understood as secondary coping responses—efforts to cope with the experience of depression that, unfortunately, make it worse. For example, a person might attempt to escape from feelings of hopelessness and fatigue by taking a long nap in the middle of the afternoon. This might, as a consequence, temporarily remove the person from an aversive context, but it can also prevent him/her from taking the steps necessary to shift into a less depressive context overall (exercising, applying for jobs, cleaning the house, etc.). Substance abuse, excessive sleeping, watching too much television, and general inactivity are all common examples of secondary coping responses that can be maintained by negative reinforcement. These types of negative reinforcement   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  contingencies are often central in preventing people from coming into contact with potentially reinforcing environments that contribute to leading a more adaptive and engaged life. Careful assessment is required to identify whether and how specific negative reinforcement contingencies are active in a client’s life. Positive reinforcement contingencies may also be problematic for clients. In these cases, the likelihood of a behavior is increased because it is contingently associated with positive consequences. For instance, going to bed early may be positively reinforced by family members offering empathy and support. Some behaviors, such as overeating and substance abuse, can also provide immediate positive reinforcement but detract from longterm goals, thereby maintaining the depression.  How do we conduct functional analyses in BA? There exist two primary supports for the BA therapist doing functional analyses: the BA model and activity monitoring. First, the BA model used to orient clients at the outset of treatment can be used throughout treatment to guide assessment of specific events that arise in a client’s life to help identify key links between activity and mood. For example, if a client begins to talk in session about feeling troubled by a difficult interaction with her son, the therapist can suggest that they use the model to understand the components of the interaction. Together, they can discuss and write down specifically what happened (e.g., “My son said that he was failing math”), how the client felt (e.g., “I felt sad about how hard our lives always seem to be and afraid that he would not graduate”), and what the client did (e.g., “I left dinner, went to my room, and thought about how I’m failing as a parent”). These components can then be linked to identify the downward spiral that maintains negative mood (e.g., isolating and ruminating increases anxiety and sadness) and the downward spiral that prohibits effective problem solving (e.g., “I didn’t talk directly with him, and he got angry, went out with his friends, and didn’t come home until the middle of the night”). This process of assessment helps to identify targets of activation for that difficult event (e.g., generate and practice alternatives to leaving the interaction and ruminating; identify and implement steps to solving the problem of her son’s poor performance in math). Repeated application of the model in sessions and for use as homework between sessions also will help therapist and client identify patterns of maladaptive actions over time and place. Finally, repeated use of the model in such ways teaches the client a method to guide his/her actions long after therapy has ended.  Second, activity monitoring in the context of daily life is the heart of the assessment process in BA. Through detailed and ongoing activity monitoring that the client completes between sessions, therapist and client can work together to develop an understanding of the questions listed earlier. Given the role of activity monitoring, it is important early in treatment for the therapist to set the stage to explain clearly how to do it, defining both what to monitor and when to do it. Also, therapists must carefully and skillfully review monitoring tasks to reinforce the client’s efforts to begin developing activation and engagement assignments.  Therapists may elect to use a number of different formats for activity monitoring, the most basic form of which includes recording both an activity and a mood rating for each hour of the client’s waking day. Therapists also may elect to have clients monitor mastery (sense of accomplishment) or pleasure (enjoyment) associated with specific activities. Generally, we advise clients to record enough information about activities that we can begin to identify links between what they were doing and how they were feeling, but not so much information that the task is overly burdensome. It also is helpful to identify at what intervals during the day the client will write down the observations (e.g., morning, lunch, dinner, before bed). If recording for each hour is too taxing for a client, time sampling procedures may also be used. In such a procedure, client and therapist agree on a specified number of hours when activities will be monitored during the week between sessions. Time sampling procedures need to include a variety of situations in which the client functions during the week. In general, therapists will want to encourage clients to complete entries at regular intervals throughout the day and are advised to work with clients to develop plans for recording that take advantage of natural cues and rhythms in their lives to facilitate such regular recording.  Therapists can provide clients with a simple weekly Activity Record for monitoring assignments (e.g., see Figure 9.2). However, as is often emphasized in BA, the function of the behavior is more important than its form; thus, clients may eschew monitoring on an Activity Record but be comfortable using personal calendars, smartphones, or other idiosyncratic recording methods. Adapting the monitoring assignment to a form that is compatible with the client’s normal daily routine is highly encouraged. For instance, clients who spend a lot of time in their car may keep their records above the visor; others may find it helpful to keep it   Behavioral Activation for Depression  Instructions: Record your activity for each hour of the day, and record a mood rating associated with each activity. Use the scale below with the anchors that you and your therapist develop to guide your mood rating. Aim to make entries on your Activity Record at least every 3–4 hours each day. Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday Saturday Sunday 5–6 6–7 7–8 8–9 9–10 10–11 11–12 12–1 1–2 2–3 3–4 4–5 5–6 6–7 7–8 8–9 9–10 10–11 11–12 12–1 1–2 2–3 3–4 4–5  Mood Ratings: 0: Description, with examples of associated activities:  5: Description, with examples of associated activities: 10: Description, with examples of associated activities: figUre 9.2. Activity Record (hourly).   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  taped to the refrigerator or bathroom mirror; still others find it useful to carry it with them in a pocket, purse, backpack, or briefcase.  When a client has completed an activity monitoring assignment, it is essential for the therapist to review it in detail. Failing to review activity monitoring records may mean missed opportunities to reinforce the client’s behavior and to develop the case conceptualization. Much of competent BA lies in skillfully reviewing a completed Activity Record. What does the competent therapist attend to when reviewing the records? In general, the therapist will want to keep the case conceptualization questions listed earlier in the forefront of his/ her mind when reviewing a completed activity log. The therapist reviews the Activity Record to understand the client’s activities, routines, and life context, and to begin to identify patterns that may be maintaining or exacerbating depressed mood.  Specific questions that therapists can use to guide their review of activity schedules are listed below:  •• What would the client be doing if he/she were not  depressed (working, managing family responsi   bilities, exercising, socializing, engaging in leisure  activities, eating, sleeping, etc.)?  •• Is the client engaging in a wide variety of activi   ties, or have his/her activities become narrow?  •• What is the relationship between specific activities  and mood?  •• What is the relationship between specific life con   texts/problems and mood?  •• In what ways are avoidance and withdrawal main   taining or exacerbating depression? What does the  client avoid or from what is he/she pulling away?  In what specific ways?  •• Are there routine disruptions?  •• Where has contact with reinforcers been lost?  •• Are there deficits in coping skills and strategies?  To answer these questions, it is essential to focus on the parts of the client’s activity and context that change and the parts that are consistent over time. It is not uncommon for depressed clients to report that their mood is always low, no matter what they are doing or where they are doing it. They may describe that they simply feel “blah” all the time or that, perhaps, their mood changes, but such changes are minor or irrelevant. A central premise of BA, however, is that variability is everywhere, though sometimes it is difficult to detect.  Moreover, the variability is not random. Instead, variations in behavior and its settings have a direct effect on a person’s mood and, as such, provide critical information about central contingencies. When clients report that they feel depressed “all the time,” it is either because they are inaccurately reporting on their mood retrospectively, their behavioral repertoires are extremely narrow (e.g., lying in bed all day long), or they have not learned to discriminate between subtle differences in mood. This last point is a critical one. One of the key tasks for therapists is to help clients understand that their moods are intimately linked to what they are doing, where they are doing it, and the resulting consequences. Treating depression requires making a series of strategic changes in each of these domains, all of which are based on understanding the basic contingent relationships.  Repeatedly Applying and Troubleshooting Activation and Engagement Strategies  Given the idiographic nature of BA, the course of treatment may look quite different across a range of clients. Despite this diversity, we discuss below a few straightforward behavioral methods that are frequently used.  Activity Scheduling and Self-Monitoring  The major work of therapy in BA occurs between treatment sessions. It is uncommon for clients to leave a session without some specific activities with which to experiment during the week. Thus, activity scheduling and monitoring of outcome are standard methods used throughout treatment. At the end of each session, the client should clearly understand the specific activity assignment and have a clear strategy for implementing it during the week (including a plan for overcoming likely obstacles to implementation).  Specifically scheduling the activity is a useful tool for having the client commit to times when he/she will do the homework. When the assignment is listed in writing on a particular day of the week, at a particular hour, the client has the benefit of an external aid to motivate behavior change (i.e., working from the “outsidein” as opposed to the “inside-out”). Activity scheduling is also used frequently for clients with significant routine disruptions. Schedules can be an aid in the effort to develop and follow regular routines for eating, working, sleeping, exercising, and maintaining social   Behavioral Activation for Depression  contact. Depending on the activity, the client may not specifically schedule the time but may instead record its completion on a daily log.  A key part of scheduling activities frequently involves careful attention to contingency management. As social psychologists have long known, “The correlations between intention and behavior are modest . . . the weak intention–behavior relation is largely due to people having good intentions but failing to act on them” (Gollwitzer, 1999, p. 493). Given this reality, it is essential for BA therapists to consider ways they can help clients structure their environment so as to maximize success with treatment assignments and goals.  One helpful method of contingency management is the use of public commitment to enhance the likelihood of completing assignments (Locke & Latham, 2002). Often, we explore whether friends, coworkers, or family members are available to be included in activation plans. For instance, one of our clients learned in treatment that when his depression was more severe, it was essential for him to tell his wife each morning the primary tasks he intended to complete that day. For him, “keeping his word” was an effective reinforcer that helped to increase his activation.  In addition, we work with clients to structure their environments in other ways that will enhance activation. Thus, for a client who works on an exercise plan during the week, putting on her exercise clothes before she leaves work at the end of the day is an essential part of the plan.  Finally, clients may also experiment with the use of arbitrary reinforcers for specific behavior change tasks. Although the emphasis of BA is heavily on increasing contact with natural reinforcers in one’s environment, the selective use of arbitrary reinforcers can at times be helpful. The client we noted earlier planned a special dinner with his wife at the end of a week of adherence with activation tasks; the client who was working on the exercise program bought a new shirt for exercising after she started her new program.  Occasionally, therapists may suggest the use of aversive contingencies to help promote behavior change; for instance, one client found it useful to agree to call his therapist if he was going to stay in bed and miss work for the day. We have described to other clients the method of writing donation checks to their least favored charities, which are then cashed if they do not complete scheduled activities (Watson & Tharp, 2002). Often, simply the suggestion of an aversive contingency  is sufficient to motivate change. For instance, the client who agreed to call his therapist did, in fact, call early one Monday morning; when he was halfway through leaving a message, he stated, “This is ridiculous. Forget it, I am going to work.”  When clients do activity scheduling, it is also essential to build in a monitoring component such that they record the context and consequences of activation. This provides both information about the specific activation assignment, and regular and ongoing practice in noticing contingent relationships between activity and mood. It is essential for the therapist to discuss what the client learned from the activation and self-monitoring tasks in each session. In addition, the therapist needs to provide regular feedback about progress and to highlight areas of improvement or troubleshoot problems that may have arisen.  It is essential for the therapist not to shy away from asking about homework that is incomplete or not done. Attending to these domains is exactly the job of the BA therapist. Repeated and persistent focus on a small set of activation tasks often occupies a great deal of the course of treatment. Asking about what prevented the completion of homework gives therapist and client essential information about important barriers and possible examples of avoidance patterns. The purpose of such discussions is not to punish or shame the client, so it is important to approach homework review with a direct and nonjudgmental attitude. At the same time, discussing incomplete or partially completed homework may be experienced as aversive by the client, which may help to facilitate his/her doing the homework next time (i.e., through being negatively reinforced by escaping from the therapist’s uncomfortable questioning). If this occurs naturally, it is not a problem and can in fact enhance treatment progress. However, the therapist should never use shame or criticism, however subtly, to enhance homework completion.  Graded Task Assignment  Graded task assignment, which is a core part of CT for depression (Beck et al., 1979), is also a hallmark of BA and a key part of most activity scheduling efforts. Thus, it is important for therapists to help clients break down behaviors into specific, achievable units to facilitate successful behavior change. Knowing how to break down tasks and grade them appropriately in a stepwise progression from simple to complex requires thera    CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  pists to use a broad array of basic self-management and problem-solving skills. Toward this end, it is also important for therapists to help clients learn the method of grading tasks during therapy, so that they can apply this skill to new contexts and tasks after therapy has ended. In explaining the tool of graded task assignment, it is often important to remind clients that the goal is not to accomplish all parts of the activity; rather, the goals are to get started on important tasks, increase activation, and disrupt avoidance. Therapists can also explain to clients that breaking tasks down helps to ensure success with subtasks, and such success experiences can in turn reinforce and motivate work on successive components of the larger task.  It is very important to break down tasks in such a way that early success is guaranteed. If clients experience difficulty with tasks, therapists may want to revisit explicitly whether the task was broken down and graded sufficiently. Clients also can be asked to envision the steps involved in a given task before attempting it outside of therapy, and to anticipate any obstacles that might arise. If this process suggests that certain components may be difficult to master, therapist and client can grade that task into smaller and more achievable components.  Avoidance Modification and Problem Solving  This is perhaps one of the most rich and varied aspects of BA. As noted earlier, clients may be addressing avoidance of concrete tasks at work or home, avoidance of painful emotions such as grief or fear, avoidance of interpersonal conflict, and so forth. The specific methods used to address these areas are tied to the specific nature of the avoidance. For instance, a client who avoids the experience of grief over a lost relationship may be assisted in spending time each day reviewing photos of the former partner, reminiscing about times they shared, and so forth. A client who avoids tasks at work may be assisted in breaking down tasks, making specific to-do lists, asking others for help, and so forth. A client who avoids interpersonal conflict may be assisted in practicing assertive communication in role plays in sessions, experimenting with discussions with friends, bringing a family member to a therapy session, and so forth. That said, within this broad domain, a number of basic strategies may be helpful in planning treatment.  First, it is essential when addressing avoidance to start from a collaborative stance with the client. It is  important to understand and to communicate an understanding of the discomfort that a client may experience in a particular situation, which is then followed by some action on the part of the client to end the aversive experience. Therapists can emphasize the ways that avoidance may serve an adaptive function in the short term but be problematic in the long term. Given that many avoidant behaviors may be under the control of immediate contingencies, it is often helpful to highlight repeatedly the long-term consequences of particular behaviors. Returning to the BA model to highlight such patterns is often helpful.  Second, basic problem-solving methods are frequently used to address avoidance. Although we rarely teach problem-solving steps in a structured and formal manner, addressing avoidance typically involves figuring out how to approach and solve problems. Thus, it is essential for therapists to maintain a problem-solving mind-set with respect to avoidance and to work with clients to generate a range of options for possible alternative coping behaviors. Problem-solving strategies include defining and assessing the problem, generating alternative solutions, managing environmental contingencies, and troubleshooting the solution when needed. It should be noted that all of the other basic strategies are also frequently used in the service of avoidance modification and problem solving (activity scheduling and monitoring, graded task assignment, etc.).  Third, to help maintain a consistent focus on avoidance, clients may be assisted by several mnemonic devices. These devices help to organize a method of examining, “What is the function of a behavior; what are its consequences?” We have used the acronym AC- TION to identify the general approach that we ask clients to take (Martell et al., 2001):  •• Assess—Is this behavior approach or avoidance?  Will it be likely to make me feel better or worse?  •• Choose—Either choose to continue this behavior,  even if it makes me feel worse, or try a new be   havior.  •• Try—Try the behavior chosen.  •• Integrate—Any new behavior needs to be given  a fair chance, so integrate a new behavior into a  routine before assessing whether it has been help   ful or not.  •• Observe the Results—Pay close attention and  monitor the effects of the new behavior.  •• Never Give Up—Remember that making changes  can often require repeated efforts and attempts.   Behavioral Activation for Depression  When clients demonstrate behavioral patterns characterized by avoidance behaviors, therapists may use the acronym of being in a TRAP (Martell et al., 2001):  •• Trigger—usually something in the environment  (e.g., criticized by employer)  •• Response—usually an emotional reaction (e.g.,  feels shame and sadness)  •• Avoidance Pattern—The avoidance behavior(s)  used to cope with the emotional response (e.g.,  leaves work early, complains to partner about dis   pleasure with job)  Therapists then ask the client to get out of the TRAP and back on TRAC; that is, under the same trigger and response conditions, they are asked to experiment with “alternative coping” behaviors.  Engagement Strategies  Research has well documented the frequency and negative consequences of ruminative behavior among people with depression (Nolen-Hoeksema, 2000). The BA approach considers ruminating as a behavior that frequently prevents people from engaging fully with their activities and environments. BA therapists are on alert for client reports of ruminating and are also careful to assess whether ruminating is a problem when clients return to sessions reporting that an activation assignment “didn’t work.” If, for example, a client reports that she experienced little mood improvement while playing with her son in the park, the therapist will want to examine whether she was only partially engaged with the task of playing because her mind was focused on why her former partner did not want to continue their relationship, what that meant about her value as a woman, and so forth.  In addressing rumination in BA, we are less interested in the particular content of ruminative thoughts than in the context and consequences of rumination. For instance, in working with a client who frequently ruminated about a job that he regretted having declined, the BA therapist asked him to examine the following types of questions: What were you doing while you were thinking about the other job? How engaged were you with the activity of the moment and with your surroundings? What happened during and after your thinking about the other job? In examining these questions, therapist and client identified that the client was more likely to ruminate when he was working on  aversive tasks in his current job, about which he felt significant anxiety; thus, ruminating was negatively reinforced by distracting the client from anxiety and decreasing his focus on the aversive tasks. BA therapists may ask clients who ruminate frequently to experiment with “attention to experience” practice, in which they deliberately focus their attention on their current activity and surroundings. For instance, they may be asked to bring their full awareness to physical sensations (colors, sounds, smells, tastes, physical movements, etc.). These strategies are akin to mindfulness practices (Segal, Williams, & Teasdale, 2002) and are also very consistent with the dialectical behavior strategy of “opposite action all the way” (Linehan, 1993).  Reviewing and Consolidating Treatment Gains  As therapist and client agree that there has been sufficient improvement and termination seems indicated, remaining sessions should focus on relapse prevention, which largely involves reviewing and consolidating gains the client has made. Toward the end of therapy, it is often wise to focus on anticipating situations in the client’s life that may trigger depressive feelings and behaviors, and to generate plans for coping with such situations. Upcoming life events that can be anticipated as challenges for the client (e.g., the death of a parent, a career change) should be discussed in detail, and the client can draft a self-help plan to activate in the face of the stressor. In addition, it is also very important to review the basic BA model and the methods used in therapy to ensure that the client is leaving with a solid understanding of how to apply these as tools in the future. For instance, therapists will want to review how to identify links between what one does and how one feels, how to set specific and concrete goals, how to use graded task assignment, and how to identify and target primary avoidance patterns (noticing that one is ruminating more at work, noticing that one is starting to fail to return phone calls of friends, etc.).  The Therapy Setting  Initial research on BA primarily focused on the context of outpatient individual psychotherapy settings; however, recent studies are examining application across a broad array of settings and delivery modes. For example, several groups have found creative ways to transport BA to settings outside of specialty mental health clinics. Preliminary trials have documented the   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  promise of treating adult primary care patients with depression using BA (Gros & Haren, 2011; Uebleacker, Weisberg, Haggarty, & Miller, 2009), and Ekers and colleagues have provided confirmation showing that nonspecialists can learn and effectively deliver BA in primary care settings (Ekers, Dawson, & Bailey, 2013; Ekers, Richards, McMillian, Bland, & Gilbdoy, 2011). Similarly, Hopko and colleagues (2011) recently conducted a successful randomized controlled trial (RCT) of BA for depressed cancer patients in oncology clinics. Dimidjian and colleagues are also currently testing BA in a multisite RCT for antenatal depression with a flexible delivery format, and obstetric nurses and behavioral health providers as study clinicians. Group therapy appears to be a viable format for delivering BA to larger numbers of clients (Houghton, Curran, & Saxon, 2008; Porter, Spates, & Smitham, 2004). There is also growing interest in integrating BA into university settings (e.g., Cullen, Spates, Pagoto, & Doran, 2006; Gawrysiak, Nicholas, & Hopko, 2009; Reynolds, MacPherson, Tull, Baruch, & Lejuez, 2011).  Treatment duration has ranged from 12- to 24-session formats. Limitations of client resources, insurance reimbursement, and other factors may necessitate particular treatment durations. In our studies and clinical work, we often schedule brief phone contacts between sessions to reinforce the interpersonal connection to the therapist and the importance of completing the between-session assignments, and to provide an opportunity to address questions or problems with the between-session assignments.  Although BA is most often delivered as an individual treatment modality, significant others in clients’ lives are often included in sessions across the course of treatment. Decisions about whether to include significant others in treatment follow from the functional analysis; thus, they are determined on an idiographic basis. Conjoint sessions can be helpful in assessing patterns that may be maintaining the client’s depression, providing information and education to the family member about the treatment rationale and approach, and providing opportunities for the client and family member to practice new interpersonal behaviors with the therapist’s direct and immediate feedback.  Therapist Qualities  In our experience, a number of structural and stylistics qualities are important for BA therapists to bring to their clinical work. Briefly, the structured nature of  BA is maintained through the use of agendas to guide session foci; therapists engage clients in the process of collaborative agenda setting at the outset of each session. Typically, the agenda includes some review of progress through administration of a depression inventory (e.g., BDI-II or HRSD), review of homework, discussion of target problems, assignment of new homework, and a session summary. In addition, the structure is guided by a steadfast focus on nurturing activation. From a stylistic standpoint, essential qualities of the BA therapist include an emphasis on collaboration or learning together as a team. In so doing, the therapist is mindful of pacing to support active collaboration and of soliciting information to ensure that the client understands information presented in session (e.g., specific targets or interventions, the overall BA model, or other “take-home” points from the session). All of the BA strategies also require the basic skill of being a good problem solver. Therapists approach most matters that arise in treatment simply as problems to be solved. Thus, therapists must be naturally curious about factors that maintain problems and be skilled at generating a range of more functional alternative behaviors. Toward this end, it is important to be comfortable with a direct, matter-of-fact, and nonjudgmental manner of communication, particularly in the face of challenges such as not doing assigned activation plans or not attending scheduled sessions. Therapists must also balance a genuine sense of empathy and understanding for the suffering and struggles of their clients with an optimistic and dogged commitment to the possibility of change. BA therapists validate the struggles clients experience and seek out occasions to encourage progress, even if seemingly minimal. Finally, understanding basic behavioral concepts and principles can help therapists conceptualize cases according to a behavioral model of depression and present a coherent framework to clients.  The acronym ENLIVEN (Dimidjian, 2011) captures the structural and stylistic strategies necessary for the competent BA therapist in an easily remembered mnemonic:   •• Establishes and follows agenda  •• Nurtures activation  •• Learns together with client  •• Is nonjudgmental  •• Validates  •• Encourages  •• Naturally expresses warmth   Behavioral Activation for Depression  In our treatment outcome research, we have used ongoing clinical supervision and therapist consultation teams to assist therapists in adhering to and refining these important therapist qualities. Therapists typically meet together weekly for 1–2 hours. The teams help therapists increase skills with basic treatment strategies (conceptualizing treatment plans, doing functional analysis, effectively grading tasks, etc.). In the context of a focus on specific cases and strategies, the team also provides essential reinforcement for the therapist qualities of empathy, nonjudgment, problem solving, curiosity and persistence, and optimism about change. Although we have not tested this hypothesis empirically, we strongly suspect that it would be difficult for many therapists to maintain these qualities particularly in their work with clients struggling with severe, complicated, or chronic depression without the support of an effective consultation team.  Client Variables  Our treatment outcome research suggests that depressed adults can experience acute and enduring clinical benefit from a course of BA. Our clinical impressions are that engagement with the basic treatment rationale and willingness to complete homework assignments are both important predictors of outcome in BA. Moreover, it is important to note that we used a number of client characteristics as exclusionary criteria in our treatment research. For instance, if a client were acutely suicidal, such that his/her risk could not be managed on an outpatient basis, then we would refer him/her for more acute and intensive treatment. In addition, if a client had a comorbid diagnostic disorder that was more severe and prominent (more interfering and the primary focus of the client), and necessitated another evidencebased treatment (e.g., obsessive–compulsive disorder), then we would also refer him/her to a more specifically appropriate treatment. We also carefully evaluated any potential medical problems that may have contributed to depression and referred clients for appropriate concurrent medical treatment, if necessary.  Recent clinical research also highlights the potential of BA as a treatment option for patients across the lifespan, including adolescents (McCauley, Schloredt, Gudmundsen, Martell, & Dimidjian, 2011; Ritschel, Ramirez, Jones, & Craighead, 2011; Ruggiero, Morris, Hopko, & Lejuez, 2007; Van Voorhees et al., 2009). This work is in line with earlier work by Lewinsohn and colleagues (1984) in the development of the Cop   ing with Depression Course for adolescents. This treatment program includes activity scheduling, relaxation training, assertiveness and social skills training, and cognitive restructuring. Admittedly, the inclusion of cognitive restructuring in the Coping with Depression Course places this program in the broader area of CBT rather than specific BA, but the emphasis is on scheduling pleasant events. Evidence also supports the use of BA with older adults (Acierno et al., 2012; Meeks, Looney, van Haitsma, & Teri, 2008; Meeks, Teri, van Haitsma, & Looney, 2006; Snarski et al., 2011; Sood, Cisek, Zimmerman, Zaleski, & Fillmore, 2003; Teri, Logsdon, Uomoto, & McCurry, 1997), ethnically diverse patients (Kanter, Hurtado, Rusch, Busch, & Santiago-Rivera, 2008; Kanter, Santiago-Rivera, Rusch, Busch, & West, 2010), patients with anxiety and borderline symptoms (Hopko, Lejuez, & Hopko, 2004; Hopko, Sanchez, Hopko, Dvir, & Lejuez, 2003), patients with posttraumatic stress disorder (Jakupcak et al., 2006; Mulick & Naugle, 2004; Wagner, Zatzick, Ghesquiere, & Jurkovich, 2007), substance users with elevated depressive symptoms (Daughters et al., 2008; MacPherson et al., 2010), patients with schizophrenia (Mairs, Lovell, Campbell, & Keeley, 2011), inpatients (Curran, Lawson, Houghton, & Gournay, 2007; Hopko, Lejuez, et al., 2003), patients with cancer (Armento & Hopko, 2009; Hopko, Bell, Armento, Hunt, & Lejuez, 2005; Hopko et al., 2011) and other medical comorbidities such as obesity (Pagoto, Bodenlos, Schneider, Olendzki, & Spates, 2008) and diabetes (Schneider et al., 2011). Although many of these studies are preliminary, reporting data from small open-trial designs, the breadth of this work suggests that BA may be adapted as a treatment framework for a wide variety of clients struggling with depression and comorbid problems.  case stuDy  Background Information  The following section presents the treatment of Mark, a 43-year-old man with a long history of depression. Mark was in treatment for 19 sessions across 4 months. The description here is presented to illustrate the implementation of core BA principles and strategies. Earlier sessions are described in greater detail to provide the reader with “how-to” information regarding the primary principles and strategies. Later sessions emphasize a thematic focus for which the same types of principles   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  and strategies are applied. It is important to emphasize at the outset that this case description is not intended to communicate a prescriptive course of treatment, and readers are advised against following the sequence of strategies in a lockstep fashion. BA is a highly idiographic treatment, in which the choice of specific activation strategies is driven by functional analysis; given this, the reader is encouraged to attend to the ways the therapist conceptualizes Mark’s difficulties and implements treatment strategies over the course of therapy. It is our hope that this detailed illustration will inspire readers to apply the basic principles and core strategies in a flexible and idiographic manner.  Mark sought treatment at the urging of his primary care physician. His recent episode of depression had lasted without remission for 3 years. Mark also had a history of alcohol abuse. His early alcohol abuse had caused significant problems in Mark’s first marriage, which ended in divorce when he was in his early 20s; however, problems with alcohol were not a cause of current concern. He had been in therapy previously, during his separation and divorce 4 years earlier. However, Mark described it as unstructured and unfocused, and reported that he stopped going after a few sessions. He lived alone, although he had joint custody of his twin adolescent daughters; Mark and his ex-wife alternated parenting every other week.  Mark reported that he had had periods of depression for “as long as I can remember.” In particular, he recalled his first episode of depression at age 12, shortly after his father abruptly left and severed all contact with Mark and his family. Mark reported that he had believed his parents were happily married and, at that time, blamed himself for his father’s departure. Mark reported that his mother and older siblings never discussed his father. In describing his mood during adolescence and adulthood, he reported, “I have periods when I’m able to function OK. I go to work and all that, but I’m never really happy.” Mark’s primary depressive symptoms included depressed mood, loss of pleasure in nearly all activities, excessive guilt, fatigue, difficulty concentrating, and occasional passive thoughts of death.  Mark had had a social network that revolved primarily around his former marriage, but he had withdrawn from that network since his separation and divorce. Currently, he spent most of his time alone, with the exception of caring for his daughters. Mark was college educated and worked as an accountant for a local manufacturing company. He also wrote children’s sto   ries and, prior to his most recent episode of depression, was working on a number of stories as a member of a local writer’s group.  Case Conceptualization and Overview of Treatment  Mark’s depression was conceptualized as occurring in the context of his divorce and the changes that ensued following that process; in addition, vulnerabilities related to his family history also formed a context for his current experience. Mark experienced intense grief and anxiety following his divorce to which he responded with patterns of interpersonal avoidance, which in turn were negatively reinforced by reductions in the grief and anxiety. Mark had trouble fully engaging in his significant relationships and instead avoided intimacy in various ways in both overt ways (e.g., refusing social contacts) and subtle (e.g., ruminating about mistakes he made in the past, failing to express commitment to the relationship and what he thought or felt about various topics on a regular basis). Over the course of treatment, the therapist and Mark hypothesized that avoiding close interpersonal connections in his adult life kept Mark detached enough that he would not feel subsequent losses as acutely as those he felt as a child. However, these patterns of avoidance also maintained Mark’s depression by limiting his experience of reward in many of his current contexts. Treatment focused initially on increasing activation and addressing many secondary problems and routine disruptions that had become established. Treatment sought to reverse the downward spirals of depression by scheduling and structuring activities. Although Mark increased his activation relatively quickly, his mood did not improve significantly. This led to a primary focus on Mark’s rumination and the ways it functioned to avoid intimacy in his relationships, and experimentation with new behaviors designed to move Mark closer to his goal of having a close intimate relationship and feeling better.  Session 1  Session 1 focused on reviewing the results from the assessment process, presenting the treatment model, encouraging questions and feedback, and tailoring the model to Mark’s specific experiences. The review of the assessment process is typically brief; in this part of the session, the aim of the therapist is to ensure that he/she has a solid understanding of the client’s present    Behavioral Activation for Depression  ing problems, relevant history, and previous experience with treatment, if any. The therapist also reviews the basic diagnostic formulation to ensure that the assessment outcome matches the client’s subjective experience of his/her current problems. Discussion of the treatment typically forms the bulk of the early sessions. The following transcript provides an example of the therapist presenting the treatment model and responding to frequently asked questions about the etiology of depression. Specifically, the therapist puts forth the idea that depression is treated behaviorally, regardless of etiology.  tHeraPist: Let me tell you a little about the basic model that guides BA. The first idea is that there are often things that happen in people’s lives that make it hard for them to connect with the kinds of experiences that would normally help them feel good. These shifts can be clear and easy-to-detect changes like major losses or disruptions in life. And they can also be smaller things, like the kind of things that just bug you a little but they keep happening, or you have a bunch of them happen all around the same period of time. The most important part is the idea that the effect of these events is that it’s harder to connect with the kinds of experiences that could give you a sense of pleasure or accomplishment in your life, and that could help you feel better. Does that sound like it fits for you?  mark: I would say that is true for me. Definitely getting divorced was a big one. I think that did set things off, but even now, there isn’t much that helps me feel better. Even things that I think should help me feel better don’t do much. I just don’t have the energy at this point.  tHeraPist: Yes, exactly. It’s very normal to feel a whole range of things in the context of such events. Often sadness or grief is central, but so are feelings of fatigue and a sense of not having energy or interest in anything. All of these are parts of the experience of depression.  mark: That describes it.  tHeraPist: I’m going to draw that out here on this form. In the first circle, we can list some of the events we’ve already talked about, like the divorce, sharing custody of your girls, and your move. Those reactions of fatigue and low energy that follow are very normal, and we’ll write them in here in the second circle. What we find often happens is that people can  respond to these changes by pulling away from their lives even more. This pulling away can happen sometimes in obvious ways, like staying in bed or calling in sick to work, or canceling social engagements, and sometimes in more subtle ways, like being focused more on your thinking than on the activities you are engaged in. Does that make sense for you?  mark: Yes, absolutely. I do all of those things.  tHeraPist: It makes total sense that you would pull away when you are feeling so down. The problem with pulling away like this is that it tends to keep people stuck in feeling depressed, and the pulling away can become a problem in its own right. So that is the arrow that links what you do and how you feel in a kind of downward spiral. The more you pull away or the more you are caught in your thoughts,  the worse you actually feel, the less energy you have.  mark: Yes. That sums it up.  tHeraPist: And, actually, for many people, there is also a second downward spiral. So the more the first downward spiral is set in motion, it actually can lead to new problems, like your boss gets frustrated with you or your friends stop calling, or it can keep you from solving some of the problems that triggered the depression in the beginning. So the ultimate goal of our work together is to figure out new actions you can take here (pointing to the third circle on the diagram) that can help to reverse this downward spiral. We will want to learn together what sorts of activities may have a positive effect on your mood, and then help you activate and engage in those specific ways. And we will figure out how to solve the problems that are creating stress or dissatisfaction in your life. How do you see this fitting with your experience? Do you have questions about what I’ve said? Parts that fit or don’t fit?  mark: I understand what you are saying, and I think some of it fits, but I guess I don’t understand why I get so depressed. I mean, other people have stressful things in their lives and they seem to function. Other people get divorced or have crappy jobs, and they move on. I mean, come on, I’ve been divorced for 4 years now. I think depression runs in my family. My older brother has been depressed forever, and I sometimes wonder if my dad was depressed when he took off. Sometimes, I can’t really identify anything that has happened in my life. I mean, I am never really happy and then, it’s just like a switch goes in my   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  brain and I’m back in that dark hole again. How does that fit with what you are saying?  tHeraPist: That is an excellent question. What I mean as I talk about depression is that some people are more vulnerable than others. And, there are many ways that you may be vulnerable to depression— through genetics, biology, or experiences in your history. In fact, we can add some of these things you are talking about now to the first circle as part of the context for you. (Writes in family history.) What this treatment emphasizes is that it’s possible to change depression by making changes in what you do.  mark: That makes sense to me. One part of what you said definitely fits for me—the part about pulling away more. I definitely do that. Sometimes I don’t talk to another person or get out of bed all weekend. I know it makes it all worse. But I still do it. I don’t seem to be able to do anything else when I feel that way.  As the therapist replies to these very common questions, she seeks to normalize avoidant responses to depression. It is essential for the client to experience the therapist as someone who understands and has sincere empathy for his/her struggle. The therapist must communicate that the client’s behaviors make sense, even though they may not serve the client well in the long term. In this way, the client is more likely to experience the therapist as an ally in the change process as opposed to someone who oversimplifies or “doesn’t get” the challenges of making changes. Additionally, the therapist also emphasizes to Mark the importance of guided activity, highlighting her own role as an expert and the importance of careful assessment. She emphasizes the difference between assignments based on a superficial understanding of depression and those that are guided by functional analysis, a key aspect of the treatment, to which the therapist will return many times.  tHeraPist: Those are great observations and are really on target with what I have noticed for a lot of people as well. What many people experience is that when they start to activate and engage, they can actually feel worse initially! The troubling fact about pulling away or avoiding is that it does provide some shortterm relief. But in the long term, that downward spiral can keep you trapped in depression.  mark: That makes a ton of sense to me. I just don’t want to do anything. Making a meal makes me tired.  I feel irritated by the sound of silverware scratching on plates. It’s kind of crazy, but I just want to crawl in a hole, to turn out a light in my head and make it all go away. Then, I end up feeling worse when I do stay in bed. I used to drink, too. I knew it would make it worse, and I don’t do it much anymore, but it helped in the moment, even though I knew it didn’t really help. I guess I felt better temporarily and that was enough.  tHeraPist: Yes, exactly. Avoidance is a perfectly natural response. What unfortunately happens, though, is that you are not in touch with all those things that can give you pleasure and a sense of accomplishment, and you are not engaged in solving the problems that create stress in your life.  mark: That’s the first and second downward spirals you were talking about, right? I get it but it just all feels so overwhelming. Just the thought of it . . .  tHeraPist: Yes, I know. That is where I come in. It’s important to emphasize that this treatment is not just about me saying you should “do more” in general. Sometimes I tell people that it’s not the Nike approach to therapy, where I tell you each week to “just do it.” You have probably received feedback like that from other people in your life, and you may even say something similar to yourself.  mark: Yeah, guilty as charged.  tHeraPist: My assumption is that if this were easy to figure out, you would already have done it. It’s a simple treatment but that doesn’t mean it’s easy. The reason that you are here is that it’s not easy, and that is where my expertise comes in. A major part of this treatment is the idea of guided activation. This means that you and I will be working together to identify specific ways in which you can experiment with activation. My expertise lies in figuring out, first, where the places are that would be the most helpful in increasing your activation and engagement, and second, what small and manageable steps you can take to get started. You can think of me as a coach or consultant to you in the process of change. We will work together, as a team, in small steps, all along the way. How does that sound?  mark: The idea of it sounds good. I guess it’s worth trying.  tHeraPist: I’d like to ask you to read a short pamphlet about this treatment, between now and the next time that we meet. It will provide you with more infor    Behavioral Activation for Depression  mation. When we meet next time, we can talk more about how we will put the ideas into practice.  With this initial session, the therapist has begun to teach Mark about the treatment model and is getting him actively involved in and on board with the rationale. The therapist has oriented Mark to their respective roles in treatment and has given him this first homework assignment (reading the treatment rationale pamphlet). These critical tasks of the first session set the stage for additional discussion in Session 2.  Session 2  In Session 2, the therapist carefully follows up on a number of the key orienting tasks, which includes ensuring that Mark is on board with the basic treatment model and explaining the structure of the therapy. The therapist attends to these topics in opening the session:  tHeraPist: It’s great to see you today, Mark.  mark: Thanks. It’s good to be back here.  tHeraPist: That’s great. You know, when I was thinking about our session last time, I realized that there were a couple of points I wanted to emphasize more. One of the important ones is that this is a very collaborative approach to therapy, and one that is also fairly structured. So each time we meet, we will start out by setting an agenda for the session, and we will do this collaboratively. In fact, over time, you will set the agenda more and more, though I may have more to say about it in the beginning. The idea is that I’m the expert on how to get over depression, and you are the expert on yourself and your life, and what things help or don’t help.  mark: That sounds reasonable to me.  tHeraPist: Great. So in terms of the agenda for today, I have a couple of things. I’d like to talk more about the treatment approach and your reaction, and more about how we put some of the ideas into practice. Do you have items you want to be sure we address today?  mark: No, that sounds good. I did read the pamphlet, and it really hit home. It was like they wrote it about me, basically. I thought, “Thank goodness somebody has figured this out.”  tHeraPist: That’s great. I think one of the core ideas of the model is things happen that tend to trigger de   pressed mood, and then people tend to do things, or not do things, that make the depression worse. For you, my understanding is that the main trigger was your divorce and that occurred in the context of your history of important losses, too, in your family growing up.  mark: Yeah, both are true. I’ve really pulled back on a lot, like not exercising and not doing things with other people or even with my girls. We used to cook these great dinners together and now it’s like an effort to get organized to order pizza. It’s kind of like that everywhere—at work, too. I’m just managing the minimum and, honestly, a lot of times I’m not even doing that.  tHeraPist: I know. It can be very hard to keep doing the sort of things that will keep you feeling well. And that is where this therapy comes in. From our session last time and from your reading, what is your understanding of what we are going to be doing in here, and how I am going to be helpful? If you were to tell a friend of yours what we were going to do in this therapy, what would you say?  mark: I guess I would say that we are going to pinpoint the activities that give me some pleasure or help me feel like I’m handling things well. Then, we will figure out how to help me get into the position of being more involved in some of those things.  tHeraPist: Yes, that is a big part of it. Sometimes in people’s lives something that is completely beyond their control triggers depression, and then what I call secondary problem behaviors get triggered or made worse. These are the behaviors that involve pulling away or avoiding, as you were saying, like stopping fun activities with your girls or withdrawing at work. And in those cases we work on the secondary problem behaviors, and that is the core of the therapy. Other times, we also need to address larger problems in your life that may be related to what makes you vulnerable to depression. In those cases, therapy can involve both directly addressing the secondary problem behaviors and working directly on the problems, after we have kind of cleared the path for doing some problem solving by getting you activated and engaged.  mark: That sounds like it’s probably the case for me because I know I had a lot of problems relating to Diane that were part of our divorce, and those are not any better.   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  tHeraPist: Yes, we will talk more as we go along about what set off the depression for you. In a global sense, we know now that it was the divorce. But, as we start following your mood and activities day to day, we will see the ways that your mood has ups and downs. We will work together and look at that carefully, asking what set that off, how you responded to your mood hitting that point, and whether it would help if you tried something different.  The therapist has now stated twice that generally a contextual event triggers depression, while earlier acknowledging that several things can contribute to vulnerability. This is a subtle but important point because clients sometimes believe their depression came “out of the blue” or that it is simply “biological” and not modifiable by behavioral means. By emphasizing an environmental antecedent (e.g., a loss of positive reinforcement), the therapist sets up the idea that rather than depression being completely beyond patients’ control, their depressive response makes sense, and more importantly, it is possible to make behavioral changes to regain or establish new reinforcers in their lives. Moreover, the therapist has continued to emphasize the importance of carefully monitoring and assessing the relationships among mood, activity, and context as a key part of designing effective behavior change plans. The therapist then builds on this foundation as she moves into the other main focus of Session 2—the initiation of activity monitoring. Here, the therapist explains to Mark why activity monitoring is important, begins to teach him how to complete an Activity Record (see Figure 9.3), and links it directly to some of his recent experiences.  tHeraPist: One of the main tools that we use in this therapy is called an Activity Record. This is one example. (Hands Mark the record.) As you can see, it has blocks for each hour of the day. I’d like you to use this to start recording your activity and your mood. It’s basically a way to keep track of how you are spending your time during the day and how you are feeling. We want to learn what you are doing on an hour-by-hour and day-to-day basis. What things in your life help you feel better, and what things make you feel worse? You and I will review these very carefully together, focusing on how you are spending your time and how you feel. Sometimes the Activity Record tells us right away where changes need to be  made, and other times we have to look at it over a couple of weeks.  mark: OK.  tHeraPist: Is there anything you have been doing since you started to feel more depressed that is different from what you normally do?  mark: Yes, exercising less, watching more TV, and just the amount of time I spend thinking about all this. It’s just crazy.  tHeraPist: It’s not crazy at all, but I agree that it’s not helping you very much. And it’s very difficult, which is why you are here. We can start to figure this out together. It’s great that you are already aware of those patterns, and those are good examples of looking concretely at what you are doing. This therapy is about increasing your awareness of how your mood is affected subtly from activity to activity and increasing those that tend to be more rewarding. It’s like we are on a detective mission for the “up” and “down” activities in your life, those that are linked with feeling improved mood and those are that not.  mark: Makes sense. So, should I write all this down? Do you really want me to do this every hour?  tHeraPist: Here’s the guideline that I use: I want people to record their activity frequently enough that they are not relying heavily on memory. The problem with memory when you are depressed is that your awareness can be dulled or biased by the depression. So you don’t have to do it every hour. We have to be realistic about the rest of your life! But you may want to experiment with doing it every 3–4 hours. Sometimes, people like to do it at breakfast, lunch, dinner, and before bed.  mark: That might work for me.  tHeraPist: Let’s go over what to write down. You put your activity down for each hour block and then for each hour block you also assign a mood rating from 0 to 10. Let’s look at today as an example. What were you doing in the hours before you came here?  mark: I was at work.  tHeraPist: Okay, great. What were you doing at work?  mark: I was teaching a new employee how to use our computer system. It was really frustrating because she wasn’t picking it up and I didn’t have much patience.   tHeraPist: That’s great information to record. Why   Instructions: Record your activity for each hour of the day, and record a mood rating associated with each activity. Use the scale below with the anchors that you and your therapist develop to guide your mood rating. Aim to make entries on your Activity Record at least every 3–4 hours each day. Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday Saturday Sunday 5–6 6–7 Awake thinking in bed (9) 7–8 8–9 At work (7) 9–10 Getting ready for work (8) 10–11 At work (7) 11–12 12–1 1–2 2–3 3–4 Working/ teaching employee (5) Home (7) 4–5 5–6 6–7 Therapy (5) MakingDinner (6) 7–8 TV (9) TV (9) 8–9 9–10 10–11 11–12 12–1 1–2 2–3 3–4 4–5  Mood Ratings: 0: Description, with examples of associated activities: writing; playing with my kids  5: Description, with examples of associated activities: doing a work task that is only moderately interesting but I’m focused and concentrating 10: Description, with examples of associated activities: thinking about how I’ve screwed everything up figUre 9.3. Sample completed Activity Record (hourly) (assigned on Monday and reviewed on Thursday).  375   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  don’t you write down “working–teaching new employee.” Now, I also want you to record your mood on a 0- to 10-point scale, so let’s see if we can get some anchors here. What would be 0 mood for you? We can track this in whatever way will be most useful for you, so we could consider that 0 might be feeling really good, with no depression or feeling down at all. If so, we would then consider 10 to be when you feel your absolute worst, the worst you could possibly feel. It might be helpful to think of some activities that are a 5 or in between, when you’re not feeling your best but you’re not feeling particularly bad either. Which activities might be associated with each?  The therapist and Mark then worked together to identify activities that were associated with the low, middle, and high ends of the scale. Some clients prefer to use the low end of the scale to indicate feeling negative mood, whereas others (like Mark) prefer to anchor the low end as indicating feeling positive mood (“really good” for Mark). Allowing such flexibility can be helpful as long as therapist and client are clear about the anchors that will be used when the client completes the monitoring at home. It should also be noted that therapists may ask clients to rate other dimensions, such as the degree to which activities were associated with mastery and pleasure (Beck et al., 1979) or a sense of being nourished or depleted (Segal et al., 2002). These may be rated instead of or in addition to mood. Often we begin by asking clients to record mood ratings given that this is an easier starting place for many clients because it requires less discrimination of subjective experience; moreover, the mood rating provides essential information about potential antidepressant activities. For some clients, it is helpful to build on this by teaching them how to distinguish between mastery and pleasure, and the ways in which both can be helpful in regulating mood. In the case of rating mood or mastery–pleasure, it is important to review carefully the method and scale we want clients to use. For other clients, the dimensions of nourishing and depleting are helpful to identify activities that are antidepressant.  tHeraPist: Given this scale, what was your mood rating for the 2 hours of “working” today?  mark: Probably a 5.  tHeraPist: That’s exactly it. Now, sometimes what happens is that people don’t fill it out because they  think, “I wasn’t doing anything.” It’s important to realize that even if you are not doing an activity, we want to know that, too.  mark: What do you mean?  tHeraPist: Well, when people think “activities,” they often think of things like “going to the store,” “watching a movie,” “picking up my child from school.” But, we are conceptualizing activity more broadly. It might be driving by Diana’s house or having a significant phone conversation with someone, or even lying in bed, spending time thinking about Diana.  mark: That would be true on a lot of days.  tHeraPist: Yes, and you can write that down. Those are some of the most important things. In some ways, the more detail, the better. We want to start noticing subtle changes. We want to build on those times that you feel just a little better, and we want to figure out what the problem is when you feel worse.  mark: I think I got it.  tHeraPist: Great! People usually come away from this thinking that it sounds really simplistic. And it does. It sounds simple, but in practice it is not that simple. It can be difficult to do in the beginning, to really look at all your activities and figure out how your mood is related to them. It takes skill and hard work on both our parts. Is there anything that we can think of now that might get in the way of your doing this monitoring this week?  The therapist ended the session by discussing with Mark potential barriers to doing the assignment, encouraging him to make contact by phone if any questions arose, and offering encouragement about the likelihood that she could be helpful to him.  Session 3  As noted earlier, one of the necessary competencies of a BA therapist is the ability to review an Activity Record and glean information that will help to customize activation and engagement strategies. Session 3 focused heavily on reviewing Mark’s Activity Record (see Figure 9.3) and using the information collected as a springboard for more detailed assessment of key problem behaviors. Again, the therapist’s focus in these early sessions is on increasing activation in areas that will improve Mark’s mood; this work will set the foun    Behavioral Activation for Depression  dation for later work on avoidance modification and problem solving.  tHeraPist: Shall we go over your Activity Record? mark: OK. (Hands the therapist the record.) tHeraPist: Why don’t you walk me through it? What  did you learn? (Hands the record back to Mark.) mark: I’m not sure if this is what you had in mind. I started the next day after our last session. I went to work that day, but I was feeling so lousy that I left early and came home. I was just kind of fiddling around the house until dinner. I felt really down all day up to that point; I rated my mood as a 7. I did make dinner, which was a little better for me. I used to love to cook for Diana and myself, and we would make these big feasts sometimes with the girls. Since the divorce, though, sometimes I just grab a bag of chips or something like that, or on a good night I might order a pizza. When I was cooking, I felt a little better then, about a 5. tHeraPist: This is terrific. You did a really great job with this. You completed the record exactly as we talked about—writing down your activities and also your mood rating—and all of this information is extremely useful. I want to ask you some more questions about specific parts of the day in a minute, but right now let me just get an overall sense of things.  Notice how the therapist is careful to reinforce the client’s efforts early in the review process. Clients are often uncertain about how to complete the record, and it is not uncommon for them to return with partially or improperly completed records. In such cases, therapists must balance the need to provide corrective feedback and to reinforce the client’s efforts. Frequent client errors include writing down activities very globally (e.g., “at work” for 6 hours), failing to record mood ratings, or failing to record anything because they did “nothing.” In such cases, the therapist should address these problems in a straightforward and matter-of-fact manner.   tHeraPist: What happened after you made dinner? mark: Well, after dinner, I started watching TV, and everything kind of tanked from there. I sat and watched TV until 2:00 in the morning. I guess it helped in that it kept my mind off of worries about work and just feeling lousy about Diana, but I was  really depressed the whole time. In fact, I rated my mood as a 9.  tHeraPist: That is really important information. I see that you were also up the next night watching TV until 1:00 A.M. Is this true of a lot of nights for you, or are these two more like exceptions?  mark: I wish they were exceptions, but no, it’s been more the rule. And then what happens is that I just can’t get up in the morning. Well, I guess I do wake up, but I just lie there in bed. I’ve been getting to work pretty late, and some days I just call in sick.  tHeraPist: So we’ll use this log to pick up themes of specific activities that can help you feel good and those that may be contributing to your depression, like we talked about last time, the “up” and “down” activities. It seems like there are a few that might be important. I’m thinking that the watching TV and going to bed late is one big one, and the other two are cooking and how you are doing at work.  mark: I think the TV is a really big one.  Notice here that the therapist identified a few broad areas that appear to be related to the maintenance of the client’s depression. The BA therapist is also alert to disruptions in the client’s normal routines; in Mark’s case, both eating and sleeping routines appear to have been significantly altered. The therapist then works collaboratively with Mark to target a specific area for further assessment and problem solving (i.e., nighttime TV watching). At this point, the therapist begins the more explicit process of functional analysis.  tHeraPist: OK, why don’t we start there? Let’s get clear first about what the problem is because it doesn’t sound like it’s watching TV in general.  mark: That’s true. Normally, I would watch some TV, like I might watch for an hour. But, actually, come to think of it, I was more involved in my writing then, too. So, normally, I might watch TV until about 9:00  P.M. and then turn off the TV and write for another hour. Or, if I had the girls, we might watch a show together and then turn off the TV and read or play a game, or just hang out together, or maybe I’d be on a phone call or something. tHeraPist: So, this is different for you. The problem, then, is that you don’t turn off the TV at 9:00 P.M. and instead watch it for an additional 4–5 hours.  mark: Yes, that’s the problem.   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  tHeraPist: Are you doing this every night of the week or just on work nights?  mark: I hate to admit it, but it’s pretty much all nights, not always so late, but pretty much always later than is good for me.  To this point, the therapist has successfully defined the problem in specific and behavioral terms. With a clear and mutual understanding of the problem, therapist and client can begin to consider the contingencies that may be maintaining the problem and what may be amenable to change.  tHeraPist: We should probably look at what gets in the way of turning the TV off, since it does not seem to have a great effect on your mood. If you were to turn off the TV at 9:00 P.M. now, what do you think would happen?  mark: I thought about turning it off last night, but I just didn’t want to think about all of this stuff.  tHeraPist: By “all this stuff,” do you mean the divorce and the pressures at work? mark: Yes, both of them.  tHeraPist: So, that is what you are actively avoiding. And the TV helps you to distract?  mark: Yes, I just don’t have the mental awareness now to start writing. I can’t focus on it, and I’m just not interested.  tHeraPist: I think you have the right idea in terms of distraction, but the problem is that you are distracting yourself with something that doesn’t give you much pleasure and not much accomplishment.  mark: And meanwhile the house is a mess. I haven’t paid my bills in months, and . . .  tHeraPist: Yes, that makes sense. That’s the second downward spiral we talked about. What do you think about working together on the problem of watching TV? Then, we can tackle some of those other things you are raising. The TV problem might be simple to solve, but my guess is that there is more to understand about it.  Notice how easily the client can become overwhelmed and hopeless in response to the myriad problems in his life. The therapist is alert to this possibility during sessions and is careful to refer back to the BA model as a way to understand the client’s experience  and to refocus the client on the problem at hand. In addition, the therapist also takes a keen interest in the “minutiae” of the client’s day-to-day behavior, particularly if such behavior is related to mood. This detailed level of interest is critical. Its intent is twofold: First, such discussions guide the choice of activation targets and specific assignments; second, it is the intent that such discussions will teach Mark to take a similar interest and begin to notice patterns that are more and less helpful in working his way out of depression.  tHeraPist: Let’s understand better what happens with the TV. Does it come into your mind, the thought that you might be better off if you turned off the TV?  mark: Typically, I think, “I should go to bed.” But I know that if I go to bed, I’ll just lie there awake anyway, thinking about what Diana is doing, thinking about how much I am going to hate being at work the next day. So, then I think I might as well watch TV.  tHeraPist: Is that what happens in bed? You lie there and ruminate about Diana or things you have done or haven’t done at work?  mark: Pretty much exactly.  In this transcript, the therapist has effectively identified a number of key relationships. Nighttime TV watching is associated with (1) deteriorated mood; (2) poor performance at work; and (3) a process of negative reinforcement in which negative affect (specifically, grief and anxiety) potentially is reduced when the client is watching TV. The therapist has done so in a collaborative and nonjudgmental manner, and the client is on board. At this point, the therapist explicitly examines her hypothesis with Mark about the relationship between TV and mood. On the basis of this understanding, they can then consider possible activation strategies.  tHeraPist: I’m wondering if part of what is happening is that watching TV is helpful in the short run because it takes your mind away from these topics that are connected to a lot of potential sadness and also anxiety about the future.  mark: Yeah, that’s true.  tHeraPist: But the tough part is that while it works in the short run, it’s that same downward spiral or vicious cycle in the long run because watching TV gives you almost no pleasure and it keeps you from   Behavioral Activation for Depression  doing activities that you previously got a lot out of, and it sets you up for having problems at work. mark: Yes, exactly. It’s crazy, I know, but it’s such an easy way out when I’m just beaten by the day.  tHeraPist: Absolutely! So we have to take that into account when we think about making any changes here. I’m thinking that you could try going to bed in spite of that, and we could work on the ruminating. Or, if you are going to be up, you could do things that are better than the TV. Which do you lean toward?  The therapist attends to the function (distraction) of the problem behavior (TV watching), while engaging in problem solving in a very collaborative manner.  mark: Probably finding other things, better than the TV. I used to go to a book group one night a week. It was made up of other writers and I liked a few of the people a lot, so when I was doing that, I was also doing reading in the evenings, too.  tHeraPist: OK, does reading seem more of a way you could start getting back into some of your writing, versus jumping in with writing itself?  mark: Yes, there is no way I could write now. I would just be staring at a blank page, feeling like crap.  tHeraPist: OK, that makes sense. So what about starting with this? One option is that you could have a limit for yourself of 9:00 P.M. for TV and we could work on identifying a book that you could read instead.   mark: It’s a good idea. It’s more a question of my doing it.  It is very important that the therapist not gloss over comments such as Mark’s final statement. When clients express doubt about how or whether they will implement an activation strategy, it is essential to attend to this in detail. Additionally, it is helpful for the therapist to be attentive to statements such as “I’ll just have to make myself do it,” which generally indicate that therapist and client have not sufficiently identified the contingencies that control the behavior. In our experience, use of sheer willpower is unlikely to meet with great success, and suggestions of such signal that further assessment is required, as the therapist illustrates.  tHeraPist: So we need to be sure we are getting at the real problem, instead of just saying, “Oh, you are  going to do this,” and leaving it at that. What kind of reader are you? Are you someone who can get really involved in a book?  mark: I do get really involved. In fact, I’ll think about the book a lot during the day, if I’m already into it.  tHeraPist: But getting yourself to do it is hard.  mark: Yes, it’s getting started on things.  tHeraPist: That is great to know. So, we have to somehow get you involved in the book so that when 9:00  P.M. rolls around, you are already involved, so it will be easier to turn off the TV. mark: That would make it easier.  tHeraPist: What if you were to buy a book on the way back from our session and begin reading it in the café of the bookstore.  mark: Oh, yeah, that is right on the way back. I can do that.  tHeraPist: Mark, I think the trick with all of this is to figure out what is going to help you move toward the things that will be beneficial for your mood. And this is what is really hard—getting yourself to go back to the things that you used to enjoy, when you have no interest in them right now. When you feel good, you take it for granted that it’s easy to do things like reading, spending time with friends or your girls, and even writing. When you don’t feel good, you really notice it. The problem is that you’re in this vicious cycle again. The longer you do not do things, the more badly you feel and the less you want to do. The trick for us is to figure out ways to help you start to do some of the things that will give you pleasure again.  The therapist acknowledges to the client that the new behavior will be hard to initiate because of mood, and that it is necessary to do so anyway. Many times, clients employ an “inside-out” or mood-dependent approach to their depression; that is, they passively wait for their mood to improve before making behavioral changes. BA therapists teach clients that when they feel down, they cannot afford to wait for a better mood to strike them. The goal is to get active when they feel down (as hard as that is). Increasing activation will eventually improve mood, even if not immediately, and it will interrupt the pattern of secondary problems created by withdrawal and avoidance. Addressing mooddependent behavior (or talking about an outside-in vs.   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  inside-out approach) is a sensitive point in therapy, in which a great deal of empathy for the experience of feeling depressed is required. The therapist must skillfully balance encouragement of action with validation of the difficulty of activating when depressed. In addition, strongly encouraging even the smallest signs of increased activation (frequently with the use of significant praise) is essential in supporting the process of change.  mark: Yeah, I know. A lot of the time I might know what I need to do, but I have no idea how to get myself to do it. I’ve just dropped a lot of stuff, like anything social in the evenings. I don’t try to make plans. And, like I said, for almost a year I was going to that writer’s book group every Thursday. But then I said to myself, I’m not writing. This whole divorce is wiping me out. What is the point of going? I have nothing to add.” But it’s true that when I went, I used to get a lot out of it. I’m just not interested now, though.  tHeraPist: Yes, exactly. That’s where you and I will work together. I want to come back to the social connections and the routines around writing, but let’s stick with the reading and nighttime TV for a bit longer first, if that’s OK?  mark: Yeah, that makes sense.  tHeraPist: Let’s think through this book plan again. Is there anything that might come up between here and the bookstore that would derail that plan?  At this point, the therapist and Mark spend the remainder of the session discussing particular books he could purchase that would maximize his engagement, and they discuss potential barriers that might arise to derail him from the intended plan. They also continued to review the Activity Record to identify other key problems, including ruminating at work, withdrawing from social networks, and experiencing disruptions in routines that previously brought him pleasure (e.g., cooking, exercise). In each case, the therapist uses a similar method that she used with the problem of TV watching: defining the problem, identifying the antecedent and consequences, and checking out hypotheses about how the activity is related to mood with the client. The therapist also frequently returns to the overall BA model to help explain links between activities and mood. In each case, they work to learn together what possible targets will be most promising for activation.  Also, the therapist continues to emphasize that simply deciding to “make myself do it” is not likely to be an effective activation strategy for Mark, and that it is essential to tie the activation plan to a clear understanding of the function of the problem behaviors. The therapist employs a combination of gentle questioning, consistent validation of the roles of withdrawal and avoidance through reliance on the BA model, and repeated discussion of potential barriers to activation plans. Importantly, the therapist also highlights for Mark that compliance with the homework assignments may not bring immediate relief.  “What will be really good this week is to see what effect these things have on your mood. Even if they have just a little bit of a positive effect, then we know that we are on the right track. And, Mark, they might not have an immediate positive effect on your mood. It might be that the act of getting yourself to do it is the success itself, and that you need to keep doing it for a while before you start to feel better. But, it’s my guess that some of this stuff will help your mood a little bit, even in the short run.”  The session concluded with the therapist and Mark reviewing the homework assignments, which included purchasing a new book, starting to read it in the café, and turning off the TV every night at 9:00 P.M. and reading. In addition, they agreed that Mark would return a telephone call of an old friend, Mary, who lived in his neighborhood and had been trying to contact him recently.  Session 4  Mark arrived at to Session 4 with little improvement in the severity of his depression. He reported that he had increased his social contact but was not feeling any better. Mark also had delayed the task of purchasing the new book and continued to watch TV late at night. The therapist addressed both of these problems in a direct, matter-of-fact way with curiosity and interest.  mark: It was a really bad weekend. I did call Mary and ended up going to this kind of cocktail party at the community pool that she had organized. I was kind of shocked that I went, but I thought being outside would do me good. I was thinking about what we were talking about, and I thought about how much I used to love swimming. I was actually a lifeguard   Behavioral Activation for Depression  during summers in college. But I think I felt worse after I went. I suppose there were moments that were fun, but I was so frustrated by it all. I just spent the rest of the weekend holed up in my apartment.  tHeraPist: Would that be good to put on the agenda? Doing things that you used to enjoy and not enjoying them?  mark: Sure.  tHeraPist: And I want to make sure we check in about how it went with the book versus the TV, too. Which do you want to talk about first—calling Mary and the party or the TV?  mark: I guess we can do the TV first. I just bought the book today. On Friday, I was at that party, so I didn’t  get home and in bed until midnight.  tHeraPist: Did you watch TV then?  mark: No, I do think I was more tired from being out   side all night, so I just fell asleep when I got back.  tHeraPist: And what about Saturday and last night?  mark: It was kind of par for the course. I stayed up late  both nights.  Given the importance of attending consistently and regularly to the completion of homework, here the therapist assesses what interfered with Mark’s full completion of the previous assignment.  tHeraPist: I’m glad you bought the book. That’s terrific! I’m curious, too, though, about what got in the way of getting it sooner. Am I recalling correctly that you were going to buy it on the way back from the session last week?  mark: Yeah, I was, but when I left, someone called me from work about needing to meet, so I didn’t have as much time as I thought. But I thought I could do it after work, and then in the evening, I thought, “I’ll get it on the weekend because I’ll have more time.” I don’t know.  tHeraPist: If you go back to your leaving the session last time, when you got the phone call from work, was there anything else that derailed the plan?  mark: No, that was really it. I was still pretty optimistic about getting the book. It was just that I didn’t have as much time as I thought I would, and I had to get to work.  tHeraPist: OK, that is good to know. So your plan was  to get the book on the weekend, and you just bought it today. On the weekend, did you think about getting it, or did it just come up again today?  mark: I did, but I felt so bad after the party I just couldn’t get myself to do it.  tHeraPist: It sounds like you were really down. Do you remember that diagram we used in our first session to understand the big picture of depression? I think it fits here, too.  mark: How so?  tHeraPist: So, if we think about the party as what happened, then you felt really down and discouraged, right? (Pulls out the model and writes in this situation.)  mark: Definitely.  tHeraPist: And you pulled away by staying at home over the weekend and not buying the book. My guess is that this fueled feeling more discouraged. Is that right?  mark: Totally. I thought, good heavens, I can’t even do a simple thing like buy a damn book.  tHeraPist: That’s it, so there is that downward spiral getting set into motion.  mark: It’s it exactly. I wanted to do less and less and I felt worse and worse.  tHeraPist: It’s great that you can see how these are all connected. I’m curious how it was that you got yourself to get the book today. Are you feeling better, or is it something else?  mark: I’m not feeling quite as bad, and given that I was already out, it was easier to go get the book. Plus I knew that we were going to meet and you were probably going to ask me about it.  tHeraPist: That is so great to know! So one thing we know is that I have got to keep following up about these things because it helps you do them.  mark: (laughing a little) True, not that I enjoyed imagining being called to task on it, but it did help, I guess.  tHeraPist: And getting yourself out of the house to buy a book this weekend was a lot harder than getting yourself out this morning, since you were already leaving to go to work. Being out already made it easier to accomplish your task.  mark: Right. That sort of thing seems to happen a lot lately.   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  tHeraPist: So one solution would be to not wait for the weekend when you’ve got a specific task to do because that seems to be a harder time for you to accomplish things. The other thing would be for us to set up a system of phone check-ins when you are feeling particularly down, since it seems to help to know that we will be following up on these tasks when we meet. The other issue, though, is to figure out what brought you down so much this weekend, and what to do about that.  mark: I think that is the biggest thing.  tHeraPist: Shall we talk a bit about the party and the weekend in order to figure out what is going to help most? How does that sound? And we’ll make sure to come back to the TV and reading plan.  mark: OK. I would like not to feel as lousy as I was feeling.  tHeraPist: Why don’t we take a look at your Activity Record? (Reviews the record.) It looks like your mood ratings were moderate on Thursday and Friday after we met. Then, Friday, at the party and for the rest of the weekend, they were high—7’s, 8’s, and 9’s, too.  mark: I’m not sure this is for me, honestly. I think I gave it a fair shot, calling Mary, going to the party. I didn’t want to do either, but I did. And I felt worse afterwards.  When clients report that they are increasing activation and their mood is not improving, it is important to assess a number of possible explanations. First, therapists may consider whether the activation assignments were too ambitious and did not incorporate successful grading. In such cases, it is important for therapists to acknowledge responsibility for this and recommend an assignment based on smaller components of the task. Second, therapists want to consider whether the functional analysis was accurate. Is it possible that they are activating the client in a domain that is unlikely to yield improvements in mood? Third, therapists want to consider whether ruminative thinking is interfering with activation. In such cases, clients “physically” engage in the activation assignments, whereas “mentally” they remain disengaged from their context and are less likely to have an opportunity to experience reward. Fourth, it is possible that although activation may not immediately improve mood, it may still be “on the right track,” because clients are taking active steps toward solving problems and addressing important life goals.  In Mark’s case, the therapist decided initially to pursue the possibility that rumination was interfering with activation, based on Mark’s comments in earlier sessions about frequently ruminating about Diana and their divorce.  tHeraPist: I guess one thing we could explore together is what was on your mind during the party. When you were standing by the pool talking to other people, or even swimming in the water, what was on your mind?  mark: You know, when I was diving into the water, I do remember that those were the pleasurable moments of the party. The sound of the water splashing, the coolness, the silence under the water, that was all great. That is what I used to love about swimming too. But the other part—I think I was mentally checking out. I was with a lot of people I really like. Mary is great, and her whole family was back visiting from the East Coast. I haven’t seen them in years and I really enjoy all of them. They are great people. But, it didn’t really matter. I just wasn’t there.  tHeraPist: Were you thinking about Diana or yourself in relation to her?  mark: Yeah, that was mainly it.  tHeraPist: Were the other folks there conversing with you?  mark: Yes, and I was talking with them. I mean, I could hear the words coming out of my mouth, but I was just not there.  tHeraPist: So you have one rating on this record for the party, a 7. But, if we were to break these different pieces apart—the swimming, when you were fully engaged with the activity, and the talking, when your mind was elsewhere—what would you rate each?  mark: The swimming . . . it was good. I guess that would be a 3, if 0 is feeling good; I mean it didn’t take it all away. But the talking . . . that was terrible, a 9.  The therapist has successfully identified the problem that was interfering with the potential benefits of activation. She continues to assess the nature and scope of the problem.  tHeraPist: I’m trying to figure out if when you are actively engaged in an activity that kind of requires some attention to it, are those the times that are more enjoyable?   Behavioral Activation for Depression  mark: Yeah, that’s true.  tHeraPist: Is this a problem that also interferes with your mood and accomplishment of tasks at work?  mark: Yes, exactly. I go into my office and it’s like where does the time go? Hours go by and I haven’t done a damn thing. I’m just wandering over and over things that happened with Diana, what I said, what I could have said. It’s awful.  tHeraPist: OK, so we know this is an important problem to address. It’s interfering with your enjoyment of times that have the potential to improve your mood, and it’s interfering with managing your job well. Can we spend a little more time on what hap   pened at the party?  mark: OK.  tHeraPist: How would you normally be when talking with Mary’s family, if you were not thinking about all these things? What would I see differently in those times than what I might have observed on Friday?  mark: I’d be talking to everyone. I wouldn’t be feeling so bad.  tHeraPist: Yes, that is exactly true. What I’m really curious about is, when you are not feeling so bad, what would you be doing differently? Would you be asking them more questions? Making more eye contact? Responding differently?  mark: Yeah, all of those things. I’d be more active in the conversation.  tHeraPist: So you would be more engaged.  mark: Yes, more engaged. Less of that heavy feeling; you know, that “this really sucks” feeling.  In the preceding portion of the session, the therapist has begun to define behaviorally what Mark does in interpersonal interactions when he is not depressed. Carefully specifying these behaviors is an important step in developing some possible plans for targeted change in how Mark approaches similar situations.  tHeraPist: Do you think that if you could practice talking, when you weren’t feeling down, more like you normally would with these people that you might feel better?  mark: I don’t know.  tHeraPist: I think the key is to notice what you do in response to the ruminating and to see whether that is  helping or not helping your mood, and then for us to begin to explore what you may need to do differently. It seems that at the party, what you were doing when your mood was better, was to be more engaged.  mark: It’s true. But, when I’m like this, I don’t have much to say.  tHeraPist: Yes, when you are depressed, you are more quiet and withdrawn.  mark: Yes, because it’s painful. I see Mary’s parents and I think, “They’ve been married for 30 years. I could have had that with Diana.” Then, I start thinking that she is with someone else. It just goes downhill from there.  tHeraPist: You are absolutely right. There is a lot of pain there. And what’s happened is that in response to that pain, you have narrowed activity in your life. So you not only feel the pain of being reminded of that loss, but also there is not a lot else going on in your life. And even when you are doing things, you are not as engaged because you are feeling so much pain. I think we need to get you back to doing the things you did before you had the breakup, and before the two of you got together. We need to get you back to your baseline, and once we do that, we can figure out how to get you feeling even better than that.  mark: It sounds good.  tHeraPist: I know you are thinking this is like pie in the sky, but we can figure out how to do this. The key is to figure out some concrete and manageable steps to help you engage more when you are doing some of these activities, like going to the party. You are right. It’s worlds harder to do when you are not feeling well, but these behaviors are partly why you enjoyed those occasions more in the past. We know that you enjoyed Mary and her family in the past, and we know that you got a lot of pleasure from swimming when your mind was fully present with the activity. So the trick is not only to call your friends, like you did so wonderfully with Mary, but also to go to the gathering, and to get yourself really to interact instead of just being there at the party. For times when you find yourself withdrawing into your thoughts, we need to develop specific strategies to help you do less of that. Can you think of anything that would help you do that?  mark: I don’t know. I just don’t seem to have much to say these days.   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  tHeraPist: I know it’s hard. There are a variety of things you could try, such as asking more questions, and then closely attending to the response. Or you could focus on something more specific, such as voice or facial expression, to keep your mind from wandering. Sometimes it works just to notice that you’ve drifted and to take a deep breath to refocus on your goal in that moment.  mark: I suppose I could try it. My mind just seems to keep wandering.  tHeraPist: I know. So your job here would be to practice being more vigilant as to when that happens because it will happen. The more you notice you’re drifting, the more you can practice refocusing yourself back on your friend. Does your mind wander in here?  mark: I guess a little.  tHeraPist: Why don’t we try it in here? Let’s pick something to focus on, and then you can practice here.  mark: OK. What do I do?  tHeraPist: I’m going to time us for the next 5 minutes and, as we talk, I want you to practice fully engaging in our discussion. Your mind is going to wander, particularly if we are talking about something that reminds you of Diana, I would guess. So let’s pick something you can focus on to bring your attention back to our conversation. How about the sound of my voice, like changes in tone, how I articulate words, the pace of my speech?  mark: I can try.  tHeraPist: Great. So, let’s talk about some options for social connections that you could make this weekend.  The therapist and Mark continued this discussion for the next few minutes, at which time, the therapist interrupted their conversation to ask Mark for feedback about his experience.  tHeraPist: What did you notice?  mark: I don’t know, maybe you are talking kind of softly.  tHeraPist: How engaged were you with our discussion? Why don’t you give me a rating, with 0 being not engaged at all and 10 being totally engaged?  mark: I guess maybe 7. It wasn’t that hard here because I was really focused. I guess I did start to think  about Diana a little when we were talking about my calling Mary. I did remind myself to pay attention to your voice, and I guess you just sounded so interested. It made it harder for me to wander off in my thoughts when you seemed to be paying so much attention to what we were talking about.  tHeraPist: That was my impression, too, that your engagement was generally high, and that you did appear to refocus your attention a couple times. That is terrific!  mark: Yeah, but it was a little strange. I mean, usually people aren’t that focused when they are just talking about usual stuff.  tHeraPist: That is very true. I might have been paying closer attention to what you were doing and saying than other folks are in typical social interactions. And this may feel pretty artificial now in general. My guess, though, is that once you get more engaged in social interactions, it won’t be necessary to concentrate so hard. It will just come automatically again.  mark: That makes sense.  In this way, the therapist generates a strategy to block avoidance (rumination) by substituting a new behavior in the form of attending to direct and immediate experience. Although, in this case, Mark experimented with directing his attention to interpersonal stimuli, clients may also be directed to experiment with attention to other aspects of sensory stimuli, such as sights, smells, and so forth. The in-session behavioral rehearsal is very important in that it allows the client to practice and receive direct feedback from the therapist, both of which increase the likelihood of success outside of the session. The therapist then returns to the specific task of reviewing and developing behavioral assignments for the next session.  tHeraPist: Let’s go back to your not getting out all weekend. Do you think going out to buy the book was too hard? Is there something easier you could’ve done to help you get a little more engaged this weekend?   mark: I’m not sure. How hard is it to go out and buy a book?  tHeraPist: Very hard, when you’re really down. Let’s think about smaller steps. If you can do a smaller step and get a little reinforcement for it, then it becomes easier to move toward your goal.   Behavioral Activation for Depression  The therapist and client continue along these lines with graded task assignment. Given that Mark has previously enjoyed socializing, he and the therapist came up with a plan that on the weekend, he would start by returning some phone calls from friends and inviting Mary for lunch. During lunch, he would focus specifically on attending to their conversation. The therapist also raised the possibility of swimming as an exercise activity. Mark reported that he thought his plate was full with the assignments they had already developed, and they decided to table further discussion of swimming. The therapist then uses the final moments of the session to review the homework, to encourage progress, to validate the difficulty of change, and to reinforce the basic treatment model.  Session 5  At the outset of the session, Mark reports improvement in his mood and the therapist includes this as an item on the agenda. Their discussion allows the therapist to emphasize an important point about maintaining new behaviors in consistent and regular routines. In this session, the therapist continues to emphasize the pattern of social connections and to assess factors that increase Mark’s vulnerability to exacerbated mood when alone.  tHeraPist: Let’s understand in more detail how it is that you are feeling better? mark: I think the reading plan is helping. I finished the book.  tHeraPist: Great! So you probably need another book.  mark: (laughing) I guess that’s true. You don’t think just the one cured the problem?  tHeraPist: (laughing) Oh, how I wish that were the case! Seriously, though, Mark, I think that is such an important question. There is a real temptation when you start feeling a little better to back off from some of the very things that are helping. It makes sense because making these changes requires so much effort, I know. But maintaining the routines are so important.  mark: It’s true. I actually think I’ve been doing pretty well with that this week. I’ve been reaching out more to other people.  tHeraPist: This is fantastic.  mark: And Mary called me again. So, I guess I didn’t do what we talked about in terms of calling her, but  I did ask her about lunch when she called. I didn’t really want to because I was feeling down when she called. I had just gotten a letter from the lawyer about some new money stuff with Diana. But, I did ask Mary, and I took the girls, too. I think they enjoyed it a lot. I did really focus on asking them all a lot of questions during lunch. I think that helped, too.  tHeraPist: Mark, you have definitely had more social contact in the last few days! You are doing a huge part of this treatment, which is acting in accordance with the goals and plans that we are setting here, as opposed to being directed by how you feel in the moment.   mark: I tried.  tHeraPist: You did it! You talked about having lunch with your coworker. Did you do that?  mark: I did do that.  tHeraPist: You did a lot! That’s great. OK, I may be pushing our luck here, but what do you think about adding swimming to our agenda?  mark: I knew you were going to ask about that again.  tHeraPist: (laughing) You know me too well. What’s your thought about it?  mark: It’s probably a good idea. There is actually a swim lesson that the girls like to do on the weekends, and I could take them and do laps at the same time in the other pool.  tHeraPist: Fantastic! Do you have them with you this weekend? Could we schedule that for the weekend?  mark: Yeah, I think that would help.  tHeraPist: Mark, do you think that reconnecting with people and some of these activities, like reading, are connected with your improved mood?  mark: Yes, that definitely had a lot to do with it. I am still not sure that we are getting to the real problem with all of this, but you are right that it does help.  tHeraPist: So we should talk about that, too. Before we move to that, is there anything else that you think is contributing to your positive mood, or is it mostly having more social contact, which you find reinforcing?   mark: It’s the social contact and trying to distract myself with the reading.  tHeraPist: That is so great! Good reminder, too. Let’s talk some about another book and how to keep up that schedule.   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  At this point, the therapist and Mark focus on developing a specific plan for selecting and purchasing a new book to continue the reading routine. Next, the therapist returns to Mark’s comments about whether the interventions are addressing what is most important.  tHeraPist: What you mentioned before about the real problem . . . I’m curious what you meant.  mark: I guess I’m still thinking about Diana a lot. I think that there is a part of me that has to let go, yet just isn’t letting go. I am thinking, just asking myself, “Is there still a chance for us? What did I do to screw it all up so badly?” And then I start thinking, “Is this all I have now—having lunch with people, reading by myself at night?” You know, the kind of stuff we’ve been focusing on . . . I don’t know. Is it really going to fix anything?  tHeraPist: Mark, I know it feels like this stuff isn’t really getting at the real problem in terms of your thinking about Diana, and I agree that is really important to talk about. At the same time, I don’t want us to lose sight of the fact that this other stuff makes a huge difference. It’s important for you to reconnect with ways to buoy up your mood before you start to tackle some of the past problems and those that still come up with Diana. Also, I think we will find that there are some similar patterns, so maybe the ways you have tended to pull away from other people since you’ve been down might have some connections with what happened with Diana.  mark: That’s true. I guess they are not totally separate.  tHeraPist: Are you saying that it’s time now to start focusing our time more directly on those topics?  mark: I think so. Maybe I’m more aware of it because I’m feeling a little better. I guess I’m asking more often, “Is this all there is now?” It just seems like a damn lonely life to be leading, if this is it.  The therapist and Mark end the session by reviewing the assignments. In addition, they agree on a plan to return to Mark’s important questions in the next session.   Sessions 6–9  In this next series of sessions, the therapist and Mark return to Mark’s question from Session 5. In repeated sessions, he reports improvements in mood related to making progress on projects at home, exercising, and becoming more socially connected in casual and friendship circles. These areas of progress are reflected consistently on his Activity Record forms, which now specifically target the areas of social engagement, reading, and swimming (see Figure 9.4). (This version of the Activity Record can be considered when the activation targets are clear and well developed, and the detailed information gained via hour-by-hour monitoring is not as necessary. It can also be used for clients who have difficulty with the more detailed Activity Record.)  Even with clear areas of improved activation and mood, Mark also reports that his mood is vulnerable to his tendency to ruminate frequently about his ex-wife. The therapist and Mark begin to explore the potential function of rumination about his ex-wife. As they did with respect to both TV watching and rumination dur-  Task Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday Saturday Sunday Reading Reaching out to other people Swimming Mood 5 5 5 6 8 3 3   figUre 9.4. Sample completed Activity Record (daily).   Behavioral Activation for Depression  ing social interactions, they develop some initial hypotheses about the consequences of Mark’s ruminating about his ex-wife.  TherapisT: Is it possible that ruminating might be a form of avoidance itself? It’s like your mind gets stuck in a broken record format. You keep replaying what you did wrong, what you could have done, and one of the effects is that you are actually avoiding the painful emotions about the loss of the relationship, and maybe also avoiding exploring new relationships?   Mark: It feels like I can’t stand the loss of it. That’s what I can’t accept—that it is lost. I keep thinking maybe there is a way to recapture it, even though I know there simply is not. We can’t even communicate about the kids’ health care without a lawyer.  TherapisT: So, in a way, ruminating may be a way to avoid feeling grief and sadness. I wonder if part of this comes from what you learned about how to cope with major loss after your dad left. It seems like no one talked about that and you got pretty caught up in thinking about how you might have been responsible. I wonder if it’s hard to know what to do emotionally right now.  Mark: It’s certainly true about what happened when I was a kid.  TherapisT: So one possibility we could experiment with is taking time specifically to experience the sadness and loss.  Mark: I don’t know. Thinking about her and what I’ve lost seems overwhelming. I just want to be done with it and move on.  TherapisT: I know. Exactly! The problem is that ruminating seems to have the effect of keeping you from moving on. Instead of moving onto other relationships or pursuits in your life, your mind keeps replaying what happened and didn’t happen with Diana.  Mark: I just don’t know if I’m ready for other relationships.   TherapisT: So, if you weren’t ruminating as much, do you think you might experience more fear?  Mark: When I think about getting into another relationship. . . . You know, I think that there is actually a person at work who is interested in dating, but that’s been part of the reason that I’ve kind of held back  from doing things with her. She’s asked me to lunch a couple of times. I just don’t want to be back in the same place again 2 years from now. I can’t take this whole thing again, and I don’t want to subject my kids to it either.  TherapisT: So, it may be possible that ruminating has  the effect of keeping at bay not only feelings of loss  about Diana but also fears about future loss.  The therapist also emphasized the importance of continuing with activation plans developed in earlier sessions to maintain adaptive routines and improve mood. In particular, they highlight the need for consistent attention to social contact, exercise, and reading. In addition, the therapist and Mark discuss his return to the writers’ group into more detail, beginning to break down that larger task into manageable pieces. Work on these targets forms the majority of the middle of the course of treatment. As Mark begins to address feelings of loss more directly and continues his work on social connections, exercise, and limiting TV watching, he also begins to express interest in dating again.  Sessions 10–15  In this section of treatment, the therapist and Mark begin to address directly the prospect of his developing new intimate relationships in his life, specifically with a woman at work to whom he is attracted. They explore what is necessary to approach rather than avoid Mark’s fear of starting a new relationship, and the therapist hypothesizes in particular that Mark’s ruminative style may have functioned to avoid learning from patterns in past relationships. The therapist used the TRAP/TRAC acronym as a simple way to help Mark recognize the conditions under which he was likely to avoid (the TRAP), and to then engage in more adaptive coping behavior to get back on “TRAC.” For example, Mark reported that he would see the woman at work (trigger), begin to feel nervous (response), and either not talk with her or restrict his conversation to perfunctory work issues (the avoidance pattern). His alternative coping under the same conditions involved asking her if she would like to have coffee. Sessions then focus heavily on examining in detail what Mark might learn from his former marriage that would be instructive in future relationships. The following dialogue provides an example of the types of foci that these sessions target.    CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  mark: One of the things that happened a lot with Diana is I never felt like I was really present with her or the girls. It was like they were in this little world together and I was always on the outside somehow. I often thought that I should put myself more in the center, like say more of what I thought, but I just didn’t. I never did.  tHeraPist: Did that cause conflict with her?  mark: Yes, absolutely. It was one of things that she said when she ended things. Being on the outside is a big thing for me.  tHeraPist: What does being on the outside involve specifically? How would I know if you were doing that?  mark: It’s just not being willing to speak up about things. She always said it was like I wasn’t really in or out on anything, just kind of on the fence the whole time.  tHeraPist: Can you think of a specific example when that was an issue?  mark: Well, my mother and brothers never really liked Diana very much, but I didn’t do much to stand up for her with them. I just kind of let things unfold. . . .  tHeraPist: So, that might have been a TRAP with her? Was it a trigger that you thought she wanted something from you in terms of your commitment?  mark: Yes, it was, because I ended up feeling really overwhelmed by that.  tHeraPist: And the avoidance pattern was withdrawing.   mark: I did. I just backed off, and she had to handle the whole scene with my family.  tHeraPist: So with your coworker, if you were to take a stand with her now, what would that look like? What would alternative coping be?  mark: I have no idea.  tHeraPist: Do you think there is a similar trigger?  mark: Maybe, because I think she is wondering what’s up with me? Like am I interested or not?  tHeraPist: Have you been clear with her about being interested in dating her?  mark: Not really. We talk often at work, but I can’t say that I’ve really said much about it.  tHeraPist: Would you like to ask her out?  mark: Yes, I guess I would.  tHeraPist: Why don’t we think of some specific  things you could say as alternatives to withdrawing  and practice with some of them?  In these sessions, the therapist and Mark define, in very specific and concrete terms, the types of behaviors associated with decreased satisfaction and quality in his former marriage. For instance, the therapist’s following question to Mark is a central question asked repeatedly over the course of BA: “What does being on the outside involve specifically? What does it look like? How would I know if you were doing that?” The therapist emphasizes identifying clear, specific, and observable behaviors when analyzing behaviors and defining goals. Then, the therapist and Mark work to identify specific strategies that he can use to practice alternative behaviors in pursuing a future relationship. They continue to use the TRAP/TRAC framework to examine situations that arise and Mark’s response, and to guide him toward a more engaged approach to intimate interpersonal relationships. As Mark begins dating, they have ample opportunity to revise and refine strategies through activation assignments that target being direct and present in intimate interactions.  Sessions 16–19  By Session 16, the therapist and Mark agree that the bulk of the work of understanding and problem-solving Mark’s depression in terms of his unique life context and avoidant response patterns that maintain his depression has been completed. Mark has successfully activated in terms of his secondary problem behaviors (e.g., increased reading, exercise, social contacts, and projects around the house; decreased TV watching) and he has taken steps toward solving the problems of grief and fear of intimacy via initiating a new relationship.  Thus, the final sessions of treatment focused on reviewing and consolidating primary themes and methods used in therapy. Specifically, the therapist and Mark identified the importance of continuing to practice his new skills of blocking rumination by attending to immediate goals and to his direct and immediate experience, and being more direct and expressive with his new partner. In addition, the therapist carefully reviewed with Mark the ways he had learned to use the BA fundamentals himself. Together they reviewed ways that Mark would know when he was starting to feel depressed or to engage in avoidance response patterns. They also reviewed specific steps he could take   Behavioral Activation for Depression  to begin self-monitoring his mood and activities, and to problem-solve alternative coping behaviors. They also specifically identified a number of alternative behaviors that were uniquely helpful in breaking the vicious cycle of depression, avoidance, and withdrawal; these antidepressant behaviors included, for example, exercise, calling a friend, and reading. Mark reported that he felt well equipped with these tools and the opportunities he had had to practice them in therapy. He also reported feeling encouraged about the positive changes he had already made in his life. He ended treatment expressing optimism about his future and warmly thanked the therapist for all of their work together. Over time, Mark continued to maintain the gains he made in treatment. He established a new relationship with a woman, and they became engaged over the course of the following year. He continued to practice many of the skills he had learned in therapy in the context of this new relationship, with his children, and with his coworkers and friends.  Case Summary  The course of treatment with Mark provides an example of many of the core principles and strategies of BA. The treatment followed from careful and ongoing functional analysis of key problems that Mark presented, which in turn allowed the therapist to develop the organizing case conceptualization. This work was completed in collaboration with Mark during sessions and was also a focus of the ongoing clinical consultation team meetings, of which Mark’s therapist was a member. During treatment, the therapist used a range of specific strategies, including goal setting, self-monitoring, graded task assignment, problem solving, behavioral rehearsal, and attention to experience. She also addressed a number of important treatment targets frequently observed in BA, including interpersonal avoidance, rumination, and routine disruption.  Overall, the therapist worked as a coach throughout therapy, helping Mark to problem-solve specific steps to overcome patterns of avoidance and to engage in activities. She also taught Mark to identify links between activity and mood so that they could learn together where to focus time and attention. She used the EN- LIVEN strategies within each session. She maintained the structure of each session and the overall course of treatment, with a sustained focus on learning together and taking action. She maintained a matter-of-fact, nonjudgmental, problem-solving approach to the chal   lenge of treating depression and the difficulties that arose during the course of Mark’s therapy, responding with warmth, encouragement, and understanding. She relied consistently on the BA model, acknowledging the difficulty of change when depressed and the importance of action, especially when mood is low. She returned regularly and persistently to an activation focus on the selected targets of change and worked as a team with Mark to support him in learning how to build a life that was rich and rewarding.  coNclusioN  This chapter provides the conceptual basics and the how-to specifics that are required to use BA with depressed clients. Evolving from the seminal foundation established by the work of Ferster, Lewinsohn, and Beck, BA highlights the power of direct and sustained attention to behavior change. BA aims to help clients become active and engaged in their lives in ways that reduce current depression and help to prevent future episodes. BA therapists help depressed clients to increase activities that bring greater reward and to solve important problems. Both outcome research and other converging lines of empirical inquiry suggest that BA holds promise as an efficacious treatment for depression (Dimidjian et al., 2011). Future research will examine in greater detail the process of change in BA and the ease with which BA can be transported to a wide range of clinical practice settings.  referenCes  Acierno, R., Rheingold, A., Amstadter, A., Kurent, J., Amella, E., Resnick, H., et al. (2012). Behavioral activation and therapeutic exposure for bereavement in older adults.  American Journal of Hospice and Palliative Medicine, 29(1), 13–25.  Addis, M. E., & Carpenter, K. M. (2000). The treatment rationale in cognitive behavioral therapy: Psychological mechanisms and clinical guidelines. Cognitive and Behavioral Practice, 7(2), 147–156.  Addis, M. E., & Martell, C. R. (2004). Overcoming depression one step at a time: The new behavioral activation approach to getting your life back. Oakland, CA: New Harbinger.  American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.). Arlington, VA: Author.   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  Armento, M. E. A., & Hopko, D. R. (2007). The Environmental Reward Observation Scale (EROS): Development, validity, and reliability. Behavior Therapy, 38, 107–119.  Armento, M. E. A., & Hopko, D. R. (2009). Behavioral activation of a breast cancer patient with coexistent major depression and generalized anxiety disorder. Clinical Case Studies, 8(1), 25–37.  Barraca, J., Pérez-Álvarez, M., & Lozano Bleda, J. H. (2011). Avoidance and activation as keys to depression: Adaptation of the Behavioral Activation for Depression Scale in a Spanish sample. Spanish Journal of Psychology, 14(2), 998–1009.  Beck, A. T., Rush, A. J., Shaw, B. F., & Emery, G. (1979). Cognitive therapy of depression. New York: Guilford Press.  Beck, A. T., Steer, R. A., & Brown, G. K. (1996). Manual for the BDI-II. San Antonio, TX: Psychological Corporation.  Bennett-Levy, J., Butler, G., Fennell, M., Hackman, A., Mueller, M., & Westbrook, D. (2004). Oxford guide to behavioural experiments in cognitive therapy. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.  Borkovec, T. D., Newman, M. G., Pincus, A. L., & Lytle, R. (2002). A component analysis of cognitive-behavioral therapy for generalized anxiety disorder and the role of interpersonal problems. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 70, 288–298.  Carvalho, J. P., Gawrysiak, M. J., Hellmuth, J. C., McNulty,  J. K., Magidson, J. F., Lejuez, C. W., et al. (2010). The reward probability index: design and validation of a scale measuring access to environmental reward. Behavior Therapy, 42(2), 249–262. Christopher, M. S., Jacob, K. L., Neuhaus, E. C., Neary, T. J., & Fiola, L. A. (2009). Cognitive and behavioral changes related to symptom improvement among patients with a mood disorder receiving intensive cognitive-behavioral therapy. Journal of Psychiatric Practice, 15(2), 95–102.  Cuijpers, P., van Straten, A., & Warmerdam, L. (2007). Behavioral activation treatments of depression: A metaanalysis. Clinical Psychology Review, 27, 318–326.  Cullen, J. M., Spates, C. R., Pagoto, S. L., & Doran, N. (2006). Behavioral activation treatment for major depressive disorder: A pilot investigation. Behavior Analyst Today, 7, 151–166.  Curran, J., Lawson, P., Houghton, S., & Gournay, K. (2007). Implementing behavioural activation in inpatient psychiatric wards. Journal of Mental Health Training, Education and Practice, 2(2), 28–35.  Daughters, S. B., Braun, A. R., Sargeant, M. N., Reynolds, E. K., Hopko, D. R., Blanco, C., et al. (2008). Effectiveness of a brief behavioral treatment for inner-city illicit drug users with elevated depressive symptoms: The Life Enhancement Treatment for Substance Use (LETS Act!). Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 69(1), 122–129.  Dimidjian, S. (2011, July). Behavioral activation. Workshop presentation at Sangath, Goa, India.  Dimidjian, S., Barrera, M., Jr., Martell, C., Muñoz, R. F., & Lewinsohn, P. M. (2011). The origins and current status of behavioral activation treatments for depression. Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 7, 1–38.  Dimidjian, S., Hollon, S. D., Dobson, K. S., Schmaling, K. B., Kohlenberg, R. J., Addis, M., et al. (2006). Randomized trial of behavioral activation, cognitive therapy, and antidepressant medication in the acute treatment of adults with major depression. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 74, 658–670.  Dobson, K. S., Hollon, S. D., Dimidjian, S., Schmaling, K. B., Kohlenberg, R. J., Gallop, R., et al. (2008). Randomized trial of behavioral activation, cognitive therapy, and antidepressant medication in the prevention of relapse and recurrence in major depression. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 76(3), 468–477.  Ekers, D. M., Dawson, M. S., & Bailey, E. (2013). Dissemination of behavioural activation for depression to mental health nurses: training evaluation and benchmarked clinical outcomes. Journal of Psychiatric and Mental Health Nursing, 20(2), 186–192.  Ekers, D., Richards, D., & Gilbody, S. (2008). A metaanalysis of randomized trials of behavioural treatment of depression. Psychological Medicine, 38(5), 611–623.  Ekers, D., Richards, D., McMillan, D., Bland, J. M., & Gilbody, S. (2011). Behavioural activation delivered by the non-specialist: Phase II randomised controlled trial. British Journal of Psychiatry, 198(1), 66–72.  Ferster, C. B. (1973). A functional analysis of depression. American Psychologist, 28, 857–870.  Ferster, C. B. (1981). A functional analysis of behavior therapy. In L. P. Rehm (Ed.), Behavior therapy for depression: Present status and future directions (pp. 181–196). New York: Academic Press.  First, M. B., Spitzer, R. L., Gibbon, M., & Williams, J. B. W. (1997). User’s guide for the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV Axis I Disorders. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press.  First, M. B., Spitzer, R. L., Gibbons, M., Williams, J. B. W., & Benjamin, L. (1996). User’s guide for the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV Axis II Personality Disorders (SCID-II). New York: Biometrics Research Department, New York State Psychiatric Institute.  Foa, E. B., Rothbaum, B. O., & Furr, J. M. (2003). Augmenting exposure therapy with other CBT procedures. Psychiatric Annals, 33, 47–53.  Gawrysiak, M., Nicholas, C., & Hopko, D. R. (2009). Behavioral activation for moderately depressed university students: Randomized controlled trial. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 56(3), 468–475.  Gloaguen, V., Cottraux, J., Cucherat, M., & Blackburn, I. M. (1998). A meta-analysis of the effects of cognitive therapy in depressed patients. Journal of Affective Disorders, 49, 59–72.  Gollwitzer, P. M. (1999). Implementation intentions: Strong   Behavioral Activation for Depression  effects of simple plans. American Psychologist, 54, 493– 503.  Gortner, E. T., Gollan, J. K., Dobson, K. S., & Jacobson, N.  S. (1998). Cognitive-behavioral treatment for depression: Relapse prevention. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 66, 377–384. Gros, D. F., & Haren, W. B. (2011). Open trial of brief behavioral activation psychotherapy for depression in an integrated Veterans Affairs primary care setting. Primary Care Companion to CNS Disorders, 13(4).  Hamilton, M. A. (1960). A rating scale for depression. Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery, and Psychiatry, 23, 56–61.  Hayes, A. M., Castonguay, L. G., & Goldfried, M. R. (1996). Effectiveness of targeting the vulnerability factors of depression in cognitive therapy. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 64(3), 623–627.  Hayes, S. C., Strosahl, K. D., & Wilson, K. G. (1999). Acceptance and commitment therapy: An experiential approach to behavior change. New York: Guilford Press.  Hopko, D. R., Armento, M. E. A., Robertson, S., Ryba, M. M., Carvalho, J. P., Colman, L. K., et al. (2011). Brief behavioral activation and problem-solving therapy for depressed breast cancer patients: Randomized trial. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 79(6), 834–849.  Hopko, D. R., Bell, J. L., Armento, M. E. A., Hunt, M. K., & Lejuez, C. W. (2005). Behavior therapy for depressed cancer patients in primary care. Psychotherapy, 42(2), 236–243.  Hopko, D. R., Lejuez, C. W., & Hopko, S. D. (2004). Behavioral activation as an intervention for coexistent depressive and anxiety symptoms. Clinical Case Studies, 3(1), 37–48.  Hopko, D. R., Lejuez, C. W., LePage, J. P., Hopko, S. D., & McNeil, D. W. (2003). A brief behavioral activation treatment for depression: A randomized pilot trial within an inpatient psychiatric hospital. Behavior Modification, 27, 458–469.  Hopko, D. R., Sanchez, L., Hopko, S. D., Dvir, S., & Lejuez,  C. W. (2003). Behavioral activation and the prevention of suicidal behaviors in patients with borderline personality disorder. Journal of Personality Disorders, 17(5), 460–478. Houghton, S., Curran, J., & Saxon, D. (2008). An uncontrolled evaluation of group behavioural activation for depression. Behavioural and Cognitive Psychotherapy, 36(2), 235–239.  Hubley, S., Woodcock, E. A., Dimeff, L. A., & Dimidjian,  S. (in press). Disseminating behavioural activation for depression via online training: Preliminary steps. Behavioural and Cognitive Psychotherapy. Jacobson, N. S., Dobson, K. S., Truax, P. A., Addis, M. E., Koerner, K., Gollan, J. K., et al. (1996). A component analysis of cognitive-behavioral treatment for depression. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 64, 295–304.  Jacobson, N. S., Martell, C. R., & Dimidjian, S. (2001). Behavioral activation treatment for depression: Returning to contextual roots. Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 8, 255–270.  Jakupcak, M., Roberts, L. J., Martell, C., Mulick, P., Michael, S., Reed, R., et al. (2006). A pilot study of behavioral activation for veterans with posttraumatic stress disorder. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 19(3), 387–391.  Kanter, J. W., Hurtado, G. D., Rusch, L. C., Busch, A. M., & Santiago-Rivera, A. (2008). Behavioral activation for Latinos with depression. Clinical Case Studies, 7(6), 491–506.  Kanter, J. W., Mulick, P., Busch, A. M., Berlin, K. S., & Martell, C. (2007). The Behavioral Activation for Depression Scale (BADS): Psychometric properties and factor structure. Journal of Psychopathology and Behavioral Assessment, 29(3), 191–202.  Kanter, J. W., Rusch, L. C., Busch, A. M., & Sedivy, S. K. (2009). Validation of the Behavioral Activation for Depression Scale (BADS) in a community sample with elevated depressive symptoms. Journal of Psychopathology and Behavioral Assessment, 31(1), 36–42.  Kanter, J. W., Santiago-Rivera, A. L., Rusch, L. C., Busch,  A. M., & West, P. (2010). Initial outcomes of a culturally adapted behavioral activation for Latinas diagnosed with depression at a community clinic. Behavior Modification, 34(2), 120–144. Kroenke, K., Spitzer, R., & Williams, J. (2001). The PHQ-9: Validity of a brief depression severity measure. Journal of General Internal Medicine, 16, 606–613.  Lazzari, C., Egan, S. J., & Rees, C. S. (2011). Behavioral activation treatment for depression in older adults delivered via videoconferencing: A pilot study. Cognitive and Behavioral Practice, 18(4), 555–565.  Lejuez, C. W., Hopko, D. R., Acierno, R., Daughters, S. B., & Pagoto, S. L. (2011). Ten year revision of the brief behavioral activation treatment for depression: Revised treatment manual. Behavior Modification, 35(2), 111–161.  Lejuez, C. W., Hopko, D. R., LePage, J. P., Hopko, S. D., & McNeil, D. W. (2001). A brief behavioral activation treatment for depression. Cognitive and Behavioral Practice, 8(2), 164–175.  Lewinsohn, P. M. (1974). A behavioral approach to depression. In R. M. Friedman & M. M. Katz (Eds.), The psychology of depression: Contemporary theory and research (pp. 157–185). New York: Wiley.  Lewinsohn, P. M., Antonuccio, D. O., Steinmetz- Breckenridge, J., & Teri, L. (1984). The Coping with Depression Course: A psychoeducational intervention for unipolar depression. Eugene, OR: Castalia.  Lewinsohn, P. M., Biglan, A., & Zeiss, A. S. (1976). Behavioral treatment of depression. In P. O. Davidson (Ed.), The behavioral management of anxiety, depression and pain  (pp. 91–146). New York: Brunner/Mazel. Lewinsohn, P. M., & Graf, M. (1973). Pleasant activities and   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  depression. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 41, 261–268.  Lewinsohn, P. M., Hoberman, H., Teri, L., Hautzinger, M. (1985). An integrative theory of depression. In S. Reiss &  R. Bootzin (Eds.) Theoretical issues in behavior therapy, (pp. 331–359). New York: Academic Press. Lewinsohn, P. M., Sullivan, J. M., & Grosscup, S. J. (1980). Changing reinforcing events: An approach to the treatment of depression. Psychotherapy: Theory, Research, Practice, and Training, 17, 322–334.  Linehan, M. M. (1993). Cognitive-behavioral treatment of borderline personality disorder. New York: Guilford Press.  Locke, E. A., & Latham, G. P. (2002). Building a practically useful theory of goal setting and task motivation: A 35year odyssey. American Psychologist, 57, 705–717.  MacPherson, L., Tull, M. T., Matusiewicz, A. K., Rodman, S., Strong, D. R., Kahler, C. W., et al. (2010). Randomized controlled trial of behavioral activation smoking cessation treatment for smokers with elevated depressive symptoms. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 78(1), 55–61.  Mairs, H., Lovell, K., Campbell, M., & Keeley, P. (2011). Development and pilot investigation of behavioral activation for negative symptoms. Behavior Modification, 35(5), 486–506.  Manos, R. C., Kanter, J. W., & Busch, A. M. (2010). A critical review of assessment strategies to measure the behavioral activation model of depression. Clinical Psychology Review, 30, 547–561.  Manos, R. C., Kanter, J. W., & Luo, W. (2011). The Behavioral Activation for Depression Scale–Short Form: Development and validation. Behavior Therapy, 42(4), 726–739.  Martell, C. R., Addis, M. E., & Jacobson, N. S. (2001). Depression in context: Strategies for guided action. New York: Norton.  Martell, C. R., Dimidjian, S., & Herman-Dunn, R. (2010). Behavioral activation for depression: A clinician’s guide: Guilford Press.  Mazzucchelli, T., Kane, R., & Rees, C. (2009). Behavioral activation treatment of depression in adults: A metaanalysis and review. Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 16, 383–411.  McCauley, E., Schloredt, K., Gudmundsen, G., Martell, C., & Dimidjian, S. (2011). Expanding behavioral activation to depressed adolescents: Lessons learned in treatment development. Cognitive and Behavioral Practice, 18(3), 371–383.  Meeks, S., Looney, S. W., Van Haitsma, K., & Teri, L. (2008). BE-ACTIV: A staff-assisted behavioral intervention for depression in nursing homes. The Gerontologist, 48(1), 105–114.  Meeks, S., Teri, L., Van Haitsma, K., & Looney, S. (2006).  Increasing pleasant events in the Nursing Home Collaborative Behavioral Treatment for Depression. Clinical Case Studies, 5(4), 287–304.  Mohammadi, A., & Amiri, M. (2010). Behavioral Activation for Depression Scale: Psychometric properties and confirmatory factor analysis for Persian version. Iranian Journal of Psychiatry and Clinical Psychology, 16, 65–73.  Mulick, P. S., & Naugle, A. E. (2004). Behavioral activation for comorbid PTSD and major depression: A case study. Cognitive and Behavioral Practice, 11(4), 378–387.  National Institute of Health and Clinical Excellence. (2009). Depression: The treatment and management of depression in adults. London: Author.  Nolen-Hoeksema, S. (2000). The role of rumination in depressive disorders and mixed anxiety/depressive symptoms. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 109, 504–511.  Pagoto, S., Bodenlos, J. S., Schneider, K. L., Olendzki, B., & Spates, C. R. (2008). Initial investigation of behavioral activation therapy for co-morbid major depressive disorder and obesity. Psychotherapy Theory Research and Practice, 45, 410–415.  Porter, J. F., Spates, C. R., & Smitham, S. (2004). Behavioral activation group therapy in public mental health settings: A pilot investigation. Professional Psychology: Research and Practice, 35(3), 297–301.  Quijano, L. M., Stanley, M. A., Petersen, N. J., Casado, B. L., Steinberg, E. H., Cully, J. A., et al. (2007). Healthy IDEAS: A depression intervention delivered by community-based case managers serving older adults. Journal of Applied Gerontology, 26(2), 139–156.  Raes, F., Hoes, D., Van Gucht, D., & Kanter, J. W. (2010). The Dutch version of the behavioral activation for depression scale (BADS): Psychometric properties and factor structure. Journal of Behavior Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry, 41, 246–250.  Reynolds, E. K., MacPherson, L., Tull, M. T., Baruch, D. E., & Lejuez, C. W. (2011). Integration of the brief behavioral activation treatment for depression (BATD) into a college orientation program: Depression and alcohol outcomes. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 58(4), 555–564.  Ritschel, L. A., Ramirez, C. L., Jones, M., & Craighead,  W. E. (2011). Behavioral activation for depressed teens: A pilot study. Cognitive and Behavioral Practice, 18(2), 281–299. Ruggiero, K. J., Morris, T. L., Hopko, D. R., & Lejuez, C. W. (2007). Application of behavioral activation treatment for depression to an adolescent with a history of child maltreatment. Clinical Case Studies, 6(1), 64–78.  Schneider, K. L., Pagoto, S. L., Handschin, B., Panza, E., Bakke, S., Liu, Q., et al. (2011). Design and methods for a pilot randomized clinical trial involving exercise and behavioral activation to treat comorbid type 2 diabetes and major depressive disorder. Mental Health and Physical Activity, 4(1), 13–21.   Behavioral Activation for Depression  Scogin, F., Jamison, C., & Gochneaur, K. (1989). Comparative efficacy of cognitive and behavioral bibliotherapy for mildly and moderately depressed older adults. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 57, 403–407.  Segal, Z. V., Williams, J. M. G., & Teasdale, J. D. (2002). Mindfulness-based cognitive therapy for depression. New York: Guilford Press.  Snarski, M., Scogin, F., DiNapoli, E., Presnell, A., McAlpine, J., & Marcinak, J. (2011). The effects of behavioral activation therapy with inpatient geriatric psychiatry patients. Behavior Therapy, 42(1), 100–108.  Sood, J. R., Cisek, E., Zimmerman, J., Zaleski, E. H., & Fillmore, H. H. (2003). Treatment of depressive symptoms during short-term rehabilitation: An attempted replication of the DOUR project. Rehabilitation Psychology, 48(1), 44–49.  Spates, C. R., Kalata, A. H., Ozeki, S., Stanton, C. E., & Peters, S. (2012). Initial open trial of a computerized behavioral activation treatment for depression. Behavior Modification, 36(6), 1–39.  Spek, V., Cuijpers, P. I. M., Nyklicek, I., Riper, H., Keyzer, J., & Pop, V. (2007). Internet-based cognitive behaviour therapy for symptoms of depression and anxiety: A metaanalysis. Psychological Medicine, 37(3), 319–328.  Spek, V., Cuijpers, P., Nyklicek, I., Smits, N., Riper, H., Keyzer, J., et al. (2008). One-year follow-up results of a randomized controlled clinical trial on internet-based cognitive behavioural therapy for subthreshold depression in people over 50 years. Psychological Medicine, 38(5), 635–640.  Teri, L., Logsdon, R. G., Uomoto, J., & McCurry, S. M. (1997). Behavioral treatment of depression in dementia patients: A controlled clinical trial. Journals of Gerontology: Psychological Sciences, 52, 59–66.  Uebelacker, L. A., Weisberg, R. B., Haggarty, R., & Miller,  I. W. (2009). Adapted behavior therapy for persistently depressed primary care patients: An open trial. Behavior Modification, 33(3), 374–395.  Van Voorhees, B. W., Fogel, J., Reinecke, M. A., Gladstone, T., Stuart, S., Gollan, J., et al. (2009). Randomized clinical trial of an internet-based depression prevention program for adolescents (Project CATCH-IT) in primary care: 12week outcomes. Journal of Developmental and Behavioral Pediatrics, 30(1), 23–37.  Wagner, A. W., Zatzick, D. F., Ghesquiere, A., & Jurkovich,  G. J. (2007). Behavioral activation as an early intervention for posttraumatic stress disorder and depression among physically injured trauma survivors. Cognitive and Behavioral Practice, 14(4), 341–349. Ware, J. E., & Sherbourne, C. D. (1992). The MOS 36-Item Short-Form Health Survey (SF-36), I: Conceptual framework and item selection. Medical Care, 30, 473–483.  Warmerdam, L., Van Straten, A., Twisk, J., Riper, H., & Cuijpers, P. (2008). Internet-based treatment for adults with depressive symptoms: Randomized controlled trial. Journal of Medical Internet Research, 10, e44.  Watson, D. L., & Tharp, R. G. (2002). Self directed behavior. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth/Thomson Learning.  Weinstock, L. M., Munroe, M. K., & Miller, I. W. (2011). Behavioral activation for the treatment of atypical depression: A pilot open trial. Behavior Modification, 35(4), 403–424.  Weissman, M. M., & Bothwell, S. (1976). Assessment of social adjustment by patient self-report. Archives of General Psychiatry, 33(9), 1111–1115.  Zeiss, A. M., Lewinsohn, P. M., & Muñoz, R. F. (1979). Nonspecific improvement effects in depression using interpersonal skills training, pleasant activity schedules, or cognitive training. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 47, 427–439.  Zettle, R. D., & Rains, J. C. (1989). Group cognitive and contextual therapies in treatment of depression. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 45(3), 436–445.   CHaPter 10  Borderline Personality Disorder  aNDraDa D. Neacsiu Marsha M. liNehaN  This chapter presents one of the more remarkable developments in all of psychotherapy. few therapists are willing to undertake the overwhelmingly difficult and wrenching task of treating individuals with “borderline” characteristics, yet these people are among the neediest encountered in any therapeutic setting. They also impose an enormous burden on the health care system. over the past several decades, linehan and her colleagues have developed a demonstrably effective treatment for individuals with borderline personality disorder (BPD) that constitutes one of the most substantial contributions to the armamentarium of the psychotherapist in recent times. What is even more interesting is that this approach blends emotion regulation, interpersonal systems, and more traditional cognitive‑behavioral approaches into a coherent whole. To this mix linehan adds her personal experience with eastern philosophies and religions, yet the authors remain true to the empirical foundations of their approach. The fascinating case study presented in this chapter illustrates linehan’s therapeutic expertise and strategic timing in a way that will be invaluable to all therapists who deal with personality disorders. The surprising and tragic outcome underscores the enormous burden of clinical responsibility inherent in any treatment setting, as well as the practical issues that arise when treatment ultimately fails.—D. H. B.  Clinicians generally agree that clients with a diagnosis of borderline personality disorder (BPD) are challenging and difficult to treat. As a result, BPD has become a stigmatized disorder resulting in negative attitudes, trepidation, and concern with regard to providing treatment (Aviram, Brodsky, & Stanley, 2006; Lequesne & Hersh, 2004; Paris, 2005). Perhaps of greatest concern is the generally high incidence of suicidal behavior among this population. Approximately 75% of clients who meet criteria for BPD have a history of suicide attempts, with an average of 3.4 attempts per individual (Soloff, Lis, Kelly, Cornelius, & Ulrich, 1994). Suicide threats and crises are frequent, even among those who never engage in any suicidal or  nonsuicidal self-injurious behavior (NSSI). Suicidal ideation is also frequent and contributes to the onset and maintenance of daily negative mood (Nisenbaum, Links, Eynan, & Heisel, 2010). Although much of this behavior is without lethal consequence, follow-up studies of individuals with BPD have found suicide rates of about 7–8%, and the percentage who eventually commit suicide is estimated at 10% (for a review, see Linehan, Rizvi, Shaw-Welch, & Page, 2000). Among all individuals who have committed suicide, from 7 to 38% meet criteria for BPD, with the higher incidence occurring primarily among young adults with the disorder (e.g., Brent et al., 1994; Isometsa et al., 1994). Lethality and frequency of suicidal behavior seem to  394   Borderline Personality Disorder  be strongly related to impulsivity (Chesin, Jeglic, & Stanley, 2010) and poor psychosocial functioning (Soloff & Chiappetta, 2012), which may make it difficult to decide what to prioritize in treatment. Individuals with BPD also have difficulties with anger and anger expression. Not infrequently, intense anger is directed at their therapists. The frequent coexistence of BPD with both Axis I conditions (e.g., mood or anxiety disorders) and other personality disorders clearly complicates treatment further. In particular, comorbid posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) results in greater impairment in individuals with BPD (Harned, Rizvi, & Linehan, 2010).  The criteria for BPD, as defined in the fifth edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5; American Psychiatric Association, 2013), reflect a pervasive pattern of instability and dysregulation across all domains of functioning. An additional popular measure for BPD is Zanarini’s Rating Scale for BPD (ZAN-BPD; Zanarini, 2003). Other assessment measures used to diagnose BPD include the International Personality Disorders Examination (IPDE; Loranger, 1995) and the Diagnostic Interview for DSM-IV Personality Disorders (DIPD-IV; Zanarini, Frankenburg, Sickel, & Yong, 1996). The Borderline Symptom List (BSL; Bohus et al., 2001, 2007) and the McLean Screening Instrument for Borderline Personality Disorder (MSI-BPD; Zanarini et al., 2003) are additional screening measures for BPD.  Linehan (1993a), followed by additional theorists, proposed BPD to be a disorder of pervasive emotion dysregulation (see also Conklin & Westen, 2005; Livesley, Jang, & Vernon, 1998). Indeed, most DSM-5 BPD criterion behaviors can be defined either as a direct consequence of emotion dysregulation or as responses that function to modulate the aversive emotional states (Linehan, 1993b; McMain, Korman, & Dimeff, 2001).  More recent research is finding that problems with emotion dysregulation are common in many other DSM disorders (Kring & Sloan, 2010). Individuals diagnosed with a variety of other mental health disorders appear to have emotion dysregulation patterns that are similar to those seen in BPD. Increased sensitivity and reactivity, when compared to controls, has been connected to generalized anxiety disorder (GAD; Mennin, Heimberg, Turk, & Fresco, 2005), substance dependence (Thorberg & Lyvers, 2006), and social anxiety disorder (SAD) and specific phobias (Etkin & Wager, 2007). Furthermore, the transaction between vulnerability and an insufficient coaching environment is  similar to the etiological theories presented in panic disorder (Barlow, Allen, & Choate, 2004), GAD (Mennin, 2004), and some specific phobias (Cisler, Olatunji, Feldner, & Forsyth, 2010). Thus, pervasive emotion dysregulation is likely relevant to many other clinical populations beyond BPD.  This chapter focuses primarily on describing dialectical behavior therapy (DBT), as a treatment of BPD (Linehan, 1993a, 1993b) and of pervasive emotion dysregulation. Before describing DBT, we first review other treatments for BPD and provide information on their theoretical rationales and supporting data (when such data are available). We then present the empirical support for DBT as a treatment for BPD and for emotion dysregulation. This is followed by a more in-depth description of DBT—its philosophical roots, underlying theory, and treatment protocols.  overview of other treatMeNt aPProaches  Various approaches have been applied to the treatment of BPD. Although it is not our purpose to present a scholarly review of all the many treatments for BPD, we believe it helpful to review briefly the status of other treatments before presenting DBT in detail.  Psychodynamic  Psychodynamic approaches currently receiving the most attention include those of Kernberg (1984; Kernberg, Selzer, Koenigsberg, Carr, & Appelbaum, 1989), Adler and Buie (1979; Adler, 1981, 1993; Buie & Adler, 1982), and Bateman and Fonagy (2004). Among these, Kernberg’s (1984) theoretical contributions are clearly prominent. His object relations model is comprehensive as to theory and technique and has had considerable influence on the psychoanalytic literature. His expressive psychotherapy for clients with “borderline personality organization” (BPO) or BPD, transference-focused psychotherapy (TFP), emphasizes three primary factors: interpretation, maintenance of technical neutrality, and transference analysis. The focus of the therapy is on exposure and resolution of intrapsychic conflict. Treatment goals include increased impulse control and anxiety tolerance, ability to modulate affect, and development of stable interpersonal relationships. TFP also uses a target hierarchy approach in the first year of treatment. The targets are (1) containment of suicidal   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  and self-destructive behaviors, (2) therapy-destroying behaviors, and (3) identification and recapitulation of dominant object relational patterns, as experienced in the transference relationship (Clarkin, Levy, Lenzenweger, & Kernberg, 2007). Kernberg (1984) has also distinguished a supportive psychotherapy for more severely disturbed clients with BPO or BPD. Like expressive psychotherapy, supportive psychotherapy also places great emphasis on the importance of the interpersonal relationship in therapy (transference); however, interpretations are less likely to be made early in treatment, and only the negative responses to the therapist and to therapy (negative transference) are explored. Both expressive and supportive psychotherapy are expected to last several years, with primary foci on suicidal behaviors and therapy-interfering behaviors. The data supporting the use of TFP are not extensive. Clarkin and colleagues (2007) conducted a multisite randomized controlled trial (RCT) comparing TFP with the leading evidence-based treatment (DBT) and with an additional psychodynamic psychotherapy treatment designed to exclude elements considered to be the mechanism of change in TFP. A sample of mixed-gender individuals with BPD was randomized to DBT (N = 30), TFP (N = 30), and dynamic supportive treatment (ST; N = 30). Research therapists were supervised on a weekly basis, and adherence ratings were assessed although not reported. Results indicated that all three treatments demonstrated improvement in depression, anxiety, global functioning, and interpersonal adjustment. Only DBT and TFP were associated with significant improvement in suicidality (small effect sizes); similarly, only the psychodynamic treatments resulted in significant reductions in anger (medium effect sizes). According to the Clarkin and colleagues, irritability, physical and verbal assault, and impulsivity only changed in TFP. These results represent within-condition changes, as there were no differences between conditions. TFP was superior to control conditions in a secondary analysis including several measures of psychodynamic constructs, such as metacognitive and social-cognitive capacities, and reflective functioning (Levy & Scala, 2012). These results must be interpreted with caution. While positive changes were evident in all conditions, the mechanism of change proposed for TFP was not supported, and the comparison condition was questionable given that it is unclear whether the DBT therapists were adherent to the model.  Doering and colleagues (2010), followed up with an independent RCT comparing TFP with treatment by  behavioral and nonbehavioral community experts. One hundred and four women diagnosed with BPD underwent 1 year of treatment. The authors reported that TFP was superior in reducing suicidality, dropout, borderline psychopathology, use of services, and poor global functioning. Participants in TFP on average received twice as many sessions. When researchers controlled for the number of sessions attended, group differences on suicide attempts and use of services were no longer significant, although all other results remained significant (Doering et al., 2010). This study has been criticized for including all participants in the analyses (regardless of whether they attended any therapy session) and for choosing post hoc a statistical test that did not accurately reflect the findings on suicidal behavior (Kleindienst, Krumm, & Bohus, 2011).  Mentalization therapy, developed by Bateman and Fonagy (2004), is an intensive therapy grounded in attachment theory (i.e., BPD is viewed as an attachment disorder), with a focus on relationship patterns and nonconscious factors inhibiting change. “Mentalization” refers to one’s perception or interpretation of the actions of others and oneself as intentional. The treatment is based on the theory that individuals with BPD have an inadequate capacity for mentalization. Treatment, therefore, focuses on bringing the client’s mental experiences to conscious awareness, facilitating a more complete, integrated sense of mental agency. The goal is to increase the client’s capacity for recognizing the existence of the thoughts and feelings he/she is experiencing. Mentalization-based therapy (MBT) has been successfully offered as an 18-month partial hospitalization followed by 18-month biweekly therapy (Bateman & Fonagy, 1999) or as an 18-month outpatient individual and group intervention (Bateman & Fonagy, 2009). MBT as a treatment for BPD has been tested with two RCTs.  The first RCT compared 18 months of treatment as usual (TAU) with MBT for 18 months in a partial hospitalization setting, followed by 18 months of outpatient MBT (Bateman & Fonagy, 1999). Clients were randomly assigned to either standard psychiatric care without individual psychotherapy (control condition) or to partial hospitalization, a treatment program with the following goals of therapy: (1) psychoanalytically informed engagement of clients in treatment; (2) reduction of psychopathology, including depression and anxiety; (3) reduction of suicidal behavior; (4) improvement in social competence; and (5) reduction in lengthy hospitalizations. The experimental treat    Borderline Personality Disorder  ment group received once-weekly individual psychotherapy provided by psychiatric nurses, once-weekly psychodrama-based expressive therapy, thrice-weekly group therapy sessions, a weekly community meeting, a monthly meeting with a case administrator, and a monthly medications review. At the end of the 18month partial-hospitalization treatment, those receiving MBT showed significant reductions in suicidal behavior (suicide attempts and self-mutilation), inpatient hospitalization stays, measures of psychopathology (including depression and anxiety), and social functioning relative to the control group. These gains were maintained and increased during an 18-month follow-up period consisting of twice-weekly group therapy (Bateman & Fonagy, 2001). The researchers noted that their program contains three characteristics they hypothesize to be related to treatment effectiveness: a consistent theoretical rationale for treatment, a relationship focus, and consistent treatment over time. Gains were maintained at a 5-year followup, although participants in MBT continued to have impairments in general social function (Bateman & Fonagy, 2008).  The second RCT (Bateman & Fonagy, 2009) compared 18 months of outpatient MBT with a structured clinical management (SCM) control condition. MBT included individual and group psychotherapy, as well as crisis phone coaching. SCM developed by the authors to mirror best practices in the treatment of BPD was primarily a supportive intervention, with case management including both group and individual therapy. It was unclear from the study description whether participants in both conditions were offered a similar amount of time in therapy. Assessments were conducted at pretreatment, at 6 and 12 months during treatment, and at the end of treatment. One hundred and thirty-four men and women with a diagnosis of BPD and a recent history of suicidal behavior were included in the study. Analyses were conducted at each assessment time point, and not longitudinally, which makes results difficult to interpret. Nevertheless, substantial improvements in both conditions was reported, with MBT being superior to SCM in reducing suicide attempts in the last 6 months, self-injury episodes in the last 12 months, and hospitalization throughout the treatment year. SCM was superior to MBT in reducing self-harm episodes in the first 6 months of treatment. MBT was also significantly better than SCM at increasing general assessment of functioning, depression, and social adjustment (Bateman & Fonagy, 2009).  Psychopharmacological   Reviews of the literature regarding drug treatments for BPD highlight a dilemma for the prescribing pharmacotherapist: BPD involves dysregulation in too many domains for a single drug to serve as a panacea (Dimeff, McDavid, & Linehan, 1999; Lieb, Zanarini, Linehan, & Bohus, 2004; Nose, Cipriani, Biancosino, Grassi, & Barbui, 2006). In general, results indicate that several agents may be useful for improving global functioning, cognitive-perceptual symptoms (e.g., suspiciousness, ideas of reference, transitory hallucinations), emotion dysregulation, or impulsive–behavioral dyscontrol (for reviews, see Lieb et al., 2004; Nose et al., 2006).  Lieb, Völlm, Rücker, Timmer, and Stoffers (2010) conducted a meta-analysis of 27 RCTs and organized the evidence based on class of medications. They found that for first-generation antipsychotics, evidence supports the effectiveness of haloperidol in the reduction of anger and flupentixol in the reduction of suicidal behavior. Thiothixene was found not to be effective. For secondgeneration antipsychotics, evidence supports aripiprazole’s effectiveness in reducing pathological symptoms of BPD, as well as comorbid psychopathology. Olanzapine is accumulating increased evidence with regard to its positive effect in reducing affective instability, anger, and psychotic symptoms, although findings for its effect on suicidal behavior are mixed (Lieb et al., 2010). In addition to superiority to placebo, olanzapine has been shown to decrease impulsive aggression and chronic dysphoria more effectively than fluoxetine (Zanarini, Frankenburg, & Parachini, 2004). Olanzapine is consistently found to have a weight gain side effect. Ziprasidone was found not to be effective (Lieb et al., 2010).  With regard to mood stabilizers and antidepressants, valproate semisodium was found to have a significant effect in reducing interpersonal problems and depression in clients with BPD, including those with aggressive and impulsive behavior (Stein, Simeon, Frenkel, Islam, & Hollander, 1995). Lamotrigine is more effective than placebo in reducing impulsivity, and topiramate was found to reduce associated psychopathology and anger. Topiramate was found to have a significant side effect of weight loss. Antidepressants evidenced limited effectiveness in the treatment of BPD problems. Finally, omega-3 fatty acids were found to reduce suicidality and depression above and beyond placebo (Lieb et al., 2010).  In summary, some drug treatments may be effective in treating aspects of the BPD psychopathology. Never    CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  theless, caution is in order when considering pharmacotherapy for BPD. Clients with BPD are notoriously noncompliant with treatment regimens, may abuse the prescribed drugs or overdose, and may experience unintended effects of the drugs. With these caveats in mind, carefully monitored pharmacotherapy may be a useful and important adjunct to psychotherapy in the treatment of BPD.  Cognitive‑Behavioral  Treatment of BPD has received increasing attention from cognitive and behavioral theorists. The cognitive approach views the problems of the client with BPD as residing within both the content and the process of the individual’s thoughts. Beck’s approach to treating BPD (Beck & Freeman, 1990) is representative of cognitive psychotherapy generally, with the focus of treatment on restructuring thoughts and on developing a collaborative relationship through which more adaptive ways of viewing the world are developed. More specifically, it focuses on decreasing negative and polarized beliefs that result in unstable affect and destructive behaviors (Brown, Newman, Charlesworth, Crits-Christoph, & Beck, 2004). In an open clinical trial of cognitive therapy for clients with BPD, decreases in problems associated with BPD including depression, hopelessness, and suicide ideation were found at the end of treatment and during follow-up.  An RCT compared 1 year of cognitive therapy (CT) and Rogerian supportive therapy (RST) for 65 men and women who met diagnostic criteria for BPD. In this study, participants were offered one session weekly in each condition for 6 months, followed by 12 sessions aimed at maintaining gains over the subsequent 6 months. Cottraux and colleagues (2009) found that CT was superior to RST in retaining clients in therapy. No additional differences between conditions were found, although CT led to reductions in hopelessness and impulsivity faster than RST. Follow-up analyses, nevertheless, showed a significant difference between conditions, with participants who underwent CT demonstrating higher clinical global improvement than participants treated with RST. Given the small sample size and the large number of dropouts from this study, the effectiveness of CT is still unclear (Cottraux et al., 2009).  The cognitive-behavioral therapies of Young, Klosko, and Weishaar (2003; Kellogg & Young, 2006), Pretzer (1990), Blum, Pfohl, St. John, Monahan, and Black (2002), and Schmidt and Davidson (as cited in  Weinberg, Gunderson, Hennen, & Cutter, 2006) attempt to address some of the difficulties experienced in applying traditional cognitive approaches to the treatment of BPD. Pretzer’s approach emphasizes modifying standard CT to address difficulties often encountered in treating clients with BPD, such as establishing a collaborative relationship between therapist and client, maintaining a directed treatment, and improving homework compliance. Blum and colleagues developed a twiceweekly outpatient group treatment that uses a psychoeducational approach to teaching cognitive-behavioral skills (e.g., distancing, goal setting, and problem solving) to clients with BPD and to their support systems (e.g., family, friends, other care providers). The treatment is offered in a group setting and has been tested under the acronym STEPPS (Systems Training for Emotional Predictability and Problem Solving). The treatment focuses on destigmatization of BPD, emotional control, and behavioral control. Bos, van Wel, Verbraak, and Appelo (2011) conducted the most recent RCT on STEPPS. In their study, participants loosely diagnosed with BPD, representative of routine clinical practice, were randomized to either STEPPS and individual therapy (N = 84) or TAU (N = 84). At the end of the 18-week treatment, as well as at 6-month follow-up, participants treated with STEPPS reported less general and BPD-specific psychopathology, and more improvements in quality of life. Treatment was offered weekly for 18 sessions and also included a one-time follow-up session within the third and sixth months in the study. These findings, coupled with prior studies comparing STEPPS and TAU with rigorously selected BPD samples (Blum et al., 2008; Bos, van Wel, Verbraak, & Appelo, 2010) supports the effectiveness and efficacy of this intervention.  Young’s schema-focused therapy (SFT; Young et al., 2003; also see Young, Rygh, Weinberger, & Beck, Chapter 7, this volume) postulates that stable patterns of thinking (“early maladaptive schemas”) can develop during childhood and result in maladaptive behavior that reinforces the schemas. SFT includes a variety of interventions aimed at challenging and changing these early schemas through the identification of a set of dysfunctional schema modes that control the individual’s thoughts, emotions, and behaviors (i.e., detached protector, punitive parent, abandoned/abused child, angry/ impulsive child). Giesen-Bloo and colleagues (2006) completed the first RCT of TFP and SFT. TFP was compared to SFT in a study in which 86 participants received 3 years of twice-weekly individual sessions of   Borderline Personality Disorder  either SFT or TFP. Study results indicated an overall decrease in BPD symptoms for both treatments; however, participants who received SFT had significantly greater improvements overall and a lower attrition rate. Suicide and NSSI behaviors were not assessed as an outcome measure in this study. A follow-up secondary analyses study also demonstrated that SFT’s cost to implement was 20% lower than the cost needed to implement TFP (van Asselt et al., 2008). In addition, Farrell, Shaw, and Webber (2009) demonstrated the effectiveness of SFT in an 8-month group format. In their study, the authors tested the effect of augmenting TAU with an SFT group. When compared to TAU alone, TAU–SFT resulted in significantly higher remission from BPD.  An effectiveness trial was also conducted in 2009. Nadort and colleagues (2009) tested a disseminated version of SFT in regular health care centers with or without afterhours crisis support by phone. Data from 62 participants suggested that the added phone availability did not result in additional improvement, and that across conditions SFT was successful, leading to 42% recovery from BPD after 1.5 years of treatment.  Weinberg and colleagues (2006) completed an RCT of manual-assisted cognitive treatment (MACT) and TAU. MACT is a brief cognitive-behavioral treatment that incorporates strategies from DBT, CT, and bibliotherapy. The treatment targets NSSI behaviors in participants diagnosed with BPD. MACT was provided as an adjunctive treatment to TAU for study participants (N = 30). Participants were 30 women diagnosed with BPD, with a history of NSSI behaviors and at least one in the last month; however, suicide was considered one of the exclusionary criteria for study participation. Participants were randomly assigned to MACT plus TAU or to TAU-alone conditions. Upon completion of the 6-week treatment and at the 6-month follow-up, participants who received MACT had significantly fewer and less severe NSSI behaviors than those in the TAU-alone condition. These results should be interpreted with caution due to small sample size and the use of self-report measures only in assessment of NSSI behaviors.  eviDeNce for DBt as aN effective BPD treatMeNt  DBT evolved from standard cognitive-behavioral therapy as a treatment for BPD, particularly for recurrently suicidal, severely dysfunctional adults. The theoretical  orientation to treatment is a blend of three theoretical positions: behavioral science, dialectical philosophy, and Zen practice. Behavioral science, the principles of behavior change, is countered by acceptance of the client (with techniques drawn both from Zen and from Western contemplative practice); these poles are balanced within the dialectical framework. Although dialectics was first adopted as a description of this emphasis on balance, dialectics soon took on the status of guiding principles that have advanced the therapy in directions not originally anticipated. DBT is based within a consistent behaviorist theoretical position. However, the actual procedures and strategies overlap considerably with those of various alternative therapy orientations, including psychodynamic, client-centered, strategic, and cognitive therapies.  Efficacy  Although, as described earlier, several treatments have demonstrated efficacy in the treatment of people diagnosed with BPD, DBT has the most empirical support at present and is generally considered the frontline treatment for the disorder. DBT as a treatment for BPD has been evaluated in a number of controlled trials (see Table 10.1). Four of the RCTs specifically recruited clients with suicidal behaviors (Linehan et al., 1999, 2006; Linehan, Armstrong, Suárez, Allmon, & Heard, 1991; McMain et al., 2009). Two RCTs included DBT in both conditions, with the addition of medication in one condition (Linehan, McDavid, Brown, Sayrs, & Gallop, 2008; Soler et al., 2005). The results in general have shown DBT to be highly effective. In adults diagnosed with BPD who are at high risk for suicide, 1 year of DBT yielded significantly higher improvements on anger outbursts, suicidal behavior, and hospitalization compared to TAU (Linehan et al., 1991; Linehan, Heard, & Armstrong, 1993), client-centered therapy (CCT, Turner, 2000), and community treatment by non-behavioral experts (CTBE; Linehan et al., 2006) but not to a dynamic emotion-focused treatment plus protocol-based pharmacotherapy program (McMain et al., 2009). One study showed that participants treated with DBT were half as likely to engage in suicidal behaviors compared to participants in the CTBE condition, further indicating that DBT is an effective treatment for reducing suicidal behavior. During the 1 year of treatment, depression, hopelessness, and suicidal ideation improved in both DBT and control treatments (Linehan et al., 1991, 2006; McMain et al., 2009). Fur    CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  thermore, there was similar remission from major depressive disorder (MDD) and anxiety disorders in the DBT and in the control condition (Harned et al., 2008), although remission from substance dependence was significantly higher in DBT.  Treatment superiority was maintained when participants in the DBT condition were compared to only those control subjects who received stable individual psychotherapy during the treatment year, and even after researchers controlled for number of hours of psychotherapy and telephone contacts (Linehan & Heard, 1993; Linehan et al., 1999). Superiority was also maintained when comparing DBT with a treatment that had equal prestige, and was administered by expert therapist with allegiance to the treatment model (CTBE; Linehan et al., 2006). These studies suggest that the efficacy of DBT is due to specific treatment factors and not general factors or the expertise of the treating psychotherapists.   In BPD samples selected regardless of their suicide risk, findings are mixed with regard to suicidal behavior; nevertheless DBT outperforms control conditions in improving indices of emotion regulation (Koons et al., 2006; Verheul et al., 2003). DBT is also effective for adults diagnosed with BPD and a comorbid drug dependence disorder (Linehan et al., 1999, 2002).  Evidence also suggests that DBT adaptations are successful in treating people diagnosed with BPD. Soler and colleagues (2009) found a 13-week DBT skills-only intervention to be more successful in reducing problematic emotions than a psychodynamically informed standard group therapy (SGT) for participants meeting diagnostic criteria for BPD.  Bohus and colleagues (2004) compared a 12-week inpatient DBT adaptation with TAU for females diagnosed with BPD who reported a history of suicidal behavior. In a self-harming subsample, significantly more patients in DBT than in TAU abstained from NSSI at posttreatment (62 vs. 31%). Roepke and colleagues (2011) also found that a 12-week inpatient course of DBT resulted in significant improvement in depression and self-esteem when compared to TAU for women diagnosed with BPD.  Beyond BPD, studies have demonstrated the effectiveness of DBT with older depressed adults (Lynch et al., 2007; Lynch, Morse, Mendelson, & Robins, 2003), with adults with binge-eating disorder (Safer & Joyce, 2011; Safer, Robinson, & Jo, 2010), with suicidal adolescents (Barnoski, 2002; Katz, Cox, Gunasekara, & Miller, 2004; McDonell et al., 2010; Rathus & Miller,  2002) and suicidal college students (Pistorello, Fruzzetti, MacLane, Gallop, & Iverson, 2012), and with adults with a cluster B personality disorder (Feigenbaum et al., 2012).  eviDeNce for DBt as aN effective treatMeNt for eMotioN DysreGulatioN  As noted earlier, many mental disorders, including BPD, can be conceptualized as disorders of emotion regulation with deficits in both emotion up-regulation and down-regulation. For example, theorists have proposed that MDD should be conceptualized as an emotion dysregulation disorder based partly on a deficit in up-regulating and maintaining positive emotions (see Kring & Bachorowski, 1999, for a review). Similarly, literature reviews have demonstrated that anxiety disorders, schizophrenia, and even bipolar disorders are directly linked to emotion dysregulation (Kring & Werner, 2004). Once one realizes that emotions include both actions and action tendencies, one can see the link between emotion dysregulation and many disorders defined as behavior dyscontrol (e.g., substance dependence). As previously discussed, difficulties with emotion dysregulation, similar to those seen in BPD, are common in other disorders. Specifically problems with recognizing emotions, describing and labeling emotions, knowing what to do when an emotion is on the scene, and emotional avoidance are common in many Axis I disorders. Therefore, an important theoretical premise in DBT is that people who exhibit emotion dysregulation lack the skills needed for successful regulation. DBT includes a set of skills aimed at improving emotion regulation in BPD in particular, and in people who report emotion dysregulation in general.  An increasing number of RCTs suggest that DBT skills training alone is a promising intervention for a variety of populations (see Table 10.1). The majority of these studies offered only the skills training component of DBT. Therefore, although skills training was originally developed to be part of a comprehensive intervention, the number of studies suggests that DBT skills training by itself can be a successful intervention for a variety of populations with emotion regulation difficulties. Furthermore, DBT skills use (the product of skills training) has been shown to be an active mechanism of change for emotion regulation outcomes in treatment for BPD (Neacsiu, Rizvi, & Linehan, 2010).   table 10.1. table of randomized Control trials and Controlled trials for dbt  Emotion regula- DBT variant General out-tion outcomes Study inclusion Study exclusion Citation Design Methodology N/condition offered comes reported reported criteria criteria  401  Barnoski Controlled DBT vs. TAU (his-DBT = 42 rDBT (stan-DBT < TAU None Adolescents at a None  (2002) trial torical controls), TAU = 116 dard)—1 year in number of juvenile rehabili12- month FU reconvictions for tation institution assessment a felony offense in the 12 months following discharge   Bohus et al. RCT iDBT-PTSD vs. iDBT-PTSD iDBT adapted iDBT-PTSD None Females 17–65 Schizophrenia,  (2013) TAU-WL; assess-= 36 for PTSD—3 > TAU-WL in years old, mental retardation, ments at pre- and TAU-WL months PTSD remis-referred for requiring immediposttreatment and = 38 sion and PTSD childhood sexual ate other treatment, at 6-week FU interview and abuse recent life-threatenself- report ing suicide attempt, assessments medical condition contraindicated for exposure  Bohus et al. RCT iDBT vs. WL + iDBT = 40 Inpatient DBT iDBT > TAU on DBT = TAU on Female, BPD, Lifetime schizo   (2004) TAU; assessments TAU = 20 (iDBT)—3 abstinence from anger; DBT > suicide attempt phrenia, mental at pre- and post-months NSSI (62% vs. TAU on decrease (SA) or two retardation, bipolar treatment; at 1- and 31%) in depression and NSSI episodes in I, current substance 3-month FU anxiety last 2 years abuse  Bradley & RCT DBT-ST vs. no DBT-ST DBT-ST adapted No significant DBT-ST > con-Self-reported None  Follingstad treatment (con-= 24 differences trol in decrease childhood abuse  (2003) trol)—9 weeks Control = 25 between condi-in depression and significant tions across and trauma and trauma symp-depression toms  Carter et al. RCT DBT vs. TAU + DBT = 38 DBT (stan-DBT = TAU in None Female, BPD, Not a fi t/unmoti   (2010) WL; assessments TAU + WL dard)—6 months NSSI, hospital 18–65; mul-vated, presence of at pretreatment, = 35 admissions or tiple episodes a disabling organic 3 months, and 6 length of stay in of NSSI, at least condition, schizomonths hospital, quality three in the last phrenia, bipolar of life, disability year disorder, psychotic depression, florid antisocial behavior, developmental disability   (continued)   table 10.1. (continued)  Emotion regula- DBT variant General out-tion outcomes Study inclusion Study exclusion Citation Design Methodology N/condition offered comes reported reported criteria criteria  402  Cavanaugh, RCT Dialectical psycho-DPEW = 28 DBT-ST modi-DPEW > AMW DPEW > AMW Males, 18 or None Solomon, & educational work-AMW = 27 fi ed for interper-(at postreat-(at postreatment) older, never Gelles (2011) shop (DPEW) vs. sonal violence ment) in adaptive in anger manage-engaged in inti   anger management (DPEW)—8 coping skills, ment skills mate partner vioworkshop (AMW); weeks empathy skills, lence, endorsed assessments at pre- and in decreas-violent urges and posttreatment ing potential risk  for interpersonal violence  Clarkin, Levy, RCT DBT vs. TFP DBT = 17 DBT (stan-DBT = TFP = DBT = TFP = BPD, 18–50 Comorbid psychotic Lenzenweger, vs. supportive TFP = 23 dard)—1 year ST in improving ST in improving disorders, bipolar I & Kernberg treatment (ST); ST = 22 adapted to global function-depression and disorder, delusional (2007) assessments at include medica-ing and social anxiety; TFP = disorder, delirium,  pretreatment, 4, 8, tion management adjustment; TFP ST (not DBT) in dementia, amnestic  and 12 months = DBT (not ST) reducing anger and other cognitive in reducing sui-and impulsivity; disorders; active subcidality (analyses only TFP signifi -stance dependence only included cantly changed people with ≥ 3 irritability and assessments) assault behaviors  Courbasson, RCT DBT vs. TAU; TAU = 8 DBT (stan-DBT < TAU in DBT posttreat-Women ≥ 18; any Organic brain Nishikawa, & assessments at DBT = 13 dard)—1 year dropout; DBT ment > pretreat-eating disorder syndrome; mental Dixon (2012) pretreatment, 3, 6, posttreatment > ment in ability and substance retardation;  9, 12, 15, and 18 pretreatment in to cope and abuse/ depen-psychosis; and months (last two dysfunctional regulate negative dence, agreed chronic suicidality; are FU time points) eating behaviors emotions not to change in treatment for an  and attitudes; medication eating disorder or severity and use substance use of substances  Evershed et al. Controlled rDBT vs. TAU; rDBT = 8 Residential DBT > TAU in DBT > TAU in Male, inpatient None  (2003) trial assessments at TAU = 9 DBT adapted seriousness of self-reported in a high security pre-, mid-, and for forensic violence inci-hostility and hospital, havposttreatment, and sample—18 dents anger ing borderline at 6-month FU months features  Feigenbaum et RCT DBT vs. TAU; DBT = 26 DBT (stan-DBT < TAU in DBT = TAU in Age range = Extensive forensic  al. (2012) assessments at TAU = 16 dard)—1 year decrease of self-aggression, anger 18–65, diag-history that suggests pretreatment, 6 rated risk expression, nosed with a immediate danger to months, and 1 year   behavior depression, irri-cluster B person-others; schizophre- DBT = TAU in tability (signifi -ality disorder nia, bipolar disorder; NSSI reductions, cant decrease in primary substance use of services both conditions) use disorder, severe  cognitive impairment  Harley et RCT TAU + DBT-ST vs. TAU + DBT-ST group See next column TAU + DBT-ST Diagnosis of BPD, bipolar,  al. (2008); TAU + WL; assess-DBT-ST intervention > TAU + WL depression, psychotic spectrum  Feldman et al. ments at pre- and = 13 adapted for treat-at improving 18–65, on stable disorders, active  (2009) posttreatment and TAU + WL ment-resistant depression from medication substance abuse/ at a 6-month FU = 11 depression—16 Week 0 to Week dependence, mental weeks 16 retardation, pervasive developmental disorder, active suicidality, unstable medical conditions, exposure to CBT  Hill, Craig-RCT DBT-AF vs. WL DBT-AF DBT-ST—modi-DBT-AF = WL DBT-AF > WL Recent BED Male, 18 or older,  head, & Safer = 18 fi ed for AF in improvement in decreasing behavior, vomit-current diagnosis of  (2011) WL = 14 in number of depression, emo-ing as primary anorexia nervosa, bingeing and tion dysregula-compensatory in psychotherapy, purging episodes tion behavior. Stable current suicidal psychotropic ideation, substance medication. dependence, present psychosis  Hirvikoski et RCT DBT-ST vs. DBT-ST Adapted DBT-DBT-ST = Con-None Meets diagnos-Substance abuse;  al. (2011) loosely structured = 26 ST for Swedish trol in satisfac-tic criteria for IQ ≤ 70; diagnosed discussion group Control = 25 population—14 tion ADHD, adult, brain injury; autism (control) sessions on stable dose of spectrum disorder; medication suicidality; homelessness; severe depression, psychosis, or bipolar without stable medication  Katz et al. Controlled rDBT vs. TAU rDBT = 31 rDBT—average rDBT < TAU rDBT = TAU Inpatients, 14–17, Mental retardation,  (2004) trial residential unit; TAU = 31 stay = 18 days in incidents in depression admitted for sui-psychosis, bipolar assessments at pre- on the ward; reduction and cide attempts, or disorder, severe and posttreatment rDBT = TAU hopelessness suicidal ideation learning disability and at 1-year FU in emergency (significant room visits and decrease in both hospitalizations conditions) after discharge; in NSSI, and in suicidal ideation  (continued)  403   table 10.1. (continued)  Emotion regula- DBT variant General out-tion outcomes Study inclusion Study exclusion Citation Design Methodology N/condition offered comes reported reported criteria criteria  404  Koons et al. RCT DBT vs. TAU DBT = 10 DBT (stan-DBT < TAU in DBT > TAU on Women veterans, Schizophrenia,  (2001) TAU = 10 dard)—6 months NSSI, hospital-hopelessness, BPD bipolar, substance izations, suicidal depression, anger dependence and ideation, and suppression, and antisocial personality dissociation expression disorder  Koons et al. RCT DBT vs. TAU; DBT = 10 DBT (stan-Trend for DBT DBT > TAU Women veterans, Schizophrenia,  (2006) assessments at TAU = 10 dard)—6 months to reduce NSSI in reduction of BPD bipolar disorder, subpretreatment, 3, more than TAU depression (self-stance dependence, and 6 months (p < .10), DBT = report) and hope-antisocial personality TAU on reduc-lessness; DBT = disorder tion of services TAU in reduction use; DBT > TAU of depression in reduction of (interview), suicidal ideation anxiety, anger suppression; DBT > TAU in reduction of anger expression  Linehan et al. RCT DBT vs. TAU; DBT = 22 DBT (stan-DBT > TAU in DBT = TAU BPD, women, Lifetime psychotic  (1991, 1993, assessments every TAU = 22 dard)—1 year reducing risk for in reduction of 18–45 with disorder, lifetime  1994) 4 months, includ-suicidal behavior depression and current and past bipolar disorder, ing during a 1-year and decreasing hopelessness suicidal behavior mental retardation, FU use of services; (significant (at least one epi-seizure disorder DBT < TAU in decrease in both sode in the last 8 requiring medicareducing drop-conditions) weeks) tion, mandate to out; DBT = TAU treatment, need for in decreasing primary treatment suicidal ideation for a debilitating condition  Linehan et al. RCT DBT vs. TAU; DBT = 12 DBT (stan-DBT > TAU in DBT = TAU in BPD, female, Psychotic disorder,  (1999) assessments every TAU = 16 dard)—1 year substance abuse anger outcomes current drug bipolar disorder, 4 months; 4 month (significant dependence mental retardation FU decrease in both)  Linehan et al. RCT DBT + LAAM vs. DBT = 11 DBT (stan-DBT participants None Females 18–45, Bipolar disorder,  (2002) comprehensive CVT-12S dard)—1 year maintained BPD, with psychosis, seizure validation therapy = 12 reductions in current opiate disorder, mental with 12-step (CVT-opiate use dependence retardation,   405  12s) + LAAM; throughout the assessments 12-month treatevery 4 months, ment; CVT-12S including one FU participants assessment attained the  same reductions but increased their use of opiates in the last 4 months; similar decreases in psychopathology   Linehan et RCT DBT vs. commu-DBT = 52 DBT (stan-DBT < CTBE in al. (2006); nity treatment by CTBE = 49 dard)—1 year suicide attempts, Harned et experts (CTBE); use of crisis seral. (2008); assessments every vices, dropout; Bedics, Atkins, 4 months and dur-DBT led to a Comtois, & ing a 1-year FU significant reduc- Linehan (2012) tion in substance  use disorders; DBT = CTBE in reduction of suicidal ideation, remission from major depression, anxiety, and eating disorders; DBT > CTBE in introject affi liation increases  Linehan et al. RCT DBT + placebo vs. DBT + pla-DBT (stan-Placebo > olan   (2008) DBT + olanzapine cebo = 12 dard)—6 months zapine in reduc- DBT + tion of NSSI olanzapine = 12  DBT = CTBE in reduction of depression (significant decrease in both conditions; DBT showed signifi cant change in self-affi rming, self-loving, selfprotecting, and less self-attacking through treatment and FU; CTBE showed signifi cant treatment interaction for therapist affi rm/ therapist protect  Olanzapine was faster than placebo at reducing irritability and physical aggression   BPD, women, 18–45 with current and past suicidal behavior (at least one episode in the last 8 weeks)  18–60, BPD, dysregulated anger, scored high on irritability   pregnancy, medical condition for which the use of opiate replacement medication was contraindicated, indications of treatment coercion  Lifetime psychotic disorder, lifetime bipolar disorder, mental retardation, seizure disorder requiring medication, mandate to treatment, need for primary treatment for a debilitating condition  Schizophrenia, bipolar I, schizoaffective, psychotic disorder, mental retardation, seizure disorder, substance dependence within last 6 month. NSSI in the prior 8 weeks from screening, pregnant  (continued)   table 10.1. (continued)  406  Emotion regula- DBT variant General out-tion outcomes Study inclusion Study exclusion Citation Design Methodology N/condition offered comes reported reported criteria criteria  Lynch et al. RCT 8-week medication DBT + DBT (stan-DBT + MED None Over 55 years of Bipolar disorder,  (2007) trial followed by MED = 21 dard)—6 months achieves remis-age; meets cri-psychotic symptoms, RCT for nonre-MED = 14 sion from major teria for at least signs of cognitive sponders: standard depressive dis-one personality impairment, current DBT + medication order faster than disorder; scores ECT (DBT-MED) vs. MED only high on depresmedication only sion (MED); assessments at pretreatment, 2, 6, 9, and 15 months  Lynch et al. RCT Antidepres-MED = 15 DBT-ST adapta-Remission from Self-reported Current MDD, Bipolar disorder,  (2003) sants (MED) vs. DBT-ST + tion (skills depression (DBT depression (DBT age 60+; scores psychotic symptoms, DBT-ST + MED; MED = 16 and 30-minute > MED) gap > MED) high on two signs of cognitive assessments at phone coach-even wider at depression impairment, current pretreatment, ing/week)—7 FU; dependency measures ECT posttreatment, and months & adaptive cop6- month FU ing improved in  DBT only  McDonell et Controlled rDBT vs. residen-rDBT = 106 rDBT (varied With DBT, sig-None Youth ages Admissions for legal al. (2010) trial tial TAU (historical TAU = 104 intensity of DBT nifi cantly fewer 12–17 competence restoramatches) therapy in resi-NSSI episodes tion  dential setting) during 1 year of treatment than with TAU  McMain et al. RCT DBT vs. general DBT = 90 DBT (stan-DBT = GPM in DBT = GPM BPD, ages Psychotic disorder,  (2009) psychiatric man-GPM = 90 dard)—1 year decreasing sui-in decreasing 18–60, at least bipolar I disorder, agement (GPM); cidal behavior, depression, two episodes of delirium, dementia, assessments every use of crisis ser-anger, symptom suicidal or NSSI mental retarda4 months and dur-vices (significant distress (signifi -episodes in the tion, substance ing 1-month FU decrease in both cant decrease in past 5 years, dependence in the  conditions) both conditions) at least one of last month, mediwhich was in the cal condition that 3 months preced-precluded psychiatric ing enrollment medications, serious  medical condition, plans to leave in the next 2 years   Neacsiu, RCT 16-week DBT-DBT-ST DBT-ST con-DBT-ST= ASG DBT-ST >ASG Adults, ages Current psychotic Eberle, ST vs. 16-week = 22 densed to 16 in improvements in improvements 18–65, high disorder, Bipolar Kramer, Activities Support ASG = 22 weeks in depression in diffi culties emotion I, BPD, had DBT Weismann, & Group (ASG); severity; DBT-with emotion dysregulation, before, mandated to Linehan (2013) assessment every 2 ST > ASG in regulation and meets criteria for treatment, severe sui   months including a improvements in affect control a DSM-IV-TR cidality, not willing  2-month FU anxiety severity, DBT-ST = ASG diagnosis for a to discontinue ancilincrease in skills in alexithymia depressive or lary psychotherapy use decrease anxiety disorder  Pistorello et al. RCT DBT vs. supervi-DBT = 31 DBT (stan-DBT > SBE in DBT > SBE Ages 18–25, Psychosis, had indi   (2012) sion by experts in SBE = 32 dard)—7 months decreasing NSSI, in decreasing current suicidal vidual or group DBT psychodynamic to 1 year use of psychotro-depression (self-ideation, past treatment (SBE); pic medication, report) history of at least assessment every 3 and suicidality one NSSI or one months and during and in increasing suicide attempt 6-month FU quality of life  Rakfeldt Controlled rDBT vs. no treat-rDBT = 7 rDBT adapted rDBT = Control None Living in the None  (2005) trial ment—17 weeks; Control = 8 to include two in functioning young adult serassessments at pre- 1-hour skills ses-index; rDBT vices residential and posttreatment sions/ week > Control in program; has  interpersonal serious emorelationships, tional distursocial networks, bance intentionality, and global functioning   Rathus & Controlled rDBT vs. TAU rDBT = 29 rDBT DBT > TAU None Adolescents in None  Miller (2002) trial (assignment to TAU = 82 adapted—12 in reducing DBT: suicide TAU for less severe weeks, twice psychiatric attempt in last clients) weekly hospitalizations 16 weeks, at  DBT = TAU in least three BPD suicide attempts criteria (1 in DBT, 7 in TAU)  Roepke et al. Controlled iDBT vs. WL + iDBT = 40 iDBT—3 months DBT > TAU in With DBT, Female, BPD Lifetime diagnosis  (2011) trial TAU; assessments TAU = 20 increasing self-significant of schizophrenia, at pretreatment and esteem improvement in bipolar I or II, subat 10 weeks depression; with stance abuse within  TAU, no change last 6 months, mental in depression retardation  (continued)  407   408  table 10.1. (continued)  Emotion regula- DBT variant General out-tion outcomes Study inclusion Study exclusion Citation Design Methodology N/condition offered comes reported reported criteria criteria  Safer, Telch, & RCT DBT-ST vs. WL DBT-ST DBT-ST—20 DBT > WL at Ages 18–65, at None Agras (2001) = 14 weeks significantly least one binge–  WL = 15 reducing rates of purge episode bingeing–purg-per week ing  Safer, Rob-RCT (DBT-ST BED) vs. DBT-ST DBT skills DBT-ST BED = No differences Men and women Body mass index < inson, & Jo active comparison BED = 50 training adapted ACGT in binge-in emotion-regu-over age 18; 17.5 kg/m2; in psy( 2010); Safer group therapy ACGT = 51 for BED (DBT-ing abstinence lation measures, binge-eating chotherapy; unstable & Joyce (2011) (ACGT)—20 ST BED)—20 posttreatment eating-related disorder; within medications; regular  weekly sessions; weeks (64% in DBT and depression, commuting use of compensaassessments at pre- 36% in ACGT); anxiety or anger, distance from tory behaviors; and posttreatment, DBT < ACGT in depression, or study psychosis; current and at 3-, 6-, and binge days post-self-esteem alcohol/drug abuse or 12-month FU treatment but not dependence; severe  at FU; moder-depression with ate effect size suicide attempts; use favoring DBT for of weight-altering self-reports on medications; severe restraining and medical condition; eating concerns; current pregnancy or DBT more likely breast feeding; planto produce rapid ning gastric bypass responders who do better at FU  Salbach-RCT 25 weeks CBT vs. CBT = 19 DBT adapted for 57.9% in CBT, Small positive AN or BN ado-Unable to speak/ Andrae et al. 25 weeks DBT-DBT-AN/ adolescents with 62.5% in DBT-effect sizes in lescent females understand German; (2009) AN/BN vs. 12 BN = 16 anorexia/bulimia AN/BN, and emotion regula-(ages 12–21), IQ psychotic disorder  weeks waitlist WL = 15 nervosa 0% in waitlist tion >85  remitted from  DSM-IV-TR  criteria for eating  disorders; DBT-  AN/BN= CBT   > WL in calorie avoidance, meal frequency, and psychological distress  409  Soler et al. RCT DBT-ST + placebo DBT-ST+ DBT– ST Olanzepine > Olanzapine BPD, ages None  (2005) vs. DBT-ST + placebo = 30 adapted—12 placebo in reduc-< placebo in 18–45, no Axis olanzapine DBT-ST + weeks, with ing weight gain frequency of I disorder, high olanzapine phone coaching and cholesterol impulsivity clinical severity, = 30 added levels; olanz-and aggressive not in psychoepine = placebo behavior. olan-therapy in decreases of zapine > placebo psychopathology in decreasing depression and anxiety  Soler et al. RCT DBT-ST vs. DBT-ST DBT-ST See next column DBT > SGT in BPD, ages Schizophrenia,  (2009) sychodynamically = 29 adapted—3 reductions of 18–45, Clinical drug-induced psyoriented standard SGT = 30 months depression, anxi-Global Impres-chosis, organic brain group therapy ety, irritability, sion of Severity syndrome, substance (SGT); assess-anger, and affect score = 4, no dependence, bipolar, ments every 2 instability current psycho-mental retardation, weeks therapy current depression  Telch, Agras, RCT DBT-ST vs. WL; DBT-ST DBT skills train-DBT = WL on DBT women Females, ages Current psycho   & Linehan assessments at pre- = 22 ing adapted for all outcomes reported less 18–65, meet cri-therapy, weight loss  (2001) and posttreatment WL = 22 BED desire to eat teria diagnostic program, or using and at 6-month FU when angry criteria for BED psychotropic medication; current substance use disorder, current suicidality, psychosis, pregnancy  Trupin, Stew-Controlled rDBT vs. TAU; rDBT = 45 rDBT—variable Behavioral None Adolescents in None  art, Beach, & trial assessments pre TAU = 45 length problems signifi -a Washington  Boesky (2002) and posttreatment cantly decreased State JRA, in in DBT cottages three different but not in TAU cottages cottage  (continued)   TABLE 10.1. (continued)   Emotion regula- DBT variant General out-tion outcomes Study inclusion Study exclusion Citation Design Methodology N/condition offered comes reported reported criteria criteria  410  Turner (2000) RCT DBT vs. TAU; DBT = 12 DBT (stanassessments at 6 TAU = 12 dard)—1 and 12 months year, adapted to reduce therapy time and incorporate psychodynamic techniques  Van den Bosch RCT DBT vs. TAU; DBT = 27 DBT (stanet al. (2002); assessments at TAU = 31 dard)—1 year Verheul et al. pretreatment, at (2003) 11, 22, 33, 44, and  52 weeks, and at 18-month FU  Van Dijk, RCT DBT-ST vs. WL DBT-ST DBT-ST adapted Jeffrey, & Katz = 13 for bipolar disor( 2013) WL = 13 ders—12 weeks  DBT > TAU in mental health functioning; DBT > TAU in amount of suicidal behavior, although signifi cant improvement in both  DBT < TAU in reducing suicide attempts (DBT = 2, TAU = 8); NSSI signifi cantly decreased in DBT and increased in TAU; effects moderated by severity of suicidal behavior; DBT = TAU in substance use  DBT-ST=WL in reducing depression, mindfulness (both improved)  DBT = TAU in BPD, willing to Schizophrenia, improvement be randomized schizoaffective, bipoof emotional lar, organic mental functioning disorder, and/or  mental retardation  DBT > TAU in BPD, female; Psychotic disorder, reducing impul-ages 18–70 bipolar disorder, sive acts mental retardation;  not living in the area  DBT-ST=WL in BPD, age 18 or Currently in a manic improving affect older state, developmencontrol (both tal delay, ongoing improved) violent or aggressive  behaviors, unable to  understand English   411  Waltz et al. RCT DBT skills video N = 30 DBT video on Of those who DBT video view-18 or older, Previous formal DBT  (2009) vs. control (infor-“opposite action” participated in ers showed sig-literate, BPD, experience, actively mational video), the FU, 80% had nifi cant decrease IQ > 90, aware psychotic alternating viewing used opposite in emotional of diagnosis, in order action at least intensity. treatment  once  Wasser, Tyler, Controlled rDBT vs. STM Primary: rDBT adapted STM > rDBT DBT = STM Adolescents at None McIlhaney, trial (Standard Thera-rDBT = 7 due to lack for psychomo-in reducing KidsPeace Taplin, & Hen-peutic Milieu); STM = 7 of resources tor excitation at depression derson (2008) one primary match Secondary: (conducted by discharge; rDBT (both reduced it  (exact match on rDBT = 12 non-DBT clini-> STM psycho-significantly). age, gender, & STM = 12 cians) pathology having an Axis I disorder), one secondary match (similar match in age, gender)  Wolf et al. RCT DBT-ST vs. DBT-DBT-ST DBT-ST—6 DBT-ST + CBST None BPD, in therapy Schizophrenia,  (2011) ST + Computer-= 11 months with or > DBT-ST in current substance Based Skills DBT-ST + without adjunct improvement of dependence, severe Training (CBST) CBST = 13 CD-ROM–based skills acquisition cognitive dysfunction self-help pro-and knowledge gram  Note. > denotes signifi cantly greater than; < denotes signifi cantly less than; = denotes no signifi cant difference between; AF, appetite-focused; FU, follow-up; iDBT, inpatient DBT; RCT, randomized controlled trial; TAU, treatment as usual; TFP, transference-focused psychotherapy; WL, wait list; NSSI, nonsuicidal self-injury; LAAM, levomethadyl acetate hydrochloride; PTSD, posttraumatic stress disorder; rDBT, residential DBT; ECT, electroconvulsive therapy; DBT-ST, DBT skills training; DBT-ST BED, DBT-ST for binge-eating disorder; ADHD, attention-defi cit/hyperactivity disorder.   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  DBt: treatMeNt overview  Philosophical Basis: Dialectics  The term “dialectics” as applied to behavior therapy refers both to a fundamental nature of reality and to a method of persuasive dialogue and relationship. (See Wells [1972, cited in Kegan, 1982] for documentation of a shift toward dialectical approaches across all the sciences during the last 150 years; more recently, Peng & Nisbett [1999] discussed both Western and Eastern dialectical thought.) As a worldview or philosophical position, dialectics guides the clinician in developing theoretical hypotheses relevant to the client’s problems and to the treatment. Alternatively, as dialogue and relationship, “dialectics” refers to the treatment approach or strategies used by the therapist to effect change. Thus, central to DBT are a number of therapeutic dialectical strategies.  Dialectics as a Worldview  DBT is based on a dialectical worldview that emphasizes wholeness, interrelatedness, and process (change) as fundamental characteristics of reality. The first characteristic, the Principle of Interrelatedness and Wholeness, provides a perspective of viewing the system as a whole and how people relate to the system, rather than seeing people as if they exist in isolation. Similar to contextual and systems theories, a dialectical view argues that analysis of parts of any system is of limited value unless the analysis clearly relates the part to the whole. The second characteristic is the Principle of Polarity. Although dialectics focuses on the whole, it also emphasizes the complexity of any whole. Thus, dialectics asserts that reality is nonreducible; that is, within each single thing or system, no matter how small, there is polarity. For example, physicists are unable to reduce even the smallest of molecules to one thing. Where there is matter, there is antimatter; even every atom is made up of both protons and electrons: A polar opposite is always present. The opposing forces are referred to as the “thesis” and “antithesis,” present in all existence. Dialectics suggests that the thesis and antithesis move toward a “synthesis,” and inherent in the synthesis will be a new set of opposing forces. It is from these opposing forces that the third characteristic is developed. This characteristic of the dialectical perspective refers to the Principle of Continuous Change. Change is produced through the constant synthesis of the thesis and the an   tithesis, and because new opposing forces are present within the synthesis, change is ongoing. These dialectical principles are inherent in every aspect of DBT and allow for continuous movement throughout the therapy process. A very important dialectical idea is that all propositions contain within them their own oppositions. Or, as Goldberg (1980, pp. 295–296) put it, “I assume that truth is paradoxical, that each article of wisdom contains within it its own contradictions, that truths stand side by side. Contradictory truths do not necessarily cancel each other out or dominate each other, but stand side by side, inviting participation and experimentation.” One way that client and therapist address this is by repeatedly asking: “What is being left out?” This simple question can assist in finding a synthesis and letting go of an absolute truth, a nondialectical stance.  Dialectics as Persuasion  From the point of view of dialogue and relationship, dialectics refers to change by persuasion and by making use of the oppositions inherent in the therapeutic relationship rather than by formal impersonal logic. Through the therapeutic opposition of contradictory positions, both client and therapist can arrive at new meanings within old meanings, moving closer to the essence of the subject under consideration. The spirit of a dialectical point of view is never to accept a proposition as a final truth or an undisputable fact. Thus, the question addressed by both client and therapist is “What is being left out of our understanding?” Dialectics as persuasion is represented in the specific dialectical strategies we describe later in this chapter. As readers will see, when we discuss the consultation strategies, dialectical dialogue is also very important in therapist consultation meetings. Perhaps more than any other factor, attention to dialectics can reduce the chances of what psychodynamic therapists have labeled “staff splitting,” that is, the frequent phenomenon of therapists’ disagreeing or arguing (sometimes vehemently) about how to treat and interact with an individual client who has BPD. This “splitting” among staff members is often due to one or more factions within the staff deciding that they (and sometimes they alone) know the truth about a particular client or clinical problem.  Dialectical Case Conceptualization  Dialectical assumptions influence case conceptualization in DBT in a number of ways. First, dialectics   Borderline Personality Disorder  suggests that a psychological disorder is best conceptualized as a systemic dysfunction characterized by  (1) defining the disorder with respect to normal functioning, (2) assuming continuity between health and the disorder, and (3) assuming that the disorder results from multiple rather than single causes (Hollandsworth, 1990). Similarly, Linehan’s biosocial theory of BPD assumes that BPD represents a breakdown in normal functioning, and that this disorder is best conceptualized as a systemic dysfunction of the emotion regulation system. The theory proposes that the pathogenesis of BPD results from numerous factors: Some are genetic–biological predispositions that create individual differences in susceptibility to emotion dysregulation, known as “emotion vulnerability”; others result from the individual’s interaction with the environment, referred to as the “invalidating environment.” Assuming a systemic view compels the theorist to integrate work from a variety of fields and disciplines. A second dialectical assumption that underlies the biosocial theory is that the relationship between the individual and the environment is a transaction between the person and the environment. Within social learning theory, this is the principle of “reciprocal determinism.” Besides focusing on reciprocal influence, a transactional view also highlights the constant state of flux and change of the individual–environment system. Therefore, BPD can occur in multiple environments and families, including chaotic, perfect, and even ordinary families.  Both transactional and interactive models, such as the diathesis–stress model of psychopathology, call attention to the role of dysfunctional environments in bringing about disorder in the vulnerable individual. A transactional model, however, highlights a number of points that are easy to overlook in an interactive diathesis–stress model. For example, a person (Person A) may act in a manner stressful to an individual (Person B) only because of the stress Person B is putting on Person A. Take the child who, due to an accident, requires most of the parents’ free time just to meet survival needs. Or consider the client who, due to the need for constant suicide precautions, uses up much of the inpatient nursing resources. Both of these environments are stretched in their ability to respond well to further stress. Both may invalidate or temporarily blame the victim if any further demand on the system is made. Although the system (e.g., the family or the therapeutic milieu) may have been predisposed to respond dysfunctionally in any case, such responses  may have been avoided in the absence of exposure to the stress of that particular individual. A transactional, or dialectical, account of psychopathology may allow greater compassion because it is incompatible with the assignment of blame, by highlighting the reality of the situation rather than judgments about each person. This is particularly relevant with a label as stigmatized among mental health professionals as “borderline” (for examples of the misuse of the diagnosis, see Reiser & Levenson, 1984).  A final assumption in our discussion regards the definition of behavior and the implications of defining behavior broadly. Linehan’s theory, and behaviorists in general, take “behavior” to mean anything an organism does involving action and responding to stimulation (Merriam-Webster’s New Universal Unabridged Dictionary, 1983, p. 100). Conventionally, behaviorists categorize behavior as motor, cognitive/verbal, and physiological, all of which may be either public or private. There are several points to make here. First, dividing behavior into these three categories is arbitrary and is done for conceptual clarity rather than in response to evidence that these response modes actually are functionally separate systems. This point is especially relevant to understanding emotion regulation given that basic research on emotions demonstrates that these response systems are sometimes overlapping, somewhat independent, but definitely not wholly independent, thus remaining consistent with the dialectical worldview. A related point here is that in contrast to biological and cognitive theories of BPD, biosocial theory suggests that there is no a priori reason for favoring explanations emphasizing one mode of behavior as intrinsically more important or compelling than others. Rather, from a biosocial perspective, the crucial questions are under what conditions a given behavior– behavior relationship or response system–response system relationship holds, and under what conditions these relationships enter causal pathways for the etiology and maintenance of BPD.  Biosocial theory  Emotion Dysregulation  Linehan’s biosocial theory suggests that BPD is primarily a dysfunction of the emotion regulation system. Behavioral patterns in BPD are functionally related to or are unavoidable consequences of this fundamental   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  dysregulation across several, perhaps all, emotions, including both positive and negative emotions. From Linehan’s point of view, this dysfunction of the emotion regulation system is the core pathology; thus, it is neither simply symptomatic nor definitional. Emotion dysregulation is a product of the combination of emotional vulnerability and difficulties in modulating emotional reactions. Emotional vulnerability is conceptualized as high sensitivity to emotional stimuli, intense emotional responses, and a slow return to emotional baseline. Deficits in emotion modulation may be due to difficulties in  (1) inhibiting mood-dependent behaviors; (2) organizing behavior in the service of goals, independently of current mood; (3) increasing or decreasing physiological arousal as needed; (4) distracting attention from emotionally evocative stimuli; and/or (5) experiencing emotion without either immediately withdrawing or producing an extreme secondary negative emotion (see Crowell, Beauchaine, & Linehan, 2009, for a further discussion). Conceptually, the deficit in the emotion regulation system leads to not only immense emotional suffering but also multiple behavioral problems in people diagnosed with BPD. When clinicians’ ratings of characteristics associated with psychopathology are examined, tendencies toward being chronically anxious and unhappy, depressed, or despondent are the most highly descriptive of the BPD (Bradley, Zittel, & Westen, 2005). Dysfunction leads the individual to attempt to escape aversive emotions, often leading to further suffering. For example, a female client experiencing intense anger after a fight with her partner may, in an effort to escape the anger, engage in cutting behaviors. She begins to feel relief from her anger for a short period of time. However, once her anger begins to subside, shame in response to the cutting behavior begins to increase and the cycle of emotion escape behavior continues. Although the mechanisms of the initial dysregulation remain unclear, it is likely that biological factors play a primary role. Siever and Davis (1991) hypothesized that deficits in emotion regulation for clients with BPD are related to both instability and hyperresponsiveness of catecholamine function. The etiology of this dysregulation may range from genetic influences to prenatal factors, to traumatic childhood events affecting development of the brain and nervous system. Furthermore, adoption studies of monozygotic (MZ) twins (Davison & Neale, 1994) suggest a genetic vulnerability. However, researchers do not claim that genetic or biologi   cal factors account for all pathology. If pathology were solely determined by genetics, then 100% of the MZ twins would presumably share the same pathology. Because this does not occur, we can explain the differences through the transactions between biology, as described earlier, and the environment.  Invalidating Environments  Most people with an initial temperamental vulnerability to emotion dysregulation do not develop BPD. Thus, the theory suggests further that particular developmental environments are necessary. The crucial developmental circumstance in Linehan’s theory is the transaction between emotion vulnerability and the presence of the “invalidating environment” (Linehan, 1987,1993a), which is defined by its tendency to negate, punish, and/ or respond erratically and inappropriately to private experiences, independent of the validity of the actual behavior. Private experiences, and especially emotional experiences and interpretations of events, are not taken as valid responses to events by others; are punished, trivialized, dismissed, or disregarded; and/or are attributed to socially unacceptable characteristics, such as over reactivity, inability to see things realistically, lack of motivation, motivation to harm or manipulate, lack of discipline, or failure to adopt a positive (or, conversely, discriminating) attitude. The invalidating environment can be any part of an individual’s social environment, including immediate or extended family, school, work, or community. Within each of these environments are even more specific idiosyncrasies that may impact the environment, such as birth order, years between siblings, teachers and peers, and/or coworkers. It is important to note that because two children grew up in the same home does not mean that they were raised in identical environments. Furthermore, people are often not aware of their invalidating behaviors and are not acting with a malicious intent.  There are three primary characteristics of the invalidating environment. First, the environment indiscriminately rejects communication of private experiences and self-generated behaviors. For example, a person may be told, “You are so angry, but you won’t admit it” or “You can’t be hungry, you just ate.” Second, the invalidating environment may punish emotional displays and intermittently reinforce emotional escalation. For example, a woman breaks up with her partner and is feeling depressed. Her friends and family begin tell    Borderline Personality Disorder  ing her “Get over it,” “He wasn’t worth it,” and “Don’t feel sad.” Over the course of the next week, she becomes more depressed and is beginning to withdraw from daily activities. Again, her environment responds in an invalidating manner. Finally after another 3 days of high emotional arousal she makes a suicide attempt. At that moment the environment jumps in and provides support by taking care of her. Unfortunately, this type of pattern often results in inadvertent reinforcement of extreme dysfunctional behavior. Finally, the invalidating environment may oversimplify the ease of problem solving and meeting goals for an individual.  The high incidence of childhood sexual abuse reported by adults diagnosed with BPD (e.g., Herman, 1986; Herman, Perry, & van der Kolk, 1989) suggests that sexual abuse may be a prototypical invalidating experience for children. The relationship of early sexual abuse to BPD, however, is quite controversial and open to many interpretations. On the one hand, Silk, Lee, Hill, and Lohr (1995) reported that the number of criterion BPD behaviors met was correlated with severity of childhood sexual abuse in a group of clients with BPD. On the other hand, a review by Fossati, Madeddu, and Maffei (1999) suggested that sexual abuse is not a major risk factor for BPD.  The overall results of this transactional pattern between the emotionally vulnerable individual and the invalidating environment are the emotional dysregulation and behavioral patterns exhibited by the borderline adult. Such an individual has never learned how to label and regulate emotional arousal, how to tolerate emotional distress, or when to trust his/her own emotional responses as reflections of valid interpretations of events, resulting in self-invalidation (Linehan, 1993a). In more optimal environments, public validation of one’s private, internal experiences results in the development of a stable identity. In the family of a person with BPD, however, private experiences may be responded to erratically and with insensitivity. Thus, the individual learns to mistrust his/her internal states, and instead scans the environment for cues about how to act, think, or feel. This general reliance on others results in the individual’s failure to develop a coherent sense of self. Emotional dysfunction also interferes with the development and maintenance of stable interpersonal relationships, which depend on both a stable sense of self and a capacity to self-regulate emotions. The invalidating environment’s tendency to trivialize or ignore the expression of negative emotion also  shapes an expressive style later seen in the adult with BPD—a style that vacillates from inhibition and suppression of emotional experience to extreme behavioral displays. Behaviors such as overdosing, cutting, and burning have important affect-regulating properties and are additionally quite effective in eliciting helping behaviors from an environment that otherwise ignores efforts to ameliorate intense emotional pain. From this perspective, the dysfunctional behaviors characteristic of BPD may be viewed as maladaptive solutions to overwhelming, intensely painful negative affect.  Dialectical DileMMas  Linehan (1993a) describes “dialectical dilemmas” as behavioral patterns of the client that often interfere with therapy. These behavioral patterns, also referred to as “secondary targets” in treatment (compared to other targets we describe later), represent six behaviors that are dichotomized into a set of three dimensions of behavior defined by their opposite poles (see Figure 10.1). At one end of each dimension is the behavior that theoretically is most directly influenced biologically via deficits in emotion regulation. At the other end is behavior that has been socially reinforced in the invalidating environment. These secondary targets are characteristics of people diagnosed with BPD that often interfere with change, thus interfering with therapy.  figUre 10.1. Dialectical dilemmas in DBT.    CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  Emotion Vulnerability–Self‑Invalidation  One dialectical dilemma is represented by biologically influenced emotional vulnerability on the one hand (e.g., the sense of being out of control or falling into the abyss) and by socially influenced self-invalidation on the other (e.g., hate and contempt directed toward the self, dismissal of one’s accomplishments). Along this dimension of behavior, clients with BPD often vacillate between acute awareness of their own intense, unbearable, and uncontrollable emotional suffering on the one hand, and dismissal, judgment, and invalidation of their own suffering and helplessness on the other.  Emotion vulnerability here refers to the client’s acute experience and communication of emotional vulnerability and excruciating emotional pain. “Vulnerability” here means the acute experience of vulnerability rather than the sensitivity to emotional cues that defines the term when discussing the emotion dysregulation difficulties of the person diagnosed with BPD. Three reactions to emotional vulnerability are common in BPD:  (1) freezing or dissociating in the face of intense emotion; (2) rage, often directed at society in general or at people who are experienced as invalidating; and (3) intense despair. Suicide here can function to communicate to others the depth of one’s suffering (“I’ll show you”) and/or as an escape from an unendurable life. On the other side of this polarity is self-invalidation. What is invalidated, in essence, is one’s own emotional experiencing and dysregulated responses. The most typical pattern here is a reaction to emotional pain with intense self-blame and self-hate. These people identify themselves as perpetrators, which results in intense levels of shame and contempt toward the self (“There is nothing wrong with me, I’m just a bad person”). Mooddependent perfectionism is also common. Here, the individual belittles, ignores, or discounts the difficulty of his/her own life or may overestimate the ease of solving current problems. Unfortunately, this may initiate a cycle that may eventually end in death. Extreme perfectionism often ultimately leads to failure, especially in people who overestimate their abilities; the failure then results in self-hatred, which cues suicidal behaviors in these people. Finally, self-invalidation can also be expressed through willful suppression, meaning that the individual actively denies the experience of all emotion. Often clients who come into our offices simply state, “I don’t do emotions.” As with emotion vulnerability, self-invalidation needs to be attended to  actively and directly, due to the lethal consequences of these behaviors.  Active Passivity–Apparent Competence  A second dimension of behavior is a tendency toward active passivity versus the socially mediated behavior of apparent competence. Either pole of this dimension can lead to anger, guilt, or shame on the part of the client, and a tendency for the therapist to either under- or overestimate the client’s capabilities.  “Active passivity” may be defined as passivity in solving one’s own problems, while actively engaging others to solve one’s problems. It can also be described as passivity that appears to be an active process of shutting down in the face of seeing problems coming in the future. In a sense, people diagnosed with BPD do not appear to have the ability to regulate themselves internally, particularly when the regulation required is non-mood-dependent behaviors. people diagnosed with BPD appear to be “relational selves” rather than “autonomous selves”; that is, they are more highly regulated by their environment than by internal dialogues, choices, and decisions. Their best form of self-regulation is to regulate their environment, such that it then provides the regulation they need. The problem here is that managing one’s environment and getting the support one needs requires a good deal of emotional consistency and regulation, characteristics that ordinarily are difficult for people diagnosed with BPD. Lorna Benjamin has described this characteristic as “My misery is your command” (1996, p. 192).  On the opposite side of the polarity is “apparent competence,” which refers to the tendency of other people to overestimate the capabilities of the individual with BPD. Thus, this characteristic is defined by the behavior of the observer rather than the behavior of the individual with BPD. This failure to perceive their difficulties and “disability” accurately has serious effects on people diagnosed with BPD. Not only do they not get the help they need, but also their emotional pain and difficulties may easily be invalidated, leading to a further sense of being misunderstood. A number of behavioral patterns can precipitate this overestimation of the competence of the individual with BPD. Often, as a result of a significant discrepancy between the individual’s verbal and nonverbal presentations, the individual with BPD believes that he/she has sufficiently communicated his/her level of distress, when in fact the   Borderline Personality Disorder  observer interprets the individual as effectively managing a difficult situation. An example would be a woman speaking nonchalantly and without emotion about urges toward suicide after a fight with her husband. People diagnosed with BPD also frequently have difficulty generalizing behaviors across situations, especially in relationships. For example, the person may be able to cope well in the presence of one person, such as a therapist, but be unable to cope when he/she is alone or with someone other than the therapist. The therapist, understandably, may then fail to predict the dysregulation that occurs as the client walks away from the therapy session. Additionally, there may be a difficulty in generalizing coping behaviors across different moods. In one mood, a problem is solvable; in another, it is not. This may not be so difficult to figure out if mood changes are readily apparent to the observer, but often they are not. Thus, accurate estimates of the person’s competence actually require the observer, such as the therapist, constantly to anticipate mood changes that might occur to be able to predict what a client might or might not do. It is this characteristic, more than any other, that leads so often to a client walking out of a session, with the therapist believing that all is well, only to end up in the emergency department with a suicide attempt 2 hours later. At times, client failures are nothing more than failures of the therapist (and often the client, also) to predict future behavior accurately.  Unrelenting Crisis–Inhibited Grieving  The third dimension of behavior is the tendency of the client with BPD to experience life as a series of unrelenting crises as opposed to the behavior of “inhibited grieving” (i.e., an inability to experience emotions associated with significant trauma or loss). The client experiences each of these extremes in a way that facilitates movement to the other extreme; for example, attempting to inhibit emotional experiences related to current crises may result in problem behaviors that add to existing crises. As with all of these dialectical dilemmas, the solution is for therapist and client to work toward a more balanced position that represents a synthesis of the opposing poles.  People diagnosed with BPD who experience unrelenting crises have lives that are often characterized as chaotic and in crisis. “Crisis” is defined as the occurrence of problems that are extreme, with significant pressure to resolve them quickly. The consequence of  the unrelenting crisis is that the individual with BPD, as well as the person’s environmental resources, such as family, friends, coworkers, and even the therapist, slowly wear down. There are three typical scenarios that result in a pattern of unrelenting crisis. First, people with extreme impulsivity and emotion dysregulation engage in behaviors that result in crisis situations. Poor judgment is a key element to assess when analyzing the impulsive behaviors of people diagnosed with BPD. Second, situations that do not start out as crises can quickly become critical due to the lack of resources available to many people with a BPD diagnosis. This may be due to socioeconomic status, or to lack of family or peer support. Finally, unrelenting crises can be due simply to fate or bad luck at a given moment, a phenomenon that is out of the person’s control. For example, an unexpected disaster in a client’s apartment due to the neighbors running the water in their sink for an extended period of time, might occur. The floors in the client’s apartment are damaged by the water and he/she does not have the financial resources to pay for renter’s insurance or to replace the carpet in the apartment. His/her apartment is now uninhabitable, but he/ she does not have any place else to stay. This problem is out of the person’s control, but it is still that person’s responsibility to solve.  At the other extreme, and often precipitated by a crisis, is the phenomenon of “inhibited grieving.” In this context, “grief” refers to the process of grieving, which includes experiencing multiple painful emotions associated with loss, particularly traumatic loss, not just the one emotion of deep sadness or grief. People with a BPD diagnosis may not be able to experience or process the grief related to loss of the life they had expected for themselves, and ordinarily they do not believe they will recover from the grief if they actually try to experience or to cope with it on their own. As one client said to us, “I don’t do sadness.” Another said, “I feel sad, I die.” People diagnosed with BPD may not recognize their own emotional avoidance and shutdown. Thus, it is crucial for the therapist to attend to emotional avoidance, particularly of sadness and grief, and to assist clients through the grief process. Areas that must be confronted, grieved, and finally accepted include an insurmountably painful childhood, a biological makeup that makes life harder rather than easier, inability to “fit in” in many environments, absence of loving people in the current environment, or loss of hope for a particular future for which one had ardently hoped. What must be   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  confronted by the therapist is that egregious losses can be real and clients might be right: They really cannot get out of the abyss if they fall into it. Regardless of the situation to be grieved, avoidance of these situations may lead to increased shame. The shame is a result of believing that one is unloved, being alone, or fearing that one will not be able to cope in the face of emotional situations. Many of our clients believe that if they begin to address any of these areas, they will not be able to function in their lives, and often this is true. They do not have the skills or resources to assist them with the process of experiencing emotions. We often tell clients that managing grief or processing emotions requires going to the cemetery to pay tribute to what is lost, but building a house at the cemetery and living there is not a good idea. It is a place to visit, experience the sadness of the loss, and then leave. The use of this metaphor has helped many of our clients to experience emotion without falling into the abyss.  staGes of theraPy aND treatMeNt Goals  In theory, treatment of all clients with BPD can be organized and determined based on their levels of disorder, and is conceptualized as occurring in stages. “Level of disorder” is defined by the current severity, pervasiveness, complexity, disability, and imminent threat presented by the client. Clients can enter into five stages of treatment based on their current level of disorder. First, a pretreatment stage prepares the client for therapy and elicits a commitment to work toward the various treatment goals. Orientation to specific goals and treatment strategies, and commitment to work toward goals addressed during this stage, are likely to be important throughout all stages of treatment.  In Stage 1 of therapy, the primary focus is on stabilizing the client and achieving behavioral control. Out-of-control behaviors constitute those that are disordered due to the severity of the disorder (e.g., as seen in an actively psychotic client) or severity combined with the complexity of multiple diagnoses (e.g., as seen in a suicidal client who has BPD with comorbid panic disorder and depression). Generally, the criteria for putting a client in Stage 1 are based on level of current functioning, together with the inability of the client to work on any other goals before behavior and functioning come under better control. As Mintz (1968) suggested in discussing treatment of the suicidal client, all forms of  psychotherapy are ineffective with a dead client. In the subsequent stages (2–4), the treatment goals are to replace “quiet desperation” with nontraumatic emotional experiencing (Stage 2); to achieve “ordinary” happiness and unhappiness, and to reduce ongoing disorders and problems in living (Stage 3); and to resolve a sense of incompleteness and to achieve freedom (Stage 4). In summary, the orientation of the treatment is first to get action under control, then to help the client to feel better, to resolve problems in living and residual disorder, and to find freedom (and, for some, a sense of transcendence). Most research to date has focused on the severely or multiply disordered clients who enter treatment at Stage 1. The construct of stages aids in treatment planning and conceptualization with the client, and in identifying the appropriate level of care needed.  Pretreatment: Orienting and Commitment  Specific tasks of orientation are twofold. First, client and therapist must arrive at a mutually informed decision to work together. Typically, the first one to four sessions are presented to the client as opportunities for client and therapist to explore this possibility. Diagnostic interviewing, history taking, and formal behavioral analyses of high-priority, targeted behaviors can be woven into initial therapy sessions or be conducted separately. Second, client and therapist must negotiate a common set of expectancies to guide the initial steps of therapy. Client and therapist discuss, outline, and agree specifically on what they can expect from each other. When necessary, the therapist attempts to modify the client’s dysfunctional beliefs regarding the process of therapy. Issues addressed include the rate and magnitude of change that can reasonably be expected, the goals of treatment and general treatment procedures, and various myths the client may have about the process of therapy in general. The dialectical/biosocial view of BPD is also presented. Orientation covers several additional points. First, DBT is presented as a supportive therapy requiring a strong collaborative relationship between client and therapist. DBT is not a suicide prevention program, but a life enhancement program in which client and therapist function as a team to create a life worth living. Second, DBT is described as a cognitive-behavioral therapy with a primary emphasis on analyzing problematic behaviors and replacing them with skillful behaviors, and on changing ineffective beliefs and rigid thinking patterns. Third, the client is told that DBT is a skills-oriented therapy, with special em    Borderline Personality Disorder  phasis on behavioral skills training. The commitment and orienting strategies, balanced by validation strategies described later, are the most important strategies during this phase of treatment. The therapist places a strong effort into getting the client to commit to not engaging in suicidal or NSSI behaviors for some specified period of time before allowing the client to leave the session; it can be for 1 year, 6 months, until the next session, or until tomorrow.  Stage 1: Attaining Basic Capacities  The primary focus of the first stage of therapy is attaining behavioral control in order to build a life pattern that is reasonably functional and stable. Furthermore, DBT does not promote itself as a suicide prevention program; instead, it focuses on “building a life worth living.” Therefore, the primary treatment goal in DBT and in Stage 1 specifically is to assist clients in building a life they will experience as worth living. DBT attains this goal by focusing the treatment on specific behavioral targets agreed upon by both therapist and client. Specific targets in order of importance are to reduce life-threatening behaviors (e.g., suicide attempts, suicide ideation, NSSI behaviors, homicidal threats and behaviors), therapy-interfering behaviors (e.g., late to session, missing sessions, not following treatment plan, hostile attacks on the therapist), and quality-of-life– interfering behaviors (e.g., substance abuse, eating disorder, homelessness, serious Axis I disorders), and to increase behavioral skills. These targets are approached hierarchically and recursively as higher-priority behaviors reappear in each session. However, this does not mean that these behaviors must be addressed in this specific order during a session; it means that, based on the hierarchy, all relevant behavior must be addressed at some point within the session. For example, if a client is 30 minutes late to session (therapy-interfering behavior) and has attempted suicide within the last week (life-threatening behavior), the therapist may choose to address the therapy-interfering behavior first, then move on to address the life-threatening behaviors.  With severely dysfunctional and suicidal clients, significant progress on Stage 1 targets may take up to 1 year or more. In addition to these therapy targets, the goal of increasing dialectical behaviors is universal to all modes of treatment. Dialectical thinking encourages clients to see reality as complex and multifaceted, to hold contradictory thoughts simultaneously and learn to integrate them, and to be comfortable with incon   sistency and contradictions. For people with a BPD diagnosis, who are extreme and dichotomous in their thinking and behavior, this is a formidable task indeed. A dialectical emphasis applies equally to a client’s patterns of behavior because the client is encouraged to integrate and balance emotional and overt behavioral responses. In particular, dialectical tensions arise in the areas of skills enhancement versus self-acceptance, problem solving versus problem acceptance, and affect regulation versus affect tolerance. Behavioral extremes, whether emotional, cognitive, or overt responses, are constantly confronted while more balanced responses are taught.  Life-Threatening Behaviors  Keeping a client alive must, of course, be the first priority in any psychotherapy. Thus, reducing suicide crisis behaviors (any behaviors that place the client at high and imminent risk for suicide or threaten to do so, including credible suicide threats, planning, preparations, obtaining lethal means, and high suicide intent) is the highest priority in DBT. The target and its priority are made explicit in DBT during orientation and throughout treatment, simply because suicidal behavior and the risk of suicide are of paramount concern for clients with BPD. Similarly, any acute, intentional NSSI behaviors share the top priority. The priority here is due to the risk of suicidal and NSSI behavior as the single best predictor of subsequent suicide. Similarly, DBT also targets suicide ideation and client expectations about the value and long-term consequences of suicidal behavior, although these behaviors may not necessarily be targeted directly.  Therapy-Interfering Behaviors  Keeping clients and therapists working together collaboratively is the second explicitly targeted priority in DBT. The chronic nature of most problems among clients with BPD, including their high tendency to end therapy prematurely and the likelihood of therapist burnout and iatrogenic behaviors when treating BPD, requires such explicit attention. Both client and therapist behaviors that threaten the relationship or therapeutic progress are addressed directly, immediately, consistently, and constantly—and most importantly, before rather than after either the therapist or the client no longer wants to continue. Interfering behaviors of the client, including those that actually interfere with   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  receiving the therapy (e.g., lateness to sessions, missed sessions, lack of transportation to sessions, dissociating in sessions) or with other clients benefiting from therapy (in group or milieu settings; e.g., selling drugs to other clients in the program), and those that burn out or cross the personal limits of the therapist (e.g., repeated crisis calls at 3:00 A.M., repeated verbal attacks on the therapist) are treated within therapy sessions. Behaviors of the therapist include any that are iatrogenic (e.g., inadvertently reinforcing dysfunctional behaviors), as well as any that cause the client unnecessary distress or make progress difficult (e.g., therapist arriving late to sessions, missing sessions, not returning phone calls within a reasonable time frame). These behaviors are dealt with in therapy sessions, if brought up by either the client or the therapist, and are also discussed during the consultation/supervision meeting.  Quality-of-Life–Interfering Behaviors  The third target of Stage 1 addresses all other behaviors that interfere with the client having a reasonable quality of life. Typical behaviors in this category include serious substance abuse, severe major depressive episodes, severe eating disorders, high-risk and out-of-control sexual behaviors, extreme financial difficulties (uncontrollable spending or gambling, inability to handle finances), criminal behaviors that are likely to lead to incarceration, employment- or school-related dysfunctional behaviors (a pattern of quitting jobs or school prematurely, getting fired or failing in school, not engaging in any productive activities), housing-related dysfunctional behaviors (living with abusive people, not finding stable housing), mental health–related patterns (going in and out of hospitals, failure to take or abuse of necessary medications), and health-related problems (failure to treat serious medical disorders). The goal here is for the client to achieve a stable lifestyle that meets reasonable standards for safety and adequate functioning.  When necessary, DBT incorporates evidence-based behavioral interventions to address specific quality-oflife– interfering behaviors. Because DBT is a principlebased treatment, it allows seamless integration of other evidence-based protocols as long as they are compatible with the basic assumptions and philosophy of DBT. For example we have recently added to DBT a prolonged exposure protocol to treat PTSD among highly suicidal BPD clients (Harned, Korslund, Foa, & Linehan, 2012). Following Harned and colleagues’ (2012) guidelines for client readiness and implementation of  the protocol within standard DBT, a pilot study was conducted with 13 women diagnosed with comorbid BPD and PTSD, and at high risk for suicide. Outcomes showed 70% with reliable improvement in PTSD symptoms and a 60% remission rate, results similar to PE findings in the standard PTSD literature.  Behavioral Skills  The fourth target of Stage 1 is for the client to achieve a reasonable capacity for acquiring and applying skillful behaviors in the areas of distress tolerance, emotion regulation, interpersonal effectiveness, selfmanagement, and the capacity to respond with awareness without being judgmental (“mindfulness” skills). In our outpatient program, the primary responsibility for skills training lies with the weekly DBT skills group. The individual therapist monitors the acquisition and use of skills over time, and aids the client in applying skills to specific problem situations in his/her own life. Additionally, it is the role of the individual therapist, not the skills group leader, to provide skills coaching to the client as needed when problems arise.  Stage 2: Quiet Desperation  Stage 1 of DBT takes a direct approach to managing dysfunctional behavioral and regulating emotional patterns. Although the connection between current behavior and previous traumatic events (including those from childhood) may be explored and noted, the focus of the treatment is distinctly on analyzing the relationship among current thoughts, feelings, and behaviors, and on accepting and changing current patterns. The aim of Stage 2 DBT is to reduce “quiet desperation,” which can be defined as extreme emotional pain in the presence of control of action (Linehan et al., 1999). A wide range of emotional experiencing difficulties (e.g., avoidance of emotions and emotion-related cues) are targeted in this stage, with the goal of increasing the capacity for normative emotional experiencing (i.e., the ability to experience a full range of emotions without either severe emotional escalation or behavioral dyscontrol). Stage 2 addresses four goals: remembering and accepting the facts of earlier distressing and/or traumatic events; reducing stigmatization and self-blame often associated with traumatic social invalidation; reducing oscillating denial and intrusive response syndromes; and resolving dialectical tensions regarding placement of blame for past difficulties.   Borderline Personality Disorder  Stage 3: Resolving Problems in Living and Increasing Respect for Self  In the third stage, DBT targets the client’s unacceptable unhappiness and problems in living. At this stage, the client with BPD has either done the work necessary to resolve problems in the prior two stages or was never severely disordered enough to need it. Although problems at this stage may still be serious, the individual is functional in major domains of living. The goal here is for the client to achieve a level of ordinary happiness and unhappiness, as well as independent self-respect. To this end, the client is helped to value, believe in, trust, and validate him/herself. The targets here are the abilities to evaluate one’s own behavior nondefensively, to trust one’s own responses, and to hold on to self-evaluations, independent of the opinions of others. Ultimately, the therapist must pull back and persistently reinforce the client’s independent attempts at selfvalidation, self-care, and problem solving. Although the goal is not for clients to become independent of all people, it is important that they achieve sufficient selfreliance to relate to and depend on others without selfinvalidating.   Stage 4: Attaining the Capacity for Freedom and Sustained Contentment  The final stage of treatment in DBT targets the resolution of a sense of incompleteness and the development of a capacity for sustained contentment. The focus on freedom encompasses the goal of freedom from the need to have one’s wishes fulfilled, or one’s current life or behavioral and emotional responses changed. Here the goals are expanded awareness, spiritual fulfillment, and the movement into experiencing flow. For clients at Stage 4, insight-oriented psychotherapy, spiritual direction or practices, or other organized experiential treatments and/or life experiences may be of most benefit.  structuriNG treatMeNt: fuNctioNs aND MoDes  Functions of Treatment  Standard DBT is structured around five essential functions: (1) to enhance behavioral capabilities by expanding the individual’s repertoire of skillful behavioral patterns; (2) to improve the client’s motivation to change by reducing reinforcement for dysfunctional behaviors  and high-probability responses (cognitions, emotions, actions) that interfere with effective behaviors; (3) to ensure that new behaviors generalize from the therapeutic to the natural environment; (4) to enhance the motivation and capabilities of the therapist, so that effective treatment is rendered; and (5) to structure the environment so that effective behaviors, rather than dysfunctional behaviors, are reinforced.  Modes of Treatment: Who Does What and When  Responsibility for performing functions and meeting target goals of treatment in standard DBT is spread across the various modes of treatment, with focus and attention varying according to the mode of therapy. The individual therapist (who is always the primary therapist in DBT) attends to the order of targets and is also, with the client, responsible for organizing the treatment so that all goals are met. In skills training, a different set of goals is targeted; during phone calls, yet another hierarchy of targets takes precedence. In the consultation/supervision mode, therapists’ behaviors are the targets. Therapists engaging in more than one mode of therapy (e.g., individual, group, and telephone coaching) must stay cognizant of the functions and order of targets specific to each mode, and switch smoothly from one hierarchy to another as the modes of treatment change.  Individual Therapy  DBT assumes that effective treatment must attend both to client capabilities and behavioral skills deficits, and to motivational and behavioral performance issues that interfere with use of skillful responses (function 2). Although there are many ways to effect these principles, in DBT the individual therapist is responsible for the assessment and problem solving of skill deficits and motivational problems, and for organizing other modes to address problems in each area.  Individual outpatient therapy sessions are scheduled on a once-a-week basis for 50–90 minutes, although twice-weekly sessions may be held as needed during crisis periods or at the beginning of therapy. The priorities of specific targets within individual therapy are the same as the overall priorities of DBT discussed earlier. Therapeutic focus within individual therapy sessions is determined by the highest-priority treatment target relevant at the moment. This ordering does not change   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  over the course of therapy; however, the relevance of a target does change. Relevance is determined by either the client’s most recent, day-to-day behavior (since the last session) or by current behavior during the therapy session. If satisfactory progress on one target goal has been achieved or the behavior has never been a problem, or if the behavior is currently not evident, then the therapist shifts attention to another treatment target according to the hierarchy. The consequence of this priority allocation is that when high-risk suicidal behaviors or intentional self-injury, therapy-interfering behaviors, or serious quality-of-life–interfering behaviors occur, at least part of the session agenda is devoted to each of these topics. If these behaviors are not occurring at the moment, then the topics to be discussed during Stages 1, 3, and 4 are set by the client. The therapeutic focus (within any topic area discussed) depends on the stage of treatment, the skills targeted for improvement, and any secondary targets. During Stage 1, for example, any problem or topic area can be conceptualized in terms of interpersonal issues and skills needed, opportunities for emotion regulation, and/or a necessity for distress tolerance. During Stage 3, regardless of the topic, the therapist focuses on helping the client decrease problems in living and achieve independent self-respect, self-validation, and self-acceptance both within the session and in everyday life. (These are, of course, targets all through the treatment, but the therapist pulls back further during Stage 3 and does less work for the client than during the two preceding stages.) During Stage 2, the major focus is on reducing pervasive “quiet desperation,” as well as changing the extreme emotions and psychological meanings associated with traumatizing cues.  For highly dysfunctional clients, it is likely that early treatment will necessarily focus on the upper part of the hierarchy. For example, if suicidal or NSSI behavior has occurred during the previous week, attention to it takes precedence over attention to therapy-interfering behavior. In turn, focusing on therapy-interfering behaviors takes precedence over working on quality-oflife– interfering behaviors. Although it is often possible to work on more than one target (including those generated by the client) in a given session, higher-priority targets always take precedence, but all relevant targets must be addressed adequately during the session. Again, targets do not need to be addressed in sequential order; they just have to be addressed during the session. Determining the relevance of targeted behaviors is assisted by the use of diary cards, filled out by the client  during at least the first two stages of therapy and brought to weekly sessions. Failure to complete or to bring in a card is considered a therapy-interfering behavior and should be openly addressed as such. Diary cards record daily instances of suicidal and NSSI behavior, urges to self-harm or to engage in suicide behaviors (on a 0- to 5-point scale), “misery,” use of substances (licit and illicit), and use of behavioral skills. Other targeted behaviors (bulimic episodes, daily productive activities, flashbacks, etc.) may also be recorded on the blank area of the card. The therapist doing DBT must develop the pattern of routinely reviewing the card at the beginning of each session. The card acts as a road map for each session; therefore, a session cannot begin until a diary card has been completed. If the card indicates that a life-threatening behavior has occurred, it is noted and discussed. If high suicide or self-harm urges are recorded, or there is a significant increase (e.g., an increase of 3 points or higher on the 0- to 5-point scale for urges) over the course of the week, they are assessed to determine whether the client is at risk for suicide. If a pattern of substance abuse or dependence appears, it is treated as a quality-of-life–interfering behavior.  Work on targeted behaviors involves a coordinated array of treatment strategies, described later in this chapter. Essentially, each session is a balance among structured, as well as unstructured, problem solving (including simple interpretive activities by the therapist) and unstructured validation. The amount of the therapist’s time allocated to each—problem solving and validating—depends on (1) the urgency of the behaviors needing change or problems to be solved, and  (2) the urgency of the client’s needs for validation, understanding, and acceptance without any intimation of change being needed. However, there should be an overall balance in the session between change (problem solving) and acceptance (validation) strategies. Unbalanced attention to either side may result in a nondialectical session, in addition to impeding client progress. Skills Training  The necessity of crisis intervention and attention to other primary targets makes skills acquisition within individual psychotherapy very difficult. Thus, a separate component of treatment directly targets the acquisition of behavioral skills (function 1). In DBT this usually takes the form of separate, weekly, 2- to 2½-hour group skills training sessions that clients must attend, ordinarily for a minimum of 6 months and preferably   Borderline Personality Disorder  for a year. Skills training can also be done individually, although it is often more difficult to stay focused on teaching new skills in individual than in group therapy. After a client has gone through all skills modules twice (i.e., for 1 year), remaining in skills training is a matter of personal preference and need. Some DBT programs have developed graduate groups for clients who have acquired the skills but still need weekly consultation in applying the skills effectively to everyday difficulties. It is important to note that there is no research to date on the effectiveness of graduate groups. In adolescent programs, family members are usually invited. Some programs include a separate friends and families skills training group as well.  Each group typically has a leader and a co-leader. Whereas the primary role of the leader is to teach the skills, the co-leader focuses on managing group process by keeping members both focused and attending to the material being taught, as well as processing the information (e.g., ensuring that everyone is on the correct page, noticing when the leader’s invalidation has led to a member shutting down, waking someone up, sitting next to a member who is crying during group). We have found that it is difficult to keep the group focused and the leader on schedule for teaching the skills if the leader attempts to manage both roles on his/her own. Oftentimes, the co-leader role is more difficult to learn.  Skills training in DBT follows a psychoeducational format. In contrast to individual therapy, in which the agenda is determined primarily by the problem to be solved, the skills training agenda is set by the skill to be taught. As mentioned earlier, skills training also uses a hierarchy of treatment targets to keep the group focused: (1) therapy-destroying behaviors (e.g., using drugs on premises, which could lead to the clinic being shut down; property damage; threatening imminent suicide or homicidal behavior to a fellow group member or therapist); (2) increasing skills acquisition and strengthening; and (3) decreasing therapy-interfering behaviors (e.g., refusing to talk in a group setting, restless pacing in the middle of sessions, attacking the therapist and/ or the therapy). However, therapy-interfering behaviors are not given the attention in skills training that they are given in the individual psychotherapy mode. If such behaviors were a primary focus, there would never be time for teaching behavioral skills. Generally, therapyinterfering behaviors are put on an extinction schedule, while a client is “dragged” through skills training and simultaneously soothed. In DBT, all skills training clients are required to be in concurrent individual psycho   therapy. Throughout group or individual skills training, each client is urged to address other problematic behaviors with his/her primary therapist; if a serious risk of suicide develops, the skills training therapist refers the problem to the primary therapist.  Although all of the strategies described below are used in both individual psychotherapy and skills training, the mix is decidedly different. Skills acquisition, strengthening, and generalization strategies are the predominant change strategies in skills training. In addition, skills training is highly structured, much more so than the individual psychotherapy component. Half of each skills training session is devoted to reviewing homework practice of the skills currently being taught, and the other half is devoted to presenting and practicing new skills. Except when interpersonal process issues seriously threaten progress, the agenda and topics for discussion in skills training are usually predetermined.   Four skills modules are taught on a rotating basis over the course of 6 months. In standard DBT, mindfulness skills are taught for 2 consecutive weeks at the beginning of each of the subsequent modules. New members join a group during either the 2 weeks of mindfulness or the first 2 weeks of the subsequent module.  Mindfulness skills are viewed as central in DBT; thus, they are labeled the “core” skills. These skills represent a behavioral translation of meditation (including Zen and contemplative prayer) practice and include observing, describing, spontaneous participating, being nonjudgmental, focusing awareness, and focusing on effectiveness. Unlike standard behavioral and cognitive therapies, which ordinarily focus on changing distressing emotions and events, a major emphasis of DBT is on learning to manage pain skillfully. Mindfulness skills reflect the ability to experience and to observe one’s thoughts, emotions, and behaviors without evaluation, and without attempting to change or control them. Distress tolerance skills comprise two types of skills. First, crisis survival skills are used to regulate behavior, in order to manage painful situations without making them worse (e.g., without engaging in lifethreatening behavior) until the problem can be solved. Second, “accepting reality” skills are used to tolerate the pain of problems that cannot be solved in either the short-term future or that may have occurred in the past and, therefore, cannot be changed ever.  Emotion regulation skills target the reduction of emotional distress and include affect identification and labeling, mindfulness of current emotions (i.e., expe    CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  riencing nonjudgmentally), identifying obstacles to changing emotions, increasing resilience, and acting opposite to the emotion. Interpersonal effectiveness skills teach effective methods for deciding on objectives within conflict situations (either asking for something or saying “no” to a request) and strategies that maximize the chances of obtaining those objectives without harming the relationship or sacrificing selfrespect.   It is important to highlight here one skill that is essential in the DBT emotion regulation module: the skill of opposite action. This emotion regulation skill encourages clients to act opposite to their emotional urge in order to reduce their emotional arousal. The theoretical premise behind opposite action is that acting in accordance with the action urge associated with an emotion increases the likelihood that that emotion will fire again (Linehan, Bohus, & Lynch, 2007). Clients are taught that reversing expressive (e.g., facial expression, posture, voice tone) and action components of emotion responses is common to many treatments that address emotional disorders and, in essence, can be one of the main mechanisms of change in effective psychotherapy. For example, effective treatments for anxiety are based on principles of exposure and response prevention that encourage active replacement of an emotion-consistent behavior with an emotioninconsistent behavior (e.g., Foa & Kozak, 1986). The skill of opposite action expands this principle to be applicable all emotions, not just to fear. It also provides specific guidelines for how exactly to implement opposite actions for each problematic emotion. Therefore, if an emotion is not justified in the situation or is not effective, opposite action involves (1) exposure to the stimuli or cues evoking the emotion, (2) blocking of the behavior prompted by the emotion’s action urge, and  (3) acting in a way that is opposite or inconsistent with the emotional response (Linehan, 1993b). For example, the action urge of fear is to avoid; therefore, the opposite action is to fully approach the situation. For anger, the action urge is to attack physically or emotionally, clench fists, and to judge the situation. The opposite action to anger therefore involves gently removing oneself from the situation, unclenching the fists, and opening the palms of hands, relaxing the shoulders, making empathic statements, and actively working to generate empathy for the person or situation with whom one is angry (Linehan, 1993b, 2013). The skill of opposite action is very similar to the recommendation to change action tendencies in order  to change anxiety, which was proposed by Barlow in 1988. According to Barlow and colleagues (2004), negative emotionality is a latent factor underlying depression and anxiety disorders; therefore they proposed a unified treatment protocol for mood and anxiety disorders. Barlow and colleagues’ unified protocol suggests that difficulties with negative emotions can be treated through altering antecedent cognitive reappraisals (i.e., the probability of an event to happen and the likelihood of a catastrophic outcome), preventing emotional avoidance, and facilitating action tendencies that are not associated with the emotion. For this last strategy, they highlight that a crucial step is to prevent action tendencies associated with the emotion and to facilitate different action tendencies, encouraging approach when emotions says avoidance. The examples given are similar to opposite action (e.g., asking an individual diagnosed with GAD to engage in nonperfect behavior; encouraging someone with an anger problem to act detached and passive; asking someone diagnosed with depression to act active and not withdraw).  Self-management skills are taught in conjunction with the other behavioral skills; however, there is not a specific module allocated to these skills because behavioral principles are inherent in all of DBT. Selfmanagement skills include knowledge of the fundamental principles of learning and behavior change, and the ability to set realistic goals, to conduct one’s own behavioral analysis, and to implement contingency management plans.  Telephone Consultation  Telephone calls between sessions (or other extratherapeutic contact when DBT is conducted in other settings; e.g., inpatient units) are an integral part of DBT. Telephone consultation calls also follow a target hierarchy:  (1) to provide emergency crisis intervention and simultaneously break the link between suicidal behaviors and therapist attention; (2) to provide coaching in skills and promote skills generalization; and (3) to provide a timely context for repairing the therapeutic relationship. With respect to calls for skills coaching, the focus of a phone call varies depending on the complexity and severity of the problem to be solved and the amount of time the therapist is willing to spend on the phone. It is important to note that these calls are not considered therapy sessions and should not be used as such. With easy or already clear situations, in which it is reasonably easy to determine what the client can or should do  Borderline Personality Disorder  in the situation, the focus is on helping the client use behavioral skills (rather than dysfunctional behaviors) to address the problem. Alternatively, with complex problems, or with problems too severe for the client to resolve soon, the focus is on ameliorating and tolerating distress, and inhibiting dysfunctional problem-solving behaviors until the next therapy session. In the latter case, resolving the crisis is not the target of telephone coaching calls.  With the exception of taking necessary steps to protect the client’s life when he/she has threatened suicide, all calls for help are handled as much alike as possible. This is done to break the contingency between suicidal and NSSI behaviors, and increased phone contact. To do this, the therapist can do one of two things: refuse to accept any calls (including suicide crisis calls), or insist that the client who calls during suicidal crises also call during other crises and problem situations. As Linehan (1993b) notes, experts on suicidal behaviors uniformly say that therapist availability is necessary with suicidal clients. Thus, DBT chooses the latter course and encourages (and at times insists) on calls during nonsuicidal crisis periods. In DBT, calling the therapist too infrequently, as well as too frequently, is considered therapy-interfering behavior. Through orientation to coaching calls during pretreatment the client learns what to expect during the calls. For example, a therapist may communicate to the client in session what he/she will ask during the call: “What’s the problem? What skills have you used? Where is your skills book? Go get it, and let’s figure out what other skills you can use to get through this situation.” It is important to highlight that clients and therapists can easily fall into the trap of considering the act of calling for phone consultation a skill. Although asking for help may be a current target of treatment, it is not considered a skill to be used when the client is in distress. A therapists wants to reinforce the client for effectively reaching out; however, he/she does not want to reinforce the client who does not try using actual skills to manage the problem at hand prior to calling the therapist.  Additionally, the therapist is balancing the changefocused strategies with validation throughout the call. It is important that the therapist be aware of contingency management principles that may be occurring during the phone calls to avoid inadvertently reinforcing crisis behaviors and to increase contact between sessions.  A skills trainer uses phone calls only to keep a client in therapy (including, of course, when necessary, to keep the client alive). All other problems, including  suicidal crises, are turned over to the primary therapist as soon as possible. We have learned that this can be one of the most difficult distinctions for group leaders to uphold. Clients may call for a variety of reasons, and it is the role of the group leader consistently to refer the client back to the individual therapist.  The final priority for phone calls to individual therapists is relationship repair. Clients with BPD often experience delayed emotional reactions to interactions that have occurred during therapy sessions. From a DBT perspective, it is not reasonable to require clients to wait up to a whole week before dealing with these emotions, and it is appropriate for a client to call for a brief “heart-to-heart” talk. In these situations, the role of the therapist is to soothe and to reassure. In-depth analyses should wait until the next session.  Consultation Team  DBT assumes that effective treatment of BPD must pay as much attention to the therapist’s behavior and experience in therapy as it does to the client’s. Treating clients with BPD is enormously stressful, and staying within the DBT therapeutic framework can be tremendously difficult (function 4). Thus, an integral part of the therapy is the treatment of the therapist. Every therapist is required to be on a consultation team either with one other person or with a group. DBT consultation meetings are held weekly and attended by therapists currently providing DBT to clients. At times, the clinical setting may require that the team be part of an administrative meeting due to time and space restraints. When this occurs, it is important to set a specific agenda and time limitations on each part of the meeting (administration, DBT) to ensure that therapist consultation issues are addressed. The roles of consultation are to hold the therapist within the therapeutic framework and to address problems that arise in the course of treatment delivery. Thus, the fundamental target is increasing adherence to DBT principles for each member of the consultation group. The DBT consultation team is viewed as an integral component of DBT; that is, it is considered peer group therapy for the therapists, in which each member is simultaneously a therapist to other members and a client. The focus is on applying DBT strategies to increase DBT-adherent behaviors and decrease non-DBT behaviors.  There are three primary functions of consultation to the therapist in DBT. First, a consultation team helps to keep each individual therapist in the therapeutic   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  relationship. The role here is to cheerlead and to support the therapist. Second, the supervisor or consultation team balances the therapist in his/her interactions with the client. In providing balance, consultants may move close to the therapist, helping him/her maintain a strong position. Or consultants may move back from the therapist, requiring the therapist to move closer to the client to maintain balance. Third, within programmatic applications of DBT, the team provides the context for the treatment.  Joining THe ConsUlTATion TeAM  Each team comprises therapists who are currently treating a DBT client or are available to take on a DBT client. The consultation team is a community of therapists treating a community of clients. Prior to joining the team, it is important that the therapist be completely aware of his/her commitment. As with clients during the pretreatment phase of DBT, therapists must make a commitment to the team (see Table 10.2). The team member conducting the commitment session will use the same strategies and techniques used in a first session with a DBT client (e.g., devil’s advocate, pros and cons, troubleshooting). New therapists must commit to doing the behaviors listed in Table 10.2), to working actively toward increasing their own effectiveness and adherence when applying DBT principles and to being responsible for treatment and outcomes of all clients treated by the team. For example, members of the team are agreeing that if a client being treated by any member of the team commits suicide, then all members will say “Yes” when asked if they have ever had a client commit suicide.  ConsUlTATion MeeTing forMAT  There are multiple ways to run a DBT team meeting. The following is the way we conduct our meetings at the University of Washington (although it is important to note that even this format could change as needs of members change). Each of our DBT teams has an identified team leader. This person is typically the most experienced DBT therapist on the team, and his/her role is to articulate the DBT principles when necessary for overseeing the fidelity of the treatment provided. Additionally, a team may have an observer who rings a bell whenever team members make judgmental comments (in content or tone) about themselves, each other, or a client; stay polarized without seeking synthesis; fall out of mindful   table 10.2. dbt Consultation team Commitment session  1. To keep the agreements of the team, especially remaining compassionate, mindful, and dialectical. 2. To be available to see a client in whatever role one has joined the team for (e.g., individual therapist, group skills trainer, clinical supervisor, pharmacotherapist). 3. To function as a therapist in the group (to the group) and not just be a silent observer or a person that only speaks about his or her own problems. 4. To treat team meetings in the same way one treats any other group therapy session (i.e., attending the weekly meetings [not double scheduling other events or clients], on time, until the end, with pagers, PDAs, and phones out of sight and off or, if necessarily on, on silent). 5. To come to team meetings adequately prepared. 6. To be willing to give clinical advice to people who have more experience (especially when it’s hard to imagine yourself as being able to offer anything useful). 7. To have the humility to admit your mistakes/difficulties and the willingness to have the group help you solve them. 8. To be nonjudgmental and compassionate of your fellow clinicians and clients. To ring the bell of nonjudgmentalness to remind yourself to not be judgmental or unmindful, but not to ring it as a proxy for criticizing someone. The bell is a reminder, not a censor. 9. To properly assess the problem before giving solutions (do unto others as you wish they would more often do unto you). 10. To call out “Elephant in the room” when others are ignoring or not seeing the elephant. 11. To be willing to go through a chain analysis even though you were only 31 seconds late and you would have been there on time if it were not for that traffic light that always takes all day to change. 12. To participate in team by sharing the roles of Leader, Observer, Note Taker or other tasks critical to team functioning. 13. If you feel that the consult team is not being useful or don’t like the way it is being run, then say something about it rather than silently stewing in frustration. 14. To repair with the team in some way when team meetings are missed, because the team is only as strong as the weakest link. Therefore, the absence of any team member is felt. 15. To carry on even when feeling burnt out, frustrated, tired, overworked, underappreciated, hopeless, ineffective (easier committed to than done, of course).  Borderline Personality Disorder  ness by doing two things at once; or jump in to solve a problem before assessing the problem. The point of these observations is not to lay blame but to focus the team’s awareness on the behavior and move past it.  A team may begin with a mindfulness practice. There are several functions of mindfulness on a team. First, it helps members transition into the team by participating fully and focusing on only one thing in the moment, using a DBT mind-set. Second, it can provide an opportunity for team members to enhance their skills in leading and providing feedback about the practice with other team members. Consultation team agreements (see Table 10.3) have been developed to facilitate a DBT frame and help to create a supportive environment for managing client–therapist and therapist– therapist difficulties. Therefore, a team may elect to read one or all of the team agreements during the team meeting. Most importantly, an agenda is set by the team following the DBT hierarchy of targets, with a specific focus on the needs of the therapist rather than the problems of the clients. Our agenda uses the following format; however, the following items can be prioritized differently based on the needs of an individual team:  (1) the therapists’ need for consultation around clients’ suicidal crises or other life-threatening behaviors; (2) therapy-interfering behaviors (including client absences and dropouts, as well as therapist therapy-interfering behaviors); (3) therapist team-interfering behaviors and burnout; (4) severe or escalating deterioration in quality-of-life behaviors; (5) reportage of good news and therapists’ effective behaviors; (6) a summary of the work of the previous skills group and graduate group by group leaders; and (7) discussion of administrative issues (requests to miss team or be out of town, new client contacts; changes in skills trainers or group time, format of consultation group, etc.). This agenda spans the 1-hour consultation meeting. Although the agenda may look impossibly long, therapists ordinarily manage the time by being explicit about their need for help and consultation from the team. Ancillary Care  When problems in the client’s environment interfere with functioning or progress, the therapist moves to the case management strategies. There are three case management strategies: the consultant-to-the-client strategy, environmental intervention, and the consultation/ supervision team meeting (described earlier). Because DBT is grounded in dialectics and avoids becoming  table 10.3. dbt Consultation team agreements  1. Dialectical agreement: We agree to accept a dialectical philosophy: There is no absolute truth. When caught between two conflicting opinions, we agree to look for the truth in both positions and to search for a synthesis by asking questions such as “What is being left out?” 2. Consultation to the client agreement: We agree that the primary goal of this group is to improve our own skills as DBT therapists, and not serve as a go-between for clients to each other. We agree to not treat clients or each other as fragile. We agree to treat other group members with the belief that others can speak on their own behalf. 3. Consistency agreement: Because change is a natural life occurrence, we agree to accept diversity and change as they naturally come about. This means that we do not have to agree with each others’ positions about how to respond to specific clients, nor do we have to tailor our own behavior to be consistent with everyone else’s. 4. Observing limits agreement: We agree to observe our own limits. As therapists and group members, we agree to not judge or criticize other members for having different limits from our own (e.g., too broad, too narrow, “just right”). 5. Phenomenological empathy agreement: All things being equal, we agree to search for nonpejorative or phenomenologically empathic interpretations of our clients’, our own, and other members’ behavior. We agree to assume that we and our clients are trying our best and want to improve. We agree to strive to see the world through our clients’ eyes and through one another’s eyes. We agree to practice a nonjudgmental stance with our clients and with one another. 6. Fallibility agreement: We agree ahead of time that we are each fallible and make mistakes. We agree that we have probably either done whatever problematic things we’re being accused of, or some part of it, so that we can let go of assuming a defensive stance to prove our virtue or competence. Because we are fallible, it is agreed that we will inevitably violate all of these agreements, and when this is done, we will rely on each other to point out the polarity and move to a synthesis. rigid, a therapist intervenes in the client’s environment only under very specific conditions: (1) The client is unable to act on his/her own behalf and outcome is extremely important; (2) a key person in the environment will only speak with someone who is in high power (e.g., the therapist instead of the client); (3) when the client’s or others’ lives are in imminent danger; (4) when it is the humane thing to do and will cause no harm; and (5) when the client is a minor.   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  ConsUlTATion‑To‑THe‑ClienT sTrATegy  The consultation-to-the-client strategy was developed with three objectives in mind. First, clients must learn how to manage their own lives and care for themselves by interacting effectively with other people in the environment, including health care professionals. The consultation-to-the-client strategy emphasizes clients’ capacities and targets their ability to take care of themselves. Second, this strategy was designed to decrease instances of “splitting” between DBT therapists and other people interacting with clients, which occurs when different providers in a client’s network hold differing opinions on how to treat the client. A fundamental tenet of this strategy is that therapists do not tell others, including other health care professionals, how to treat the client. The therapist may suggest but may not demand. What this means in practice is that the therapist is not attached to others treating a client in a specific way. By remaining in the role of a consultant to the client, the therapist stays out of such arguments. Finally, the consultation-to-the-client strategy promotes respect for clients by imparting the message that they are credible and capable of performing interventions on their own behalf.  As mentioned previously, it is the responsibility of the individual DBT therapist to coordinate and organize care with ancillary treatment providers (function 5; e.g., case managers, pharmacotherapists). The consultation-to-the-client strategy balances the consultation-to-the-therapist strategy described earlier, primarily by providing direct consultation to the client in how to interact with other providers rather than consulting with people in the client’s environment on how to interact with the client. Except for special circumstances listed earlier, DBT therapists do not discuss clients with ancillary providers, or other providers in the client’s environment, without the client present. The therapist works with the client to problem-solve difficulties he/she has with his/her network, leaving the client to act as the intermediary between the therapist and other professionals.  enVironMenTAl inTerVenTion  The bias in DBT is toward teaching the client how to interact effectively with his/her environment. Thus, the consultation-to-the-client strategy is the dominant case management strategy and is used whenever possible. There are times, however, when intervention by the  therapist is needed. In general, the environmental intervention strategy is used over the consultation-to-theclient strategy when substantial harm may befall the client if the therapist does not intervene. The general rule for environmental intervention is that when clients lack abilities that they need to learn or that are impossible to obtain, or are not reasonable or necessary, the therapist may intervene.  Client Variables  DBT was developed to treat the multidiagnostic, difficult-to-treat clients. Therefore, there are a number of requisite client characteristics for Stage 1 DBT. Of these, voluntary participation and a commitment to a specified time period (e.g., 16 weeks, 6 months to 1 year) are critical. The effective application of DBT requires a strong interpersonal relationship between therapist and client. The therapist must first work to become a major reinforcer in the life of the client, then use the relationship to promote change in the client. Continuing the relationship can only be used as a positive contingency when a client wants to be in treatment; thus, contingency management is seriously compromised with involuntary clients. Court-ordered treatment is acceptable, if clients agree to remain in therapy even if the order is rescinded. A client characteristic necessary for group therapy is the ability to control overtly aggressive behavior toward others. DBT was developed and evaluated with perhaps the most severely disturbed portion of the population with BPD; all clients accepted into treatment had histories of multiple suicidal and NSSI behaviors. However, the treatment has been designed flexibly and is likely to be effective with less severely disturbed clients.  Therapist Variables  In comparison to other aspects of therapy, the therapist characteristics that facilitate DBT have received little attention. However, evidence supports the assumption that effective therapy for clients with BPD requires the proficient balancing of acceptance and change strategies (Shearin & Linehan, 1992). This research also found that therapists’ nonpejorative perceptions of clients were associated with less suicidal behavior.  Linehan (1993b) describes requisite therapist characteristics in terms of three bipolar dimensions that must be balanced in the conduct of therapy. The first dimen    Borderline Personality Disorder  sion represents the balance of an orientation of acceptance with an orientation of change. The therapist must be able to inhibit judgmental attitudes (often under very trying circumstances) and to practice acceptance of the client, of the self, and of the therapeutic process exactly as these are in the current moment. Nevertheless, the therapist remains cognizant that therapy implies necessity to change, and he/she assumes responsibility for directing the therapeutic influence. Second, the therapist must balance unwavering centeredness with compassionate flexibility. “Unwavering centeredness” is the quality of believing in oneself, the therapy, and the client. “Compassionate flexibility” is the ability to take in relevant information about the client and to modify one’s position accordingly by letting go of a previously held position. In balancing these two dimensions, the therapist must be able to observe his/her own limits without becoming overly rigid. Finally, the DBT therapist must be able to balance a high degree of nurturing with benevolent demanding. “Nurturing” refers to teaching, coaching, assisting, and strengthening the client, whereas “benevolent demanding” requires the therapist to recognize existing capabilities, to reinforce adaptive behavior, and to refuse to “do” for the client when the client can “do” for him/herself. Above all, the ability to demand requires willingness to believe in the client’s ability to change.  treatMeNt strateGies  “Treatment strategies” in DBT refer to the role and focus of the therapist, as well as to a coordinated set of procedures that function to achieve specific treatment goals. Although DBT strategies usually comprise a number of steps, use of a strategy does not necessarily require the application of every step. It is considerably more important that the therapist apply the intent of the strategy than that he/she should inflexibly lead the client through a series of prescribed maneuvers.  DBT employs five sets of treatment strategies to achieve the previously described behavioral targets: (1) dialectical strategies, (2) core strategies, (3) stylistic strategies, (4) case management strategies (discussed earlier), and (5) integrated strategies. DBT strategies are illustrated in Figure 10.2. Within an individual session and with a given client, certain strategies may be used more than others, and all strategies may not be necessary or appropriate. An abbreviated discussion   figUre 10.2. Treatment strategies in DBT. From Linehan (1993b). Copyright 1993 by The Guilford Press. Reprinted by permission.  of the first three types of DBT treatment strategies follows.   Dialectical Strategies  Dialectical strategies permeate the entire therapy, and their use provides the rationale for adding the term “dialectical” to the title of the therapy. There are three types of dialectical strategies: those having to do with how the therapist structures interactions; those pertaining to how the therapist defines and teaches skillful behaviors; and certain specific strategies used during the conduct of treatment.  Dialectics of the Relationship: Balancing Treatment Strategies  “Dialectical strategies” in the most general sense of the term have to do with how the therapist balances the dialectical tensions within the therapy relationship. As noted earlier, the fundamental dialectic within any psychotherapy, including that with a client who has BPD, is that between acceptance of what is and efforts   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  to change what is. A dialectical therapeutic position is one of constant attention to combining acceptance and change, flexibility and stability, nurturing and challenging, and focusing on capabilities and on limitations and deficits. The goals are to bring out the opposites, both in therapy and in the client’s life, and to provide conditions for syntheses. The presumption is that change may be facilitated by emphasizing acceptance, and acceptance, by emphasizing change. The emphasis on opposites sometimes takes place over time (i.e., over the whole of an interaction), rather than simultaneously or in each part of an interaction. Although many, if not all, psychotherapies, including cognitive and behavioral treatments, attend to these issues of balance, placing the concept of balance at the center of the treatment ensures that the therapist remains attentive to its importance.   Three primary characteristics are needed to maintain a dialectical stance in the therapeutic relationship: movement, speed, and flow. “Movement” refers to acting with certainty, strength, and total commitment on the part of the therapist. If the therapist only moves halfheartedly, the client will only move halfheartedly. “Speed” is of the essence and entails keeping the therapy moving, so that it does not become rigid or stuck. Finally, “flow” refers to being mindful of the momentto- moment unfolding of a session and responding smoothly, and with apparent effortlessness.  Teaching Dialectical Behavior Patterns  Dialectical thinking is emphasized throughout the entire treatment. Not only does the therapist maintain a dialectical stance in his/her treatment of the client but he/she also focuses on teaching and modeling dialectical thinking to the client. The therapist helps the client move from an “either–or” position to a “both–and” position, without invalidating the first idea or its polarity when asserting the second. Behavioral extremes and rigidity—whether cognitive, emotional, or overtly behavioral—are signals that synthesis has not been achieved; thus, they can be considered nondialectical. Instead, a “middle path” similar to that advocated in Buddhism is advocated and modeled. The important thing in following the path to Enlightenment is to avoid being caught and entangled in any extreme and always follow the Middle Way (Kyokai, 1966). This emphasis on balance is similar to the approach advocated in relapse prevention models (e.g., Marlatt & Gordon, 1985) for treating addictive behaviors.  Specific Dialectical Strategies  There are eight specific dialectical treatment strategies:  (1) entering and using paradox, (2) using metaphor, (3) playing the devil’s advocate, (4) extending, (5) activating the client’s “wise mind,” (6) making lemonade out of lemons (turning negatives into positives), (7) allowing natural change (and inconsistencies even within the therapeutic milieu), and (8) assessing dialectically by always asking the question “What is being left out here?” Due to space limitations, a selection of these strategies is included in the following sections. For a complete review, the interested reader is referred to the DBT treatment manual (Linehan, 1993a). enTering THe PArADox  Entering the paradox is a powerful technique because it contains the element of surprise. The therapist presents the paradox without explaining it and highlights the paradoxical contradictions within the behavior, the therapeutic process, and reality in general. The essence of the strategy is the therapist’s refusal to step in with rational explanation; the client’s attempts at logic are met with silence, a question, or a story designed to shed a small amount of light on the puzzle to be solved. The client is pushed to achieve understanding, to move toward synthesis of the polarities, and to resolve the dilemma him/herself. Linehan (1993b) has highlighted a number of typical paradoxes and their corresponding dialectical tensions encountered over the course of therapy. Clients are free to choose their own behavior but cannot stay in therapy if they do not work at changing their behavior. They are taught to achieve greater independence by becoming more skilled at asking for help from others. Clients have a right to kill themselves, but if they ever convince the therapist that suicide is imminent, they may be locked up. Clients are not responsible for being the way they are, but they are responsible for what they become. In highlighting these paradoxical realities, both client and therapist struggle with confronting and letting go of rigid patterns of thought, emotion, and behavior, so that more spontaneous and flexible patterns may emerge.  Using MeTAPHor: PArABle, MyTH, AnAlogy, AnD sToryTelling  The use of metaphor, stories, parables, and myth is extremely important in DBT and provides alterna    Borderline Personality Disorder  tive means of teaching dialectical thinking. Stories are usually more interesting, are easier to remember, and encourage the search for other meanings of events under scrutiny. Additionally, metaphors allow clients to distance themselves from the problem. In general, the idea of metaphor is to take something the client does understand and use it as an analogy for something the client does not understand. Furthermore, metaphors and stories can be developed collaboratively over the course of treatment. When therapist and client relate to a metaphor, it can be a powerful tool to use throughout the treatment, reminding the client what he/she is working on. For example, changing behavior by learning new skills can be compared to building a new hiking trail in the woods. At first, the current trail is defined and easy to navigate; however, it always leads to a dead end (old dysfunctional behavior). To build a new trail (skillful behaviors), the hiker must repeatedly go through a new, undefined area until it becomes worn in. This takes time, and the hiker moves slowly and deliberately, clearing away the brush. Additionally, while the new path is developing, the old path is slowly becoming grown over. The therapist can return to this story each time the client begins to struggle between trying new skills and returning to old dysfunctional behavior.  PlAying DeVil’s ADVoCATe  The devil’s advocate technique is quite similar to the argumentative approach used in rational–emotive and cognitive restructuring therapies. With this strategy, the therapist presents a propositional statement that is an extreme version of one of the client’s own dysfunctional beliefs, then plays the role of devil’s advocate to counter the client’s attempts to disprove the extreme statement or rule. For example, a client may state, “Because I’m overweight, I’d be better off dead.” The therapist argues in favor of the dysfunctional belief, perhaps by suggesting that because this is true for the client, it must be true for others as well; hence, all overweight people would be better off dead. The therapist may continue along these lines: “And since the definition of what constitutes being overweight varies so much among people, there must be an awful lot of people who would be considered overweight by someone. That must mean they’d all be better off dead!” Or “Gosh, I’m about 5 pounds overweight. I guess that means I’d be better off dead, too.” Any reservations the client proposes can be countered by further exaggeration, until the self-defeating nature of the belief becomes apparent. The devil’s ad   vocate technique is often used in the first several sessions to elicit a strong commitment from the client and in commitment sessions with new therapists joining the DBT team. The therapist argues to the client that since the therapy will be painful and difficult, it is not clear how making such a commitment (and therefore being accepted into treatment) could possibly be a good idea. This usually has the effect of moving the client to take the opposite position in favor of therapeutic change. To employ this technique successfully, it is important that the therapist’s argument seem reasonable enough to invite counterargument, and that the delivery be credible, made in a naive but offbeat manner.  exTenDing  The term “extending” has been borrowed from aikido, a Japanese form of self-defense. In that context, extending occurs when the student of aikido waits for a challenger’s movements to reach their natural completion, then extends a movement’s endpoint slightly further than what would naturally occur, leaving the challenger vulnerable and off balance. In DBT, extending occurs when the therapist takes the severity or gravity of what the client is communicating more seriously than the client intends. This strategy is the emotional equivalent of the devil’s advocate strategy. It is particularly effective when the client is threatening dire consequences of an event or problem to induce change in the environment. Take the interaction with the following client, who threatens suicide if an extra appointment time for the next day is not scheduled. The following interchange occurred after attempts to find a mutually acceptable time failed.  client: I’ve got to see you tomorrow, or I’m sure I will  end up killing myself. I just can’t keep it together by  myself any longer.  tHeraPist: Hmm, I didn’t realize you were so upset! We’ve got to do something immediately if you are so distressed that you might kill yourself. What about hospitalization? Maybe that is needed.  client: I’m not going to the hospital! Why won’t you just give me an appointment?  tHeraPist: How can we discuss such a mundane topic  as session scheduling when your life is in danger?  How are you planning to kill yourself?  client: You know how. Why can’t you cancel some    CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  one or move an appointment around? You could put an appointment with one of your students off until another time. I can’t stand it anymore!  tHeraPist: I’m really concerned about you. Do you think I should call an ambulance?  The aspect of the communication that the therapist takes seriously (suicide as a possible consequence of not getting an appointment) is not the aspect (needing an extra appointment the next day) that the client wants taken seriously. The therapist takes the consequences seriously and extends the seriousness even further. The client wants the problem taken seriously, and indeed is extending the seriousness of the problem.  MAking leMonADe oUT of leMons  Making lemonade out of lemons is similar to the notion in psychodynamic therapy of utilizing a client’s resistances; therapeutic problems are seen as opportunities for the therapist to help the client. The strategy involves taking something that is apparently problematic and turning it into an asset. Problems become opportunities to practice skills; suffering allows others to express empathy; weaknesses become one’s strengths. To be effective, this strategy requires a strong therapeutic relationship; the client must believe that the therapist has a deep compassion for his/her suffering. The danger in using this strategy is that it is easily confused with the invalidating refrain repeatedly heard by clients with BPD. The therapist should avoid the tendency to oversimplify a client’s problems, and refrain from implying that the lemons in the client’s life are really lemonade. While recognizing that the cloud is indeed black, the therapist assists the client in finding the positive characteristics of a situation—thus, the silver lining.  