Bipolar Disorder  tHeraPist 2: Do you think you have what we’re calling “episodes”? Like a couple of days of being wired?  DeBra: There can be, like 2 or 3 days when I can do a lot of stuff, my memory gets better, and then 2 or 3 days when it’s just not gonna work. I can. . .  Barry: (Interrupts.) It’s that household project thing. She starts redoing Jill’s room over and over. She’ll sponge-paint it purple and then wipe it out that same evening, put in new closets.  DeBra: I can filter all my energy into housework instead of killing somebody. (They both chuckle.)  tHeraPist 1: Maybe I’m a little slow today, but I’m trying to figure out whether you both agree on when these high and low periods are. Debra, have you ever kept a mood chart?  The therapist then produced a written assignment in which Debra and Barry were asked to track independently, on a daily basis, the ups and downs of Debra’s mood states, so that agreements and disagreements about what constituted the symptoms of the disorder (as opposed to personality traits) could be tracked.  The dynamics of this couple became more evident in Sessions 3–5. Debra was inconsistent about keeping her mood chart, and Barry felt that his conscientiousness in charting her mood was not being rewarded. “She won’t take responsibility for her illness,” he argued. Nonetheless, Debra had good recall of her mood swings, even though she had not written them down. The therapists offered the couple much praise for their somewhat halfhearted attempt to complete this assignment. Interestingly, Barry noted small changes in mood that he called her “manic-ness,” which Debra argued were just her reactions to everyday annoyances.  Barry: You were manic as hell on Saturday morning. tHeraPist 2: What do you mean, Barry? Barry: I went to tell her that Jill needed to get to soc   cer, and she practically bit my head off! DeBra: Because you had told me eight times already. I wasn’t manic, I was just getting annoyed. Even Jill said something about you overdoing it.  This became a theme throughout the treatment: Barry tended to overlabel Debra’s mood swings, to the extent that he often called her “manic” when the real issue appeared to be her transient irritability. He also frequently called her “depressed” when Debra felt that  she was just “relaxing. . . bored. . . trying to unwind and keep to myself for a while.” The therapists were careful not to attribute blame or to take sides with either of them. Therapist 1 said:  “I think this is a very hard distinction to make. I wish I could give you a simple rule for determining when Debra is in and out of an episode. But as you’ve seen, it’s not always so clear. I usually suggest that people go back to that symptom list and ask, ‘Is there more than one of these symptoms? Does irritability go with more sleep disturbance? Racing thoughts?’ Just being annoyed is not enough to be called ‘manic,’ unless it’s ongoing, it cuts across different situations, or it goes along with some of these other symptoms and impairment in getting through your day.”  The therapists outlined a vulnerability–stress model for understanding Debra’s episodes. Debra recounted a family history of her mother’s depression and her father’s alcohol abuse: “My mom was probably bipolar, but we just didn’t call it that back then.” They also discussed eliciting stressors that may have contributed to Debra’s prior depressions. Barry became very vocal when discussing her risk factors: He noted that crowded places (e.g., shopping malls) made her hypomanic, and that alcohol, even in small amounts, contributed to her sleep disturbance and in turn contributed to her hypomanias. The therapists offered a handout on risk factors (e.g., substance abuse, sleep irregularity, unpredictable daily routines, family conflict) and protective factors (e.g., regular medications, good family communication). Next, the clinicians helped Barry and Debra devise a relapse prevention plan:  tHeraPist 1: The clients we’ve worked with who’ve done best with this illness have been able to rely on their spouses and other close family members at times of crisis. It’s a fine line you have to walk between being able to turn to your spouse and say, “I think I’m getting sick again,” and to take some of their advice without giving up control altogether. Debra, when your moods are going up and down, you are going to want more control. Barry, maybe you sometimes feel like you’re walking a fine line as well: You want to say “Yes, you are getting sick, and I’d like to help you,” without rubbing it in, to be able to give suggestions without taking over.  Barry: That’s one thing we have in common. We’re both control freaks. I guess likes attract.   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  tHeraPist 1: Well, maybe the fact that you both like to be in control of your own fate was part of what attracted the two of you in the first place [reframing]. But like many things that attract people initially, something like not wanting to give up control can become a problem in the relationship later.  The partners came to some agreements about what the prodromal signs of Debra’s hypomania looked like (e.g., increased interest in household projects, getting up extraordinarily early, irritability that occurred in multiple situations) and some of her risk factors (e.g., alcohol). They conjointly developed a relapse prevention plan that involved keeping emergency phone numbers handy, avoiding alcohol, and avoiding high-stress interpersonal situations (e.g., conflicts between Debra and her mother). Barry and Debra also discussed how they could communicate if her symptoms started to escalate. Barry admitted that he “had to learn not to lash out” at such times, and not to “just blurt out everything I think.” Interestingly, both showed resistance to the suggestion that Debra try to maintain a regular sleep– wake cycle, even on weekends, when she had her worst mood swings. Barry scoffed, “Maybe we should just join the Army,” and both emphasized that they were not about to give up their love of late-night partying.  The psychoeducation module ended with a discussion of the effects of the illness label on Debra’s selfesteem. She had been alluding throughout the first six sessions to her discomfort with the diagnosis of bipolar II disorder.  tHeraPist 1: Sometimes when we go through our symptom lists and talk about the causes of bipolar disorder, people can feel labeled or picked apart. Debra, have you ever felt that way in here?  DeBra: When I first came in here, I felt picked on. I felt like it was “blame Debbie time,” and now there was this real biological reason to pin all our problems on.  tHeraPist 1: I hope you don’t think we’re saying that all of your problems as a couple stem from your bipolar disorder.  DeBra: No, I think you guys have been fair about that. It was hard for me to talk about, and sometimes I think Barry is just objecting to me, as a person.  tHeraPist 1: In other words, the line between your personality and your disorder gets blurred. DeBra: Yes, and to me they’re very different.  tHeraPist 1: I’m glad you’re bringing this up. I think that’s very important, to be very clear on when we’re just talking about you, your styles of relating to people. . . . Not everything you do has to be reduced to this illness.  Barry: And I probably do bring it up [the illness] too much.  DeBra: (becoming activated) Yes, and you bring it up in front of other people. . . . That can be a real problem for me. We used to have such great conversations! I get tired of talking with you about my disorder all the time. That’s all you seem to wanna talk about.  Barry: (startled) Why haven’t you told me this?  DeBra: I probably do need to tell you. . . . I just want more of a happy medium, between talking about it and not.  Barry: So what do you want?  DeBra: (becoming tearful) I’m not sure.  tHeraPist 1: I think it’s understandable that you wouldn’t know. . . . You’re not always sure how much help you need from Barry. Maybe you’re trying to find a good balance. That may take some time. I hope you don’t feel that all we’re interested in is your disorder, and not in you as a person [examines apparent resistance to the psychoeducational material].  DeBra: I usually don’t feel that way, except when I try to do that mood chart [acknowledges emotional pain underlying resistance to the therapeutic tasks]. I just want to have conversations with Barry like I have with my girlfriends. I’d like to talk about things other than my illness and my doctors.  Communication Enhancement Training (Sessions 8–14)  During Session 8, the therapists introduced CET to the couple. Barry and Debra both described a “demand– withdrawal” pattern in their communication. Barry would become intrusive in trying to understand Debra’s mood state, and Debra would withdraw and become noncooperative. Debra admitted that she had a difficult time acknowledging being depressed and talking about it because “you just didn’t do that in my family.” She grew up in a Southern family, where “you didn’t air your dirty laundry.” In contrast, Barry was from Los Angeles, where “you might spill your guts to whoever was stuck in traffic next to you.”   Bipolar Disorder  The therapists began by exploring the demand– withdrawal pattern:  tHeraPist 1: This is one of the dynamics we’ve seen in couples dealing with bipolar disorder. People with a mood disorder can get irritable with their spouses, and then their spouses react because they feel under attack, and when they react, the arguments can really spiral. The person with the disorder feels there’s something he/she is legitimately angry about, and the spouse sees the anger as evidence of the bipolar illness.  Barry: Well, my problem is that Debra’s not aware of her symptoms.  DeBra: I’m aware of them, but I wanna be left alone. You finish my sentences. . .  Barry: And then you walk out of the room. You don’t want to have anything to do with normal communication. It’s just like it was with your parents. . .  DeBra: When I’m in that state [depression], the last thing I want is a serious conversation or to have someone question what I want to do or why.  tHeraPist 2: Let’s talk about what happens between the two of you [draws couple back to relationship focus]. When you try to talk about something, what happens? One of you just won’t talk? You do talk, but it doesn’t go well?  Barry: She procrastinates, she won’t deal with things; then I yell; then she won’t be around me and she withdraws; and then I start thinking about how long I can live like this.  tHeraPist 2: Debra, how would you describe it?  DeBra: Barry gets frustrated when I don’t give him the answers he’s looking for, and then I feel bad that I frustrated him, and he feels bad that he got upset at me, and then I feel bad that I made him feel bad about upsetting me.  tHeraPist 2: Is that something you’d like to work on—your communication as a couple?  Barry: Yes. There’s been no communication because of the bipolar disorder. I don’t know if we’d have these problems if she weren’t bipolar. She gets depressed, her thoughts don’t get communicated, she never even tries. . . and that reminds me of what I was gonna ask you: Do you think she might have attention deficit disorder as well as being bipolar?  DeBra: Oh, no, here we go. . .  tHeraPist 1: Barry, no one can tell for sure, but regardless of what the cause is, it sounds like you’re ready for us to start focusing more on your relationship [redirects discussion but doesn’t directly challenge Barry’s definition of the problem]. At least part of what you’re describing sounds like the habits you have communicating with each other as a couple. We’ll be teaching you some fairly straightforward skills for talking to each other, like how to praise each other for things done well, how to listen, and how to ask for changes in each other’s behavior. This will help you during these cycles, whether they be real mood cycles or just rocky periods in your relationship [provides rationale for upcoming communication module].  DeBra: Yeah, I need to learn how to argue. He’s a lawyer; he’s a much better arguer than me.  Barry: (still angry) But you see, no one ever said a damn thing in your family; no one was ever really there. So of course you’re going to react to me because I’m passionate, and then when I get really pissed off, you finally take stock and listen. It’s the only way I can get through to you.  tHeraPist 1: I think there’s a lot for us to work with here. Debra, I’d like to take you off the “bipolar hook” for a while, and let’s work on how you act and react with each other. We don’t have to work on your communication just about bipolar disorder—maybe also how you talk about finances, friends. . .  Barry: But that’s all about doing it in here. . . . How are you gonna know how we communicate at home?  tHeraPist 1: We’re gonna bug your house. (Both chuckle) We’ll do some exercises in here that involve role playing new ways of talking, but you’ll have to practice these new ways in between sessions at home. I personally think this will benefit you a great deal, if you have the time to do it [expresses optimism].  The therapists now had a better understanding of this couple’s communication patterns. The demand– withdrawal pattern in part derived from their different family histories, but it was equally true that Barry was rewarded for being critical; it got results, even if these results were accompanied by Debra’s resentment. They disagreed on the extent to which these communication patterns were driven by her bipolar disorder. Barry assumed that most or all of their problems could be attributed to the disorder, but Debra saw this assumption as   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  just an attempt to blame her for everything. The therapists’ take was that the marital dynamics existed independently of Debra’s mood swings but became magnified by her hypomanic and depressive episodes. During hypomanic episodes she was more touchy and reactive, and when depressed she was more likely to withdraw.  In Session 9, the therapists began the skills training. FFT begins with positive communication skills to increase the likelihood that members of a couple or family will collaborate when dealing with more difficult issues. One therapist began by introducing a handout entitled Expressing Positive Feelings, in which each partner is directed simply to praise the other for some specific behavior the other has performed, and to tell the partner how this behavior makes him/her feel. The therapists first modeled the skill. One of them praised Barry, saying, “I appreciate you taking the long drive up here [to the clinic] and making an adjustment to your schedule to make this possible. . . . It makes me feel like you value what we do here.” Barry expressed appreciation for the compliment. The therapist then asked Barry and Debra to turn their chairs toward each other and select a behavior to praise in each other. Interestingly, neither had trouble selecting a topic. The problem was in staying with positive emotions and not letting negative ones leak in.  Barry: I appreciated your taking Jill to soccer on Wednesday. It made me feel like you. . . like you knew I was overwhelmed that day, and that, you know, I’m usually the one doing all the parenting while you. . .  tHeraPist 2: (interrupting) Barry, I’d like to stop you before we get into that. Debra, can you tell me what you liked so far about how Barry said that? Did he follow the instructions on this sheet?  DeBra: Well, like you said, he was starting to get into it, but I liked the first part. I’m glad he feels that way. Barry: Do you feel I give you enough positive feedback? DeBra: (pause) You have your days.  tHeraPist 2: Barry, I thought you did that pretty well. Could you try it without the tail at the end?  Barry: (Chuckles.) There you go, stealing my thunder. OK, um, Deb, thanks again for taking Jill to soccer. It made me feel like you. . . like my schedule is important to you, and that you’re thinking of me.  tHeraPist 2: Good. Debra, what’d you think?  DeBra: Much better. Barry: Sometimes I think I was put on this earth to  learn tact.  Sessions 10 and 11 of CET focused on active listening skills. One member of the couple listened while the other spoke, first about issues outside of the marriage (i.e., work relationships), then about couple-related matters. Both Barry and Debra required restructuring of their listening skills. Specifically, Debra tended to “space out” when Barry spoke, and required prompting to stay with the issues. She acknowledged that she sometimes felt she was being tested by Barry when he talked to her, to determine whether she could come up with thoughtful, intuitive replies. Her “checking out” was a way of coping with the performance anxiety that she experienced when listening to him.  Not surprisingly, Barry’s difficulty with listening centered on withholding his natural tendency to give advice. When Debra began to talk, he would listen reflectively for a minute or two, but then he would begin to ask questions, such as “Well, when are you gonna call that person?” or “Last time we talked you said you were going to finish that resumé. Why haven’t you?” Repeated practice within sessions—supplemented by homework assignments to practice these skills—led Barry to become more aware of what he was doing. During a particularly poignant moment, he admitted, “I don’t like the way I react to her. . . . I don’t like the person I’m becoming.”  As FFT passed the 3-month point and the frequency changed to biweekly, the clinicians introduced potentially more heated forms of communication, such as the partners making requests for changes in each other’s behaviors and expressing negative feelings (Sessions 12–14). At this point, Debra was not as depressed as she had been during the assessment phase, although Barry continued to complain about her low functioning. He argued that she had become unable to tell him what she had and had not accomplished during the day, and that she often made it appear that she had done things that, in reality, she had not. He labeled this her “lack of follow-through” problem. In contrast, Debra became increasingly assertive about his “micromanagement” of her behavior.  tHeraPist 1: One of the things we’d like to work on  with you is how you ask each other to change in  some way. What’s an appropriate way to ask some    Bipolar Disorder  one to help you? (Gives Barry and Debra the handout titled “Making a Positive Request.”) Try looking directly at each other; say what you would like the other person to do, and how it would make you feel. Debra, a minute ago you were talking about how Barry micromanages you. Can you turn this into a positive—ask him what you would like him to do? Phrase it in a way that he can help you? How can he ask you to follow through without nagging you?  DeBra: Uh, Barry, it would really make me happy if you. . . in situations where there’s a dilemma, if you’d give me a little more freedom.  Barry: For example? Do you mean you want us to do things at your pace?  tHeraPist 1: Barry, let it come from her.  DeBra: Um, like, if there’s some shopping to do, it would help me out if I could just say, “Yes, this is on my list and I’ll do it. . . if you could wait for me to get it done in my own time.” That would help ease the tension.  tHeraPist 2: Barry, how did you feel about how Debra asked you? Did she follow this sheet?  Barry: I think she asked me just fine, but my question is, will she then do the shopping?  DeBra: I think it would really help me to have some plan—like agreeing that if I do this part of the shopping, you’ll do that part. Maybe that would stop me from saying, “I’ll show him. He’s not gonna run my life; I’m not gonna do it his way.”  tHeraPist 1: A person who feels one-down often reacts by refusing to go along with the plan, even though going along with it might be of help to them personally. Debra, do you get into that sometimes?  The therapists were encouraging assertiveness in Debra, and at the same time gently confronting what Barry had earlier called her “passive–aggressiveness.” They then asked Barry to make a positive request of Debra.  tHeraPist 2: Barry, can you think of something you could ask Debra to do, to change her behavior?  Barry: (looking at clinicians) OK, Deb, it’s very important to me. . .  tHeraPist 2: Can you tell this to her?  Barry: (turns toward Debra) OK, it’s very important to me that you not just walk away when we have dis   cussions. That you don’t just withdraw. Especially when we talk about Jill and our differences about her. That really irritates me.  The therapists again observed Debra withdraw in  reaction to Barry’s “high-EE” behavior. They com   mented on her reactions.  tHeraPist 1: Debra, what’s happening now? You seem like you’re checking out.  DeBra: (Snaps back, smiles.) Yeah, I guess I am. What were we talking about?  Barry: You see, I think that’s part of her attention deficit disorder. Do you think she needs Ritalin [medication for this condition]?  tHeraPist 1: Barry, in this case, I don’t think so. I think that what happened, Debra, if I can speak for you for a moment, is that you withdrew because you felt you were under attack.  DeBra: That’s probably true. He got into his “You do this, you do that.”  Barry: (frustrated) Well, you just asked me to change something! Am I supposed to do all the work here?  tHeraPist 1: Barry, I’m going to encourage you to try again. Only this time, I’d like you to be more aware of how you phrase things. Notice you said what you didn’t want her to do—withdraw when you were talking to her. That’s quite important. But what would you like her to do instead?  Barry: I want her to engage with me! To talk it out!  tHeraPist 1: Can you try again, only this time tell her what you want her to do?  Barry: (Sighs.) Deb, when we talk, I’d really like. . . I’d really appreciate it if you’d hang in there and finish talking to me, especially about Jill. That would make me feel, I don’t know, like we’re partners.  tHeraPist 2: Barry, that was much better, and I’ll bet it was easier to hear. Debra?  DeBra: Yeah, I liked it. . . that’s easier. We need to do more of this.  Much emphasis was placed throughout CET on between-session homework assignments. The couple was encouraged to hold weekly meetings and to record their efforts to use the skills. Both spouses reported a reduction in tension in the relationship by the time the problem-solving segment was initiated.   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  Problem Solving (Sessions 15–18)  FFT sessions were held less frequently (biweekly) in the fourth, fifth, and sixth months. At Session 15, problem solving was introduced. After explaining the rationale, the therapists asked the couple to identify several specific problems for discussion, then reviewed the problem-solving steps with them.  The first issue chosen by the couple seemed superficial at first. They had two cats, one of which belonged to Debra (and had come with her from a previous marriage) and the other of which Barry had bought. They disagreed on how much the cats should be fed: Debra “wanted mine to be fat” and fed it frequently, whereas Barry wanted his to be thin. As a result, Barry’s cat was waking them up in the middle of the night, needing to be fed. The resulting changes in Debra’s sleep–wake cycles had resulted in her becoming irritable, restless, and possibly hypomanic. Despite a conscientious literature search, the therapists were unable to find any research on the influence of cat diets on the cycling of bipolar disorder.  The couple considered various alternatives: feeding the cats equal amounts, keeping Barry’s cat in the garage, giving away Barry’s cat, and feeding both cats before the couple went to bed. They eventually settled on the last of these. The problem itself generated humor and playfulness between them, and they derived some satisfaction from being able to deal with it collaboratively.   A second and potentially more serious source of conflict concerned their night life. Both liked going to parties, but Barry liked to stay longer than Debra, who thought that parties contributed to her mood cycling. She tended to become overstimulated by the interactions with many people and would quickly become fatigued. They considered several alternatives: going to the parties in separate cars, Barry agreeing to leave earlier, Debra going to the car and sleeping when she felt tired, and Debra taking a cab home. They eventually decided to discuss and agree upon a departure time before going to a party.  The couple was able to apply the problem-solving method successfully to other issues, such as paying the bills and helping Jill get to her afterschool activities. They continued to have trouble breaking problems down into smaller chunks, and tended to “crosscomplain” or bring up larger problems in the middle of trying to solve smaller ones. Barry often complained, “We aren’t dealing with the source of these problems,  which is her bipolar disorder. We wouldn’t have these problems if she weren’t bipolar.” Again, the therapists did not challenge his definition of the problem, but continued to offer the message that regardless of whether the source of the problems lay in Debra, the couple still needed to work collaboratively to generate acceptable compromises.  Termination (Sessions 19–21)  By 7 months, Debra, whose depression had largely remitted, had obtained a new job working in sales at a clothing store. The therapists began the termination phase of treatment, which focused on reviewing what the couple had taken away from the psychoeducation, CET, and problem-solving skills modules. Both reported that their relationship had improved, and that they “occasionally” used the communication skills at home. The therapists commented on how far they had come and encouraged them to pick a time each week to meet and rehearse one or more of the skills.  Barry was not entirely convinced of Debra’s clinical improvement, however. In one of the final sessions, he returned to the issue of Debra’s symptoms and her “unwillingness” to follow through on tasks such as cooking, depositing her paycheck, cleaning Jill’s clothes, and doing other tasks they had agreed she would perform. The following interchange ensued:  Barry: (Laughs nervously.) I had this dream the other night that I was getting married, and I knew that I was marrying Debra, but I couldn’t see her face, and I wasn’t sure it was really her. And I wasn’t sure if I should be there.  tHeraPist 1: And you were standing in front of everyone wearing your pajamas as well.  Barry: (Laughs.) Yeah, and I was about to take the exam that I hadn’t studied for. But really, sometimes I feel like she’s not the same person, especially when she doesn’t want to follow through on things we’ve talked about.  tHeraPist 1: Let me give you some perspective on this. I think a dilemma many spouses face is “Should I stick it out with my husband or my wife, or should I leave and take care of me?” There are certainly people who do that, who leave, and then there are many others who hang out and wait for things to get better, which in fact they often do.   Bipolar Disorder  Barry: And I think things have gotten better.  DeBra: I think so. I don’t know why you’re being so negative.  Barry: Well, if you. . .  tHeraPist 1: (Interrupts.) Let me finish this thought. Barry, I think it’s critical for you to make a distinction in your own mind between what Debra can and can’t control. That’s sometimes vague between the two of you. When you say she doesn’t want to follow through, that certainly sounds like an intentional behavior—something she’s doing to hurt you or annoy you. Debra, do the problems with following through ever feel like they’re about problems with your concentration? Your attention or your memory?  DeBra: (nodding emphatically) Absolutely! If you could get him to realize that, we’d be a lot farther along.  Barry: That memory stuff—is that her bipolar disorder or her attention deficit disorder?  tHeraPist 1: I’m not sure that’s really the question. That’s just a diagnostic distinction, and I’m not sure my answering one way or the other will help you. Maybe what you’re really wondering is whether these problems are controllable by her or not. If I were in your position, the things that would really anger me would be those things I thought she was doing intentionally.  Barry: Yeah, and I don’t always think about that.  tHeraPist 1: If I thought what she was doing was due to a biological dysregulation, I might be more patient, more sympathetic—in the same way that if someone had a broken leg and had trouble walking up stairs, I might have more sympathy than if I thought she was deliberately trying to hold me up.  In this segment, the therapist was addressing directly what he felt was a major source of Barry’s critical attitudes toward Debra: the belief that many of her negative behaviors were controllable and intentional (Hooley & Licht, 1997; Miklowitz et al., 1998). In some instances, Barry may have been right about Debra’s motivations. But questioning the controllability of her symptoms forced him to consider a different set of causal explanations for her behavior. The distinction between controllable and uncontrollable behavior is a key point in the psychoeducational treatment of families of patients with bipolar disorder.  Barry and Debra’s Progress  After completing FFT, Debra continued to have mild periods of depression despite her adherence to medication. Her depressions were unpleasant but not so severe that she was unable to keep her job or attend to her parenting duties. Her brief hypomanic periods sometimes caused arguments between Debra and Barry but were not debilitating. Barry and Debra were communicating better, and both agreed that Barry was more patient and less critical of her. But Debra frequently found herself reacting with the line from the now famous movie, “What if this is as good as it gets?” Although she was functional, she expressed chagrin that she could not have the life she had wanted— a successful career, a more intimate relationship with her husband, more friendships, an easier relationship with her daughter, and more financial success. The reality of her disorder and its psychosocial effects were difficult for her to accept. However, Debra felt that FFT had been helpful, as had her medication, which she showed no inclination to discontinue. The therapists offered her a referral for individual or group therapy, but Debra decided to forgo further psychosocial treatment for the time being. Barry was given the name of a local DBSA group for spouses of persons with mood disorders.  coNclusioNs  Family psychoeducational treatment appears to be a useful adjunct to pharmacotherapy. However, not all patients with bipolar disorder have families, and individual or group treatment approaches are important alternatives to consider. The finding that mood-stabilizing medications are more powerful in alleviating manic than depressive symptoms, whereas the reverse may be true for psychotherapy, is an argument for combining medical and psychosocial interventions in the outpatient maintenance of bipolar disorder.  There is limited research on which families are the best candidates for FFT. In several of our trials, patients in high-EE families have shown greater reductions in mood severity scores over 1–2 years than those in low-EE families. But reductions in relapses have been observed in patients from both high- and low-EE families treated with FFT. Our clinical observations also suggest that there are subgroups of patients who do not respond well to FFT. Specifically, patients who   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  are unusually resistant to accepting the diagnosis of bipolar disorder often resent the educational focus of FFT. These patients usually see their troubles as having external origins (i.e., being mistreated by others) and resist interventions that require them to take more responsibility for their behavior. These patients may also reject pharmacotherapy. Sadly, we have seen many patients go through several hospitalizations before the reality of their disorder sets in.  A different kind of resistance originates from viewing the disorder as biologically based. Some patients prefer to limit their mental health contacts to a psychiatrist for medication, and regard psychotherapy as irrelevant. We see nothing wrong with this position; a subset of patients does function well on medication only. Future research needs to determine whether this selfselected group is different from patients who request psychotherapy, in terms of symptomatic, course-ofillness, or family/genetic variables. Equally importantly, some patients with bipolar II depression may recover just as quickly with psychotherapy as with medications (Swartz, Frank, & Cheng, 2012).  Family members are sometimes a major source of resistance. Their reasons can include a desire to distance themselves from the patient (whom they may have tried to help for years without reward), time or distance constraints, or the discomfort of talking about family or couple issues in front of a stranger. More subtle is the fear of being blamed for the disorder (Hatfield, Spaniol, & Zipple, 1987). The family therapy movement has come a long way, but it still has its roots in a culture that faulted parents for causing mental illness. The theoretical model underlying FFT does not in any way link poor parenting to the onset of bipolar disorder. Nonetheless, a clinician often needs to make clear early in treatment that he/she does not adhere to this antiquated position.  future DirectioNs  Important future research will include effectiveness studies, which examine the clinical impact of psychotherapy as delivered to patients in “real-world” (typically community mental health) settings, by the clinicians who work in these settings and the time constraints within which they work. As explained earlier, FFT was found to be effective in stabilizing depression  and maintaining wellness in the large-scale STEP-BD study of community effectiveness, which included therapists working in 15 outpatient sites (Miklowitz et al., 2007b). It remains to be seen whether FFT, along with other treatments whose evidence base includes STEP- BD (CBT, IPSRT), will be taken up by practicing clinicians.   A related problem is determining the proper structure of FFT. In many community settings, insurance companies only pay for six to eight sessions. FFT is rather time-intensive, and research is needed to determine which of its components predict the greatest proportion of variance in the clinical outcome of participants and the quality of life of family members. For example, it is possible that some families will benefit from just the psychoeducation module or just the communication module. Perhaps these modules could be streamlined without a great loss in treatment effect size. Ideally, decisions to modify treatments such as FFT will be based on clinical outcomes research rather than solely on the desire for cost containment.  A final direction is the applicability of FFT and other psychotherapy treatments to child and adolescent patients with bipolar disorder, or genetically vulnerable children who are showing early prodromal signs. The fact that bipolar disorder even exists in school-age or early adolescent youth is just now being recognized, and factors that predict the onset of the full disorder— such as the presence of a family history of mania— are being identified (Axelson, Birmaher, Strober, et al., 2011; Birmaher et al., 2009). Our current research is examining whether giving FFT in the earliest stages of the disorder reduces the risk of developing the full syndrome (Miklowitz et al., 2013). Possibly the negative symptomatic and psychosocial outcomes of adult bipolar disorder can be mitigated through early detection and carefully planned preventive interventions.  aCknowledgMents  Preparation of this chapter was supported in part by National Institute of Mental Health Grant Nos. MH43931, MH55101, MH42556, MH62555, MH073871, MH077856, MH093676, and MH097007; a Distinguished Investigator Award from the National Association for Research on Schizophrenia and Depression; and a Faculty Fellowship from the University of Colorado’s Council on Research and Creative Work.   Bipolar Disorder  referenCes  Akiskal, H. S. (1996). The prevalent clinical spectrum of bipolar disorders: Beyond DSM-IV. Journal of Clinical Psychopharmacology, 16(Suppl. 1), 4–14.  Alloy, L. B., Uroševi, S., Abramson, L. Y., Jager-Hyman, S., Nusslock, R., Whitehouse, W. G., et al. (2012). Progression along the bipolar spectrum: A longitudinal study of predictors of conversion from bipolar spectrum conditions to bipolar I and II disorders. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 121(1), 16–27.  Altshuler, L. L., Bearden, C., Green, M., van Gorp, W., & Mintz, J. (2008). A relationship between neurocognitive impairment and functional impairment: A pilot study. Psychiatry Research, 157, 289–293.  Altshuler, L. L., Post, R. M., Black, D. O., Keck, P. E. J., Nolen, W. A., Frye, M. A., et al. (2006). Subsyndromal depressive symptoms are associated with functional impairment in patients with bipolar disorder: Results of a large, multisite study. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 67(10), 1551–1560.  Altshuler, L. L., Post, R. M., Leverich, G. S., Mikalauskas, K., Rosoff, A., & Ackerman, L. (1995). Antidepressant- induced mania and cycle acceleration: A controversy revisited. American Journal of Psychiatry, 152, 1130–1138.  American Psychiatric Association. (1994). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (4th ed.). Washington, DC: Author.  American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.). Arlington, VA: Author.  Axelson, D., Birmaher, B. J., Brent, D., Wassick, S., Hoover, C., Bridge, J., et al. (2003). A preliminary study of the Kiddie Schedule for Affective Disorders and Schizophrenia for School-Age Children mania rating scale for children and adolescents. Journal of Child and Adolescent Psychopharmacology, 13, 463–470.  Axelson, D. A., Birmaher, B., Findling, R. L., Fristad, M. A., Kowatch, R. A., Youngstrom, E. A., et al. (2011). Concerns regarding the inclusion of temper dysregulation disorder with dysphoria in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 72(9), 1257–1262.  Axelson, D. A., Birmaher, B., Strober, M. A., Goldstein, B. I., Ha, W., Gill, M. K., et al. (2011). Course of subthreshold bipolar disorder in youth: Diagnostic progression from bipolar disorder not otherwise specified. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 50(10), 1001–1016.  Baldessarini, R. J., Tondo, L., & Hennen, J. (2003). Lithium treatment and suicide risk in major affective disorders: Update and new findings. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 64(Suppl. 5), 44–52.  Bauer, M. S., McBride, L., Williford, W. O., Glick, H., Kinosian, B., Altshuler, L., et al. (2006). Collaborative care for bipolar disorder: Part II. Impact on clinical outcome, function, and costs Psychiatric Services, 57, 937–945.  Berrettini, W. (2003). Evidence for shared susceptibility in bipolar disorder and schizophrenia. American Journal of Medical Genetics, Part C, 123, 59–64.  Birmaher, B., Axelson, D., Goldstein, B., Strober, M., Gill,  M. K., Hunt, J., et al. (2009). Four-year longitudinal course of children and adolescents with bipolar spectrum disorders: The Course and Outcome of Bipolar Youth (COBY) study. American Journal of Psychiatry, 166(7), 795–804. Butzlaff, R. L., & Hooley, J. M. (1998). Expressed emotion and psychiatric relapse: A meta-analysis. Archives of General Psychiatry, 55, 547–552.  Calabrese, J. R., Fatemi, S. H., Kujawa, M., & Woyshville,  M. J. (1996). Predictors of response to mood stabilizers. Journal of Clinical Psychopharmacology, 16(Suppl. 1), 24–31. Carlson, G. A., Findling, R. L., Post, R. M., Birmaher, B., Blumberg, H. P., Correll, C., et al. (2009). AACAP 2006 Research Forum—Advancing research in early-onset bipolar disorder: Barriers and suggestions. Journal of Child and Adolescent Psychopharmacology, 19(1), 3–12.  Chambers, W. J., Puig-Antich, J., Hirsch, M., Paez, P., Ambrosini, P. J., Tabrizi, M. A., et al. (1985). The assessment of affective disorders in children and adolescents by semistructured interview: Test–retest reliability. Archives of General Psychiatry, 42, 696–702.  Colom, F., Vieta, E., Martinez-Aran, A., Reinares, M., Goikolea, J. M., Benabarre, A., et al. (2003). A randomized trial on the efficacy of group psychoeducation in the prophylaxis of recurrences in bipolar patients whose disease is in remission. Archives of General Psychiatry, 60, 402–407.  Colom, F., Vieta, E., Martinez-Aran, A., Reinares, M., Goikolea, A., Benabarre, A., et al. (2009). A randomized trial on the efficacy of group psychoeducation in the prophylaxis of bipolar disorder: A five year follow-up. British Journal of Psychiatry, 194(3), 260–265.  Colom, F., Vieta, E., Sanchez-Moreno, J., Martinez-Aran, A., Reinares, M., Goikolea, J. M., et al. (2005). Stabilizing the stabilizer: Group psychoeducation enhances the stability of serum lithium levels. Bipolar Disorders, 7(Suppl. 5), 32–36.  Colom, F., Vieta, E., Tacchi, M. J., Sanchez-Moreno, J., & Scott, J. (2005). Identifying and improving non-adherence in bipolar disorders. Bipolar Disorders, 7(5), 24–31.  Coryell, W., Endicott, J., & Keller, M. (1992). Rapidly cycling affective disorder: Demographics, diagnosis, family history, and course. Archives of General Psychiatry, 49, 126–131.   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  Cuellar, A. K., Johnson, S. L., & Winters, R. (2005). Distinctions between bipolar and unipolar depression. Clinical Psychology Review, 25(3), 307–339.  Cutler, N. R., & Post, R. M. (1982). Life course of illness in untreated manic–depressive patients. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 23, 101–115.  Dausch, B. M., Miklowitz, D. J., & Richards, J. A. (1996). A Scale for the Global Assessment of Relational Functioning, II: Reliability and validity in a sample of families of bipolar patients. Family Process, 35, 175–189.  Deckersbach, T., Nierenberg, A. A., Kessler, R., Lund, H. G., Ametrano, R. M., Sachs, G., et al. (2010). Cognitive rehabilitation for bipolar disorder: An open trial for employed patients with residual depressive symptoms. CNS Neuroscience and Therapeutics, 16(5), 298–307.  Ehlers, C. L., Kupfer, D. J., Frank, E., & Monk, T. H. (1993). Biological rhythms and depression: The role of zeitgebers and zeitstorers. Depression, 1, 285–293.  Falloon, I. R. H., Boyd, J. L., & McGill, C. W. (1984). Family care of schizophrenia: A problem-solving approach to the treatment of mental illness. New York: Guilford Press.  Fiedorowicz, J. G., Endicott, J., Leon, A. C., Solomon, D. A., Keller, M. B., & Coryell, W. H. (2011). Subthreshold hypomanic symptoms in progression from unipolar major depression to bipolar disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 168(1), 40-48.  First, M. B. (2010). DSM-5 proposals for mood disorders: A cost–benefit analysis. Current Opinion in Psychiatry, 24(1), 1–9.  First, M. B., Spitzer, R. L., Gibbon, M., & Williams, J. B.  W. (1995). Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV Axis I disorders. New York: Biometrics Research Department, New York State Psychiatric Institute. Frank, E. (2005). Treating bipolar disorder: A clinician’s guide to interpersonal and social rhythm therapy. New York: Guilford Press.  Frank, E. (2011). Proposed revisions to the concept of mixed episodes in DSM-5: The path traveled (abstract). Bipolar Disorders, 13(1), 14.  Frank, E., Kupfer, D. J., Thase, M. E., Mallinger, A. G., Swartz, H. A., Fagiolini, A. M., et al. (2005). Two-year outcomes for interpersonal and social rhythm therapy in individuals with bipolar I disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry, 62(9), 996–1004.  Frank, E., Soreca, I., Swartz, H. A., Fagiolini, A. M., Mallinger, A. G., Thase, M. E., et al. (2008). The role of interpersonal and social rhythm therapy in improving occupational functioning in patients with bipolar I disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 165(12), 1559–1565.  Fristad, M. A., Verducci, J. S., Walters, K., & Young, M. E. (2009). Impact of multifamily psychoeducational psychotherapy in treating children aged 8 to 12 years with mood disorders. Archives of General Psychiatry, 66(9), 1013–1021.  Geddes, J. R. & Miklowitz, D. J. (2013). Treatment of bipolar disorder. Lancet, 381, 1672–1682.  George, E. L., Miklowitz, D. J., Richards, J. A., Simoneau,  T. L., & Taylor, D. O. (2003). The comorbidity of bipolar disorder and Axis II personality disorders: Prevalence and clinical correlates. Bipolar Disorders, 5, 115–122. Gitlin, M. J., Mintz, J., Sokolski, K., Hammen, C., & Altshuler, L. L. (2011). Subsyndromal depressive symptoms after symptomatic recovery from mania are associated with delayed functional recovery. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 72(5), 692–697.  Gitlin, M. J., Swendsen, J., Heller, T. L., & Hammen, C. (1995). Relapse and impairment in bipolar disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 152(11), 1635–1640.  Goes, F. S., Hamshere, M. L., Seifuddin, F., Pirooznia, M., Belmonte-Mahon, P., Breuer, R., et al. (2012). Genomewide association of mood-incongruent psychotic bipolar disorder. Translational Psychiatry, 2, e180.  Goldberg, J. F. (2004). The changing landscape of psychopharmacology. In S. L. Johnson & R. L. Leahy (Eds.), Psychological treatment of bipolar disorder (pp. 109–138). New York: Guilford Press.  Goldberg, J. F., & Kocsis, J. H. (1999). Depression in the course of bipolar disorder. In J. F. Goldberg & M. Harrow (Eds.), Bipolar disorders: Clinical course and outcome (pp. 129–147). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press.  Goldstein, B. I., Goldstein, T. R., & Miklowitz, D. J. (2008). Integrating a substance use disorder (SUD) perspective into family-focused therapy of adolescents with bipolar disorder (FFT-A). Pittsburgh, PA: Western Psychiatric Institute and Clinic.  Hahlweg, K., Goldstein, M. J., Nuechterlein, K. H., Magana,  A. B., Mintz, J., Doane, J. A., et al. (1989). Expressed emotion and patient–relative interaction in families of recentonset schizophrenics. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 57, 11–18. Harrow, M., Grossman, L. S., Herbener, E. S., & Davies,  E. W. (2000). Ten-year outcome: Patients with schizoaffective disorders, schizophrenia, affective disorders and mood-incongruent psychotic symptoms. British Journal of Psychiatry, 177, 421–426. Hatfield, A. B., Spaniol, L., & Zipple, A. M. (1987). Expressed emotion: A family perspective. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 13, 221–226.  Henin, A., Biederman, J., Mick, E., Sachs, G. S., Hirshfeld- Becker, D. R., Siegel, R. S., et al. (2005). Psychopathology in the offspring of parents with bipolar disorder: A controlled study. Biological Psychiatry, 58(7), 554–561.  Honig, A., Hofman, A., Rozendaal, N., & Dingemanns, P. (1997). Psychoeducation in bipolar disorder: Effect on expressed emotion. Psychiatry Research, 72, 17–22.  Hooley, J. M., & Licht, D. M. (1997). Expressed emotion and causal attributions in the spouses of depressed patients. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 106, 298–306.   Bipolar Disorder  Hooley, J. M., & Teasdale, J. D. (1989). Predictors of relapse in unipolar depressives: Expressed emotion, marital distress, and perceived criticism. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 98, 229–235.  Johnson, R. E., & McFarland, B. H. (1996). Lithium use and discontinuation in a health maintenance organization. American Journal of Psychiatry, 153, 993–1000.  Johnson, S. L. (2005a). Life events in bipolar disorder: Towards more specific models. Clinical Psychology Review, 25(8), 1008–1027.  Johnson, S. L. (2005b). Mania and dysregulation in goal pursuit. Clinical Psychology Review, 25, 241–262.  Johnson, S. L., Cuellar, A., Ruggero, C., Perlman, C., Goodnick, P., White, R., et al. (2008). Life events as predictors of mania and depression in bipolar I disorder. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 117, 268–277.  Johnson, S. L., Edge, M. D., Holmes, M. K., & Carver, C. S. (2012). The behavioral activation system and mania. Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 8, 143–167.  Johnson, S. L., Sandrow, D., Meyer, B., Winters, R., Miller, I., Solomon, D., et al. (2000). Increases in manic symptoms following life events involving goal-attainment. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 109, 721–727.  Judd, L. L., Akiskal, H. S., Schettler, P. J., Endicott, J., Maser, J., Solomon, D. A., et al. (2002). The long-term natural history of the weekly symptomatic status of bipolar I disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry, 59, 530–537.  Kaufman, J., Birmaher, B., Brent, D., Rao, U., Flynn, C., Moreci, P., et al. (1997). Schedule for Affective Disorders and Schizophrenia for School-Age Children—Present and Lifetime version (K-SADS-PL): Initial reliability and validity data. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 36, 980–988.  Keck, P. E., McElroy, S. L., Strakowski, S. M., West, S. A., Sax, K. W., Hawkins, J. M., et al. (1998). 12-month outcome of patients with bipolar disorder following hospitalization for a manic or mixed episode. American Journal of Psychiatry, 155, 646–652.  Kim, E. Y., & Miklowitz, D. J. (2002). Childhood mania, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, and conduct disorder: A critical review of diagnostic dilemmas. Bipolar Disorders, 4, 215–225.  Klerman, G. L., Weissman, M. M., Rounsaville, B. J., & Chevron, R. S. (1984). Interpersonal psychotherapy of depression. New York: Basic Books.  Kraepelin, É. (1921). Manic–depressive insanity and paranoia. Edinburgh, UK: Livingstone.  Kumari, V., Fannon, D., Peters, E. R., Ffytche, D. H., Sumich,  A. L., Premkumar, P., et al. (2011). Neural changes following cognitive behaviour therapy for psychosis: A longitudinal study. Brain, 134(8), 2396–2407. Lam, D. H., Burbeck, R., Wright, K., & Pilling, S. (2009). Psychological therapies in bipolar disorder: The effect of illness history on relapse prevention—a systematic review. Bipolar Disorders, 11(5), 474–482.  Lam, D. H., Hayward, P., Watkins, E. R., Wright, K., & Sham,  P. (2005). Relapse prevention in patients with bipolar disorder: Cognitive therapy outcome after 2 years. American Journal of Psychiatry, 162, 324–329. Lam, D. H., Watkins, E. R., Hayward, P., Bright, J., Wright, K., Kerr, N., et al. (2003). A randomized controlled study of cognitive therapy of relapse prevention for bipolar affective disorder: Outcome of the first year. Archives of General Psychiatry, 60, 145–152.  Leibenluft, E. (2011). Severe mood dysregulation, irritability, and the diagnostic boundaries of bipolar disorder in youths. American Journal of Psychiatry, 168(2), 129–142.  Leibenluft, E., Charney, D. S., Towbin, K. E., Bhangoo, R. K., & Pine, D. S. (2003). Defining clinical phenotypes of juvenile mania. American Journal of Psychiatry, 160, 430–437.  Leverich, G. S., & Post, R. M. (1998). Life charting of affective disorders. CNS Spectrums, 3, 21–37.  Leverich, G. S., Post, R. M., Keck, P. E. J., Altshuler, L. L., Frye, M. A., Kupka, R. W., et al. (2007). The poor prognosis of childhood-onset bipolar disorder. Journal of Pediatrics, 150(5), 485–490.  Liberman, R. P., Wallace, C. J., Falloon, I. R. H., & Vaughn,  C. E. (1981). Interpersonal problem solving therapy for schizophrenics and their families. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 22, 627–629. Malhi, G. S., Adams, D., & Berk, M. (2009). Medicating mood with maintenance in mind: Bipolar depression pharmacotherapy. Bipolar Disorders, 11(Suppl. 2), 55–76.  Malkoff-Schwartz, S., Frank, E., Anderson, B. P., Hlastala, S. A., Luther, J. F., Sherrill, J. T., et al. (2000). Social rhythm disruption and stressful life events in the onset of bipolar and unipolar episodes. Psychological Medicine, 30, 1005–1016.  Malkoff-Schwartz, S., Frank, E., Anderson, B., Sherrill, J. T., Siegel, L., Patterson, D., et al. (1998). Stressful life events and social rhythm disruption in the onset of manic and depressive bipolar episodes: A preliminary investigation. Archives of General Psychiatry, 55, 702–707.  Masi, G., Mucci, M., Pfanner, C., Berloffa, S., Magazù, A., & Perugi, G. (2012). Developmental pathways for different subtypes of early-onset bipolarity in youths. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 73(10), 1355–1341.  Merikangas, K. R., Akiskal, H. S., Angst, J., Greenberg, P. E., Hirschfeld, R. M. A., Petukhova, M., et al. (2007). Lifetime and 12-month prevalence of bipolar spectrum disorder in the National Comorbidity Survey Replication. Archives of General Psychiatry, 64(5), 543–552.  Merikangas, K. R., Cui, L., Kattan, G., Carlson, G. A., Youngstrom, E. A., & Angst, J. (2012). Mania with and without depression in a community sample of US adolescents. Archives of General Psychiatry, 69(9), 943–951.  Merikangas, K. R., Jin, R., He, J. P., Kessler, R. C., Lee, S., Sampson, N. A., et al. (2011). Prevalence and correlates of bipolar spectrum disorder in the World Mental Health   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  Survey Initiative. Archives of General Psychiatry, 68(3), 241–251.  Meyer, B., Johnson, S. L., & Winters, R. (2001). Responsiveness to threat and incentive in bipolar disorder: Relations of the BIS/BAS scales with symptoms. Journal of Psychopathology and Behavioral Assessment, 23, 133–143.  Miklowitz, D. J. (2008a). Adjunctive psychotherapy for bipolar disorder: State of the evidence. American Journal of Psychiatry, 165(11), 1408–1419.  Miklowitz, D. J. (2008b). Bipolar disorder: A family-focused treatment approach (2nd ed.). New York: Guilford Press.  Miklowitz, D. J. (2012). A family intervention approach to bipolar disorder and substance abuse in late adolescence. Journal of Clinical Psychology: In Session, 68(5), 502– 513.  Miklowitz, D. J., Axelson, D. A., Birmaher, B., George, E. L., Taylor, D. O., Schneck, C. D., et al. (2008). Familyfocused treatment for adolescents with bipolar disorder: Results of a 2-year randomized trial. Archives of General Psychiatry, 65(9), 1053–1061.  Miklowitz, D. J., Axelson, D. A., George, E. L., Taylor, D. O., Schneck, C. D., Sullivan, A. E., et al. (2009). Expressed emotion moderates the effects of family-focused treatment for bipolar adolescents. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 48, 643–651.  Miklowitz, D. J., Biuckians, A., & Richards, J. A. (2006). Early-onset bipolar disorder: A family treatment perspective. Development and Psychopathology, 18, 1247–1265.  Miklowitz, D. J., George, E. L., Axelson, D. A., Kim, E. Y., Birmaher, B., Schneck, C., et al. (2004). Family-focused treatment for adolescents with bipolar disorder. Journal of Affective Disorders, 82(Suppl. 1), 113–128.  Miklowitz, D. J., George, E. L., Richards, J. A., Simoneau,  T. L., & Suddath, R. L. (2003). A randomized study of family-focused psychoeducation and pharmacotherapy in the outpatient management of bipolar disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry, 60, 904–912. Miklowitz, D. J., & Goldstein, M. J. (1997). Bipolar disorder: A family-focused treatment approach. New York: Guilford Press.  Miklowitz, D. J., Goldstein, M. J., Nuechterlein, K. H., Snyder, K. S., & Mintz, J. (1988). Family factors and the course of bipolar affective disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry, 45, 225–231.  Miklowitz, D. J., Otto, M. W., Frank, E., Reilly-Harrington,  N. A., Wisniewski, S. R., Kogan, J. N., et al. (2007a). Is psychosocial management effective?: In reply to Saddichha and Kumar. Archives of General Psychiatry, 64, 1452–1453. Miklowitz, D. J., Otto, M. W., Frank, E., Reilly-Harrington,  N. A., Wisniewski, S. R., Kogan, J. N., et al. (2007b). Psychosocial treatments for bipolar depression: A 1-year randomized trial from the Systematic Treatment Enhancement Program. Archives of General Psychiatry, 64, 419– 427. Miklowitz, D. J., Schneck, C. D., Singh, M. K., Taylor, D. O., George, E. L., Cosgrove, V. E., et al. (2013). Early intervention for symptomatic youth at risk for bipolar disorder: A randomized trial of family-focused therapy. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 52(2), 121–131.  Miklowitz, D. J., & Scott, J. (2009). Psychosocial treatments for bipolar disorder: Cost-effectiveness, mediating mechanisms, and future directions. Bipolar Disorders, 11, 110–122.  Miklowitz, D. J., Wendel, J. S., & Simoneau, T. L. (1998). Targeting dysfunctional family interactions and high expressed emotion in the psychosocial treatment of bipolar disorder. In Session: Psychotherapy in Practice, 4, 25–38.  Miklowitz, D. J., Wisniewski, S. R., Miyahara, S., Otto, M. W., & Sachs, G. S. (2005). Perceived criticism from family members as a predictor of the 1-year course of bipolar disorder. Psychiatry Research, 136(2–3), 101–111.  Monk, T. H., Kupfer, D. J., Frank, E., & Ritenour, A. M. (1991). The Social Rhythm Metric (SRM): Measuring daily social rhythms over 12 weeks. Psychiatry Research, 36, 195–207.  Murray, G., Suto, M., Hole, R., Hale, S., Amari, E., & Michalak, E. E. (2011). Self-management strategies used by “high functioning” individuals with bipolar disorder: From research to clinical practice. Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy, 18(2), 95–109.  Napier, A. Y., & Whitaker, C. (1988). The family crucible: The intense experience of family therapy. New York: Harper & Row.  O’Connell, R. A., Mayo, J. A., Flatow, L., Cuthbertson, B., & O’Brien, B. E. (1991). Outcome of bipolar disorder on long-term treatment with lithium. British Journal of Psychiatry, 159, 132–129.  Priebe, S., Wildgrube, C., & Muller-Oerlinghausen, B. (1989). Lithium prophylaxis and expressed emotion. British Journal of Psychiatry, 154, 396–399.  Rea, M. M., Tompson, M., Miklowitz, D. J., Goldstein, M. J., Hwang, S., & Mintz, J. (2003). Family focused treatment vs. individual treatment for bipolar disorder: Results of a randomized clinical trial. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 71, 482–492.  Sachs, G. S., Nierenberg, A. A., Calabrese, J. R., Marangell,  L. B., Wisniewski, S. R., Gyulai, L., et al. (2007). Effectiveness of adjunctive antidepressant treatment for bipolar depression. New England Journal of Medicine, 356(17), 1711–1722. Sato, T., Bottlender, R., Schröter, A., & Möller, H. J. (2003). Frequency of manic symptoms during a depressive episode and unipolar “depressive mixed state” as bipolar spectrum. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 107(4), 268– 274.  Sala, R., Axelson, D. A., Castro-Fornieles, J., Goldstein, T. R., Ha, W., Liao, F., et al. (2010). Comorbid anxiety in children and adolescents with bipolar spectrum disorders:   Bipolar Disorder  prevalence and clinical correlates. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 71(10), 1344–1350.  Salavert, J., Caseras, X., Torrubia, R., Furest, S., Arranz, B., Duenas, R., et al. (2007). The functioning of the Behavioral Activation and Inhibition Systems in bipolar I euthymic patients and its influence in subsequent episodes over an eighteen-month period. Personality and Individual Differences, 42(7), 1323–1331.  Scherk, H., Pajonk, F. G., & Leucht, S. (2007). Secondgeneration antipsychotic agents in the treatment of acute mania: A systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Archives of General Psychiatry, 64(4), 442–455.  Schlosser, D. A., Miklowitz, D. J., O’Brien, M. P., De Silva, S., Zinberg, J. L., & Cannon, T. D. (2012). A randomized trial of family-focused treatment for adolescents and young adults at risk for psychosis: Study rationale, design, and methods. Early Intervention in Psychiatry, 6(3), 283–291.  Scott, J., Paykel, E., Morriss, R., Bentall, R., Kinderman, P., Johnson, T., et al. (2006). Cognitive behaviour therapy for severe and recurrent bipolar disorders: A randomised controlled trial. British Journal of Psychiatry, 188, 313–320.  Simon, G. E., Ludman, E. J., Bauer, M. S., Unutzer, J., & Operskalski, B. (2006). Long-term effectiveness and cost of a systematic care program for bipolar disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry, 63(5), 500–508.  Simoneau, T. L., Miklowitz, D. J., Richards, J. A., Saleem, R., & George, E. L. (1999). Bipolar disorder and family communication: Effects of a psychoeducational treatment program. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 108, 588–597.  Simoneau, T. L., Miklowitz, D. J., & Saleem, R. (1998). Expressed emotion and interactional patterns in the families of bipolar patients. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 107, 497–507.  Spitzer, R. L., Williams, J. B., Gibbon, M., & First, M. B. (1992). The Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-III-R (SCID): I. History, rationale, and description. Archives of General Psychiatry, 49(8), 624–629.  Strakowski, S. M., Keck, P. E., McElroy, S. L., West, S. A., Sax, K. W., Hawkins, J. M., et al. (1998). Twelve-month outcome after a first hospitalization for affective psychosis. Archives of General Psychiatry, 55, 49–55.  Suppes, T., Leverich, G. S., Keck, P. E., Nolen, W. A., Denicoff, K. D., Altshuler, L. L., et al. (2001). The Stanley Foundation Bipolar Treatment Outcome Network: II. Demographics and illness characteristics of the first 261 patients. Journal of Affective Disorders, 67, 45–59.  Suppes, T., Mintz, J., McElroy, S. L., Altshuler, L. L., Kupka,  R. W., Frye, M. A., et al. (2005). Mixed hypomania in 908 patients with bipolar disorder evaluated prospectively in the Stanley Foundation Bipolar Treatment Network: A sex-specific phenomenon. Archives of General Psychiatry, 62(10), 1089–1096.  Swann, A. C., Dougherty, D. M., Pazzaglia, P. J., Pham, M., & Moeller, F. G. (2004). Impulsivity: A link between bipolar disorder and substance abuse. Bipolar Disorders, 6, 204–212.  Swartz, H. A., Frank, E., & Cheng, Y. (2012). A randomized pilot study of psychotherapy and quetiapine for the acute treatment of bipolar II depression. Bipolar Disorders, 14(2), 211–216.  Van Meter, A. R., Moreira, A. L., & Youngstrom, E. A. (2011). Meta-analysis of epidemiologic studies of pediatric bipolar disorder. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 72(9), 1250–1256.  Vaughn, C. E., & Leff, J. P. (1976). The influence of family and social factors on the course of psychiatric illness: A comparison of schizophrenia and depressed neurotic patients. British Journal of Psychiatry, 129, 125–137.  Vitiello, B., & Swedo, S. (2004). Antidepressant medications in children. New England Journal of Medicine, 350, 1489–1491.  Weinstock, L. M., & Miller, I. W. (2008). Functional impairment as a predictor of short-term symptom course in bipolar I disorder. Bipolar Disorders, 10(3), 437–442.  Weinstock, L. M., Strong, D., Uebelacker, L. A., & Miller, I.  W. (2009). Differential item functioning of DSM-IV depressive symptoms in individuals with a history of mania versus those without: An item response theory analysis. Bipolar Disorders, 11(3), 289–297. Weisman, A., Lopez, S. R., Karno, M., & Jenkins, J. (1993). An attributional analysis of expressed emotion in Mexican- American families with schizophrenia. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 102, 601–606.  Wendel, J. S., Miklowitz, D. J., Richards, J. A., & George, E.  L. (2000). Expressed emotion and attributions in the relatives of bipolar patients: An analysis of problem-solving interactions. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 109, 792– 796. West, A. E., & Weinstein, S. M. (2012). A family-based psychosocial treatment model. Israeli Journal of Psychiatry and Related Sciences, 49(2), 86–93.  Wilens, T. E., Biederman, J., Kwon, A., Ditterline, J., Forkner, P., Moore, H., et al. (2004). Risk of substance use disorders in adolescents with bipolar disorder. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 43(11), 1380–1386.  Yan, L. J., Hammen, C., Cohen, A. N., Daley, S. E., & Henry,  R. M. (2004). Expressed emotion versus relationship quality variables in the prediction of recurrence in bipolar patients. Journal of Affective Disorders, 83, 199–206.  CHaPter 12  schizophrenia and other Psychotic Disorders  Nicholas tarrier ruMiNa taylor  Among the most remarkable advances in the last decade is the direct treatment of “positive” symptoms of schizophrenia with psychological treatments. Many of these advances originally emanated from the United kingdom, where a group of senior investigators working in the context of the national Health service (nHs) developed and evaluated these approaches. nick Tarrier was at the forefront of this group during this period. in the context of case management and antipsychotic medication, this very creative mix of treatment components has been proven effective for chronic patients who do not fully respond to medication, as well as for patients in an acute stage of the disorder. evidence is now sufficient that government‑sponsored treatment guidelines in both the United kingdom and the United states have incorporated these approaches into comprehensive treatment recommendations. More recently, clear evidence has emerged supporting the use of these procedures for preventing the onset of the disorder for those at risk. The thrusts and parries of these techniques are illustrated in the case of “Jim,” who had developed an intricate web of delusions reminiscent of russell Crowe’s character in A Beautiful Mind, concerning complex schemes by others, including friends and family, to take advantage of him and steal his money and his girlfriend. The therapist’s skill in carrying out these new approaches is never better illustrated than in this chapter. These new, empirically supported psychological treatments represent the front line of our therapeutic work with these severely disturbed patients and are capable of further alleviating to some degree the tragedy that is schizophrenia.—D. H. B.  schizophrenia is a serious mental illness that is characterized by positive symptoms of hallucinations, delusions, and disorders of thought. Typically, hallucinations are auditory, in the form of hearing voices that often talk about the person and in the third person, although hallucinations can occur in other senses. Delusions are frequently bizarre, are held with strong conviction, and often involve a misinterpretation of perception or experience. The content of delusions  may include a variety of themes, including alien control; persecution; reference; and somatic, religious, or grandiose ideas. Disorders of thought are inferred from disruption and disorganization in language. Hallucinations and delusions, and sometimes thought disorders, are referred to as “positive symptoms” and reflect an excess or distortion of normal functioning. “Negative symptoms” are also frequently present and reflect a decrease in or loss of normal function, including restric   502   Schizophrenia and Other Psychotic Disorders  tions in the range and intensity of emotions, in the fluency and productivity of thought and language, and in the initiation of behavior. The consequences of these symptoms can be dysfunction in personal, social, occupational, and vocational functioning. Comorbid disorders, especially depression and anxiety, are frequently present and further impair functioning. Suicide risk is high. Aspects of description, diagnosis, and classification of schizophrenia and psychotic disorders have stimulated much debate and controversy over the decades, and details can be found in most psychiatry textbooks. They do not concern us here except to say that there can be considerable variation in clinical presentation between patients and in the same patient over time. Furthermore, cognitive-behavioral therapy for psychosis (CBTp) in recent years has mainly focused on the reduction of positive symptoms and associated distress, and that is our major concern in most of this chapter. The standard treatments for schizophrenia remain antipsychotic medication and some type of case management, and CBTp described in this chapter is assumed to be in addition to this. Indeed, recent revisions to the National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (NICE; 2009) guidelines in the United Kingdom, and the Schizophrenia Patient Outcomes Research Team (Dixon et al., 2010) in the United States, have suggested that CBTp be offered alongside medication for all those with schizophrenia.  DeveloPMeNt of coGNitive‑Behavioral theraPy for schizoPhreNia  Cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) for schizophrenia, although following a common theme and set of principles, has developed in a number of centers, mostly in the United Kingdom, and has been informed by a number of theoretical and conceptual perspectives. A dramatic expansion in the use of CBT in the 1980s and 1990s in the treatment of anxiety and affective disorders influenced clinical psychologists in the field of schizophrenia, who were trying to understand and treat schizophrenia from a psychological perspective. This was especially true in the United Kingdom, where clinical psychologists treated a range of disorders in adult mental health services and were able to transfer their treatment methods across diagnostic groups. The structure and function of a system of universal health care in the United Kingdom, the National Health Service (NHS), facilitated such skills transfer and multidisci   plinary work. Furthermore, funding of the professional training of health professionals, especially clinical psychologists, has aided awareness and dissemination of CBT for patients in general and for psychotic patients in particular. However, dissemination of treatments into the health service and the universal availability of CBTp has been slow and not without its problems (Brooker & Brabban, 2006; Tarrier, Barrowclough, Haddock, & McGovern, 1999).  research eviDeNce  Clinical, ethical, and economic considerations have encouraged clinical practitioners to be guided by an evidence base produced from evaluations of treatments. The evidence develops from uncontrolled studies and small-scale projects to controlled studies, then to large randomized controlled trials (RCTs) of efficacy and effectiveness. In spite of criticisms of the appropriateness of RCTs in mental health (Richardson, Baker, Burns, Lilford, & Muijen, 2000; Slade & Priebe, 2001), they remain the “gold standard” by which all treatments are judged (Doll, 1998; Pocock, 1996; Salkovskis, 2002; Tarrier & Wykes, 2004). Once a database of controlled trials has been established, then meta-analysis can provide a measure of the average level of therapeutic effect for that treatment. For schizophrenia, a number of published meta-analyses indicate that CBTp is effective in treating positive psychotic symptoms in psychotic patients (e.g., Gould, Mueser, Bolton, Mays, & Goff, 2001; Pilling et al., 2002; Rector & Beck, 2001; Tarrier & Wykes, 2004; Zimmermann, Favrod, Trieu, & Pomini, 2005), although there have been conflicting findings (e.g., Lynch, Laws, & McKenna, 2010). Of the 20 controlled trials of CBT for schizophrenia identified by Tarrier and Wykes (2004), data were available from 19 studies on the effects of CBT on positive symptoms. These studies have a mean effect size of  0.37(SD = 0.39, median = 0.32), with a range between –0.49 and 0.99. Using Cohen’s (1988) convention for categorizing effect sizes, 14 (74%) studies achieved at least a small effect size, six (32%) at least a moderate effect size, and three (16%) achieved a large effect size. Overall these studies indicate a modest effect size in improving positive symptoms compared to standard psychiatric care (treatment as usual, or TAU), which is probably not surprising given the nature and severity of the disorder. An updated meta-analysis and review indicated that effect sizes were 0.476 for CBTp  CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  on positive symptoms from 30 trials, 0.474 for negative symptoms from 14 trials, 0.477 for social functioning from 11 studies, and 0.424 for depression from 11 studies (Wykes, Everitt, Steele, & Tarrier, 2008). A more recent meta-analysis has extended findings by examining the effectiveness of CBTp at follow-up (3 to 15 months after treatment), compared to TAU and other psychological treatments (psychoeducation and family intervention). Sarin, Wallin, and Widerlöv (2011) included 22 studies and 2,469 participants. When CBTp was compared to other psychological interventions at follow-up the outcome was statistically significant and in favor of CBTp having a small treatment effect on positive, negative, and general symptoms. When CBTp was compared to TAU at follow-up and to other psychological treatments immediately after ending, there was a trend in favor of CBTp but this was not statistically significant. Thus, there appeared to be a delay in the effects of CBTp.  Symptom Management in Chronic Schizophrenia  In spite of maintenance medication, a considerable percentage of patients with schizophrenia continue to have persistent hallucinations and delusions that do not respond further to medication. The majority of the CBTp studies have been carried out with patients who have chronic illnesses. These studies, for which data were available for 16, have a mean effect size of 0.4 (SD = 0.32, median = 0.33), with a range from –0.32 to 0.99 (Tarrier & Wykes, 2004). Another strategy has been to adopt a less generic approach and instead use CBTp to target a more defined participant group or specific symptoms. Fowler and colleagues (2009), for example, recruited young people with early psychosis and poor social functioning and unemployment, and offered a cognitive-behavioral intervention designed to improve social recovery. Compared to the TAU-alone group, those with nonaffective psychosis and social recovery problems who received CBT demonstrated significant increases in the number of weekly hours of constructive and structured activity. Moreover, this was achieved in association with clinically meaningful and significant reductions in symptoms and hopelessness. Similarly, Grant, Huh, Perivoliotis, Stolar, and Beck (2012) evaluated an 18-month recovery-focused cognitive therapy package to improve functioning and negative symptoms in people with schizophrenia who had neuro   cognitive impairments. Those who received treatment showed significant improvements in global functioning and in positive and negative symptoms (motivation). In an earlier study, Trower and colleagues (2004) targeted harmful compliance in those with command hallucinations using cognitive therapy. Significant reductions in favor of the cognitive therapy group, which were found in perceived power and omniscience of voices, associated compliance behavior, and distress and depression, remained at 12-month follow-up. This study is currently being replicated in a large multicenter RCT with a longer follow-up to allow researchers to draw more definite conclusions regarding the effectiveness and durability of such an intervention (Birchwood et al., 2011). Recently, there have also been more successful approaches developed to treat delusional beliefs by addressing worry, insomnia, and reasoning biases, which are hypothesized to maintain the persistence of delusions and related distress (see Freeman, 2011, for a review of studies).  Symptom Recovery in Acute Schizophrenia  A handful of studies have investigated the use of CBTp in the treatment of acutely ill patients hospitalized for an acute psychotic episode. Because the participants are acutely ill and may well be suspicious, agitated, and unstable, the therapy is often implemented as a “therapy envelope,” which comprises a range of durations of therapy that can be delivered in a flexible manner. Two studies have produced effect sizes of –0.49 and 0.93 (Drury, Birchwood, Cochrane, & Macmillan, 1996; Haddock, Tarrier, et al., 1999), indicating considerable variance in this small number of studies. The Study of Cognitive Reality Alignment Therapy in Early Schizophrenia (SoCRATES) (Lewis et al., 2002), which is by far the largest and methodologically most rigorous study, recruited 309 patients with early-onset schizophrenia and produced an effect size of 0.12. In an 18-month follow-up of this trial, both CBTp and supportive counseling continued to confer clinical benefit over TAU alone, although there was a trend toward significance for auditory hallucinations to respond better to CBTp (Tarrier, Lewis, et al., 2004). A more recent RCT included participants in the acute phase of their first episode of psychosis who either received CBTp or befriending. CBTp significantly improved functioning when compared to befriending at midtreatment and end of treatment with an effect size of 0.39, but it did   Schizophrenia and Other Psychotic Disorders  not improve symptoms (Jackson et al., 2008). CBTp appeared to promote early recovery, similar to the SoCRATES study (Lewis et al., 2002). However, any differences between the CBTp and befriending groups were lost at 1-year follow-up. In addition, the lack of a TAU group meant any additional treatment participants were receiving as a result of their acute phase could not be considered (Jackson et al., 2008).  Relapse Prevention  A number of studies have investigated relapse prevention, or the ability of CBTp to prevent or delay future acute episodes. Relapse is an important outcome because of the disruption, distress, and economic costs that symptom exacerbation brings. Studies of CBTp interventions in which relapse prevention was just one of a series of components achieved little success, with four studies showing a mean reduction in relapse of only 1.4% compared to control treatments, whereas studies in which CBTp focused on and was dedicated to relapse prevention resulted in some success, with two studies showing a mean relapse reduction of 21% (Tarrier & Wykes, 2004). The latest meta-analysis by Sarin and colleagues (2011), which included a handful of studies examining relapse rates comparing CBTp to TAU and to other psychological interventions, did not show any strong evidence that CBTp had treatment effects in the prevention of relapse. Providing cognitive therapy in the acute phase was also found to be unsuccessful in reducing the number of admissions and the total number of days in hospital at 1-year follow-up (Jackson et al., 2008). A large, multicenter, methodologically robust RCT investigated the effectiveness of CBTp and family intervention specifically designed for relapse prevention and symptom reduction in patients with psychosis who had recently relapsed (Garety et al., 2008). Both interventions had no effects on remission or relapse at 12- or 24-month follow-up, although CBTp reduced depression and symptoms, and improved social functioning, and family work improved the distress associated with delusions. However, a later study by the same research group used novel statistical methodology to reexamine the data (Dunn et al., 2012). CBTp was found to be effective at increasing months in remission and reducing symptoms, but only when therapy was completed in full and included a range of cognitive and behavioral strategies targeting relapse prevention and symptoms.  Early Intervention  In addition to the effect on individuals with more established psychoses, there has been growing interest in diverting the course in schizophrenia at an early stage. Morrison and colleagues (2004) reported a study using CBT techniques in this early group to attempt to avert or postpone the first acute episode of the disorder by intervening during a prodromal period. Their technique focused not on frank positive symptoms, but on problem-solving difficulties. The results of this first RCT appeared promising. CBTp proved more beneficial than TAU in preventing progression into psychosis, preventing the prescription of antipsychotic medication, and reducing symptoms. However, in a more recent, much larger multisite RCT that compared cognitive therapy offered to young people at risk for serious mental illness and TAU, these findings were not replicated. There were no differences between the groups in terms of transition to psychosis over 12 to 24 months, although the authors discuss the possibility that their study lacked the power to detect a difference due to unexpectedly low conversion rates in the control group, and they questioned the at-risk mental state of their sample, as well as the impact of their active monitoring control condition (Morrison, French, et al., 2012). Therapy did confer clinically meaningful benefits in symptom frequency and intensity. This same research group has also evaluated the effectiveness of cognitive therapy for those within early interventions services who discontinued antipsychotic medication (Morrison, Hutton, et al., 2012). All participants received therapy, which was associated with improvements in positive and negative symptoms and functioning at the end of treatment and follow-up, and increases in self-rated recovery at follow-up. A recent meta-analysis of RCTs of early intervention services, CBT, and family interventions for those with early psychosis (3–5 years after illness onset) confirmed the positive effects of intervening in this crucial period. Early intervention services, which included CBTp, family work, and medication as part of the care package, allowed better access to and engagement with treatment, as well as reduced relapse rates, hospital admissions, and symptoms. CBTp alone improved symptom severity at 2-year follow-up, while family therapy improved relapse rates and hospital admissions at the end of treatment (Bird et al., 2010). Therefore, a holistic treatment plan provided by early intervention services appears advantageous during the initial stages of illness.   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  Summary of Evidence  The evidence for CBTp reducing positive symptoms in chronic, partially remitted patients with schizophrenia is good. Evidence that CBTp speeds recovery in acutely ill patients to the level of achieving a significant clinical benefit is more equivocal. Reductions in relapse rates are achieved when the intervention focuses on and is dedicated to relapse reduction, but they are disappointing for standard CBTp. There is positive evidence that CBTp and family intervention can benefit patients in early intervention services who are in the early stages of illness. Offering CBT in the prodromal phase appears to provide little additional benefit in terms of preventing full psychosis in vulnerable individuals, although symptoms can be improved.  theoretical aDvaNces  There has been considerable debate about the theoretical understanding of schizophrenia, with biological explanations being dominant. However, psychological and social factors have consistently been shown to be influential, certainly in affecting the course of schizophrenia, and have been incorporated into stress– vulnerability models that have emphasized the importance of these psychosocial factors in precipitating and maintaining psychotic episodes (Nuechterlein, 1987). Cognitive models have been developed in tandem with advances in CBT (Garety, Kuipers, Fowler, Freeman, & Bebbington, 2001). It is expected that as these cognitive models develop and are subjected to empirical tests, further refinements of CBTp treatment will develop. For example, CBTp appears to have little significant effect in reducing suicide risk (Tarrier, Haddock, et al., 2006); however, with a greater conceptual understanding of the psychological mechanisms underlying such risk, more focused interventions to reduce risk will arise (Bolton, Gooding, Kapur, Barrowclough, & Tarrier, 2007; Johnson, Gooding, & Tarrier, 2008).  Basic cliNical PriNciPles  A number of common clinical strategies underlie all variants of CBTp for schizophrenia: engagement and establishment of a therapeutic relationship; assessment based on an individualized case formulation that identifies psychotic experience (symptoms) and establishes associations between the patient’s cognition,  behavior, and affect within the environmental context in response to this experience; and an intervention strategy based on this formulation that uses cognitive and behavioral methods to reduce psychotic symptoms and associated emotional distress. Patients are taught to be aware of their symptoms and to learn methods to manage them (e.g., learning to control auditory hallucinations by switching their attention away from them, or by thinking about alternative explanations for their experiences).  Patients can acquire coping strategies that are broken down into elements, learned individually, then aggregated into an overall strategy. To ensure that these coping strategies can be implemented outside of therapy, patients overlearn them during the therapy session. Learning such control techniques allows patients to challenge beliefs they may have had about voices, such as “The voices are uncontrollable,” “The voices are all powerful,” and “I must obey the voices.” Thus, by learning to control basic psychological processes such as attention, through attention switching and distraction, patients also learn to challenge their beliefs about their experiences and symptoms. Behavioral experiments and reality tests may also be used to disprove delusional and inappropriate beliefs. Particular attention is paid to identifying avoidance and safety behaviors that reinforce inappropriate beliefs. Changing these behaviors is a powerful method of changing beliefs and delusions. Patients may be assisted in their attempts at behavior change by means of self-instruction and coping strategies that decrease arousal (e.g., breathing exercises; quick relaxation; guided imagery; and encouraging positive task-oriented internal dialogue). In some refractory cases, patients are convinced and unshakable in the belief that their delusions are true, and they are unwilling to examine the veracity of this subjective experience. In these cases, the clinician must negotiate treatment goals aimed at reducing distress rather than the symptoms themselves. A failure to do this will probably result in the patient disengaging and refusing treatment.  It is frequently the case that the patient’s delusional beliefs persist in spite of evidence to contradict them, including evidence that occurs naturally and that is manufactured by the therapist through behavioral experiments and reality testing. To weaken these delusional explanations, the therapist should use all available opportunities, through guided discovery and Socratic questioning, to reappraise the evidence for the patient’s explanation of events, thus weakening the   Schizophrenia and Other Psychotic Disorders  delusions. Pointing out the contradictory evidence in a quizzical and puzzled manner, often known as the “Columbo technique,” is advised, so the patient has to account for contradictions and review his/her explanation in light of this new and contradictory evidence. When delusions are strongly held, this can be a slow process, but the weakening of delusional beliefs can occur, or, as happens in some cases, the delusional interpretations remain or return, but their importance and distressing nature are greatly reduced. For example, an older adult female patient treated by one of the authors (N. T.) experienced auditory hallucinations that were of a blasphemous and obscene nature. She believed that her brain acted as a transmitter and broadcast her thoughts, so that other people in the vicinity could hear her blasphemous and obscene thoughts. Her main social contact was with her local church and associated social club. One Sunday, during the church service, she heard the voices and became convinced that her own thoughts about the voices were broadcast aloud to the congregation. She was mortified and so ashamed that she left the church and was unable to return or to have any contact with her friends. She was convinced that she had become ostracized by the church congregation. On being asked about the evidence for this, she replied that she had since met other members of the church congregation in town and they had totally ignored her, which had further reinforced her sense of exclusion, shame, and self-disgust. On further questioning, she revealed that she had been walking on the pavement and had seen her friends drive by some distance away. There was a high probability that they had not seen her. Thus, her evidence for being ostracized was challenged. We agreed upon a treatment goal that would test her interpretation of the situation. If the fear that the church congregation would shun her if she returned was real, then she should expect a negative reaction when she returned to church. If the fear was irrational, there would be no negative reaction; in fact, the others should be pleased to see her return. She experienced considerable anxiety at the thought of returning to church but managed the return using methods she had learned to cope with both the experience of auditory hallucinations and anxiety. To her surprise, far from being shunned or ostracized, she was greeted with warmth and concern. This experience considerably weakened her beliefs that others could hear her thoughts, and her delusions were rated as minimal. On being asked about the events some months later at follow-up, she said that she believed others could hear her thoughts, but because it did not  appear to bother them, she was no longer concerned about it either! In this case, her delusional explanation of past events had returned but no longer caused her any distress or disrupted her social functioning.  Emphasis has also been placed on improving the patient’s self-esteem and feelings of self-worth. This more recent addition to the treatment has been found to be effective and well received by patients (Hall & Tarrier, 2003). In this chapter we have placed these methods after the treatment of symptoms, indicating a progression from symptom reduction to improved self-esteem. However, there is no reason why improvements in selfesteem cannot be initiated at the beginning of treatment, and in some cases this may be desirable.  The future may hold exciting new opportunities to use new technology such as smartphones to implement real-time assessment and interventions, and to individualize treatment protocols (Kelly et al., 2012).  BackGrouND aND associateD factors  Phases of the Disorder and Relationship to Aims of Treatment  Schizophrenia, a complex disorder that may well be lifelong, passes through a number of phases. For example, the prodromal phase that occurs before a fullblown psychotic episode is characterized by nonspecific symptoms and symptoms of anxiety, depression, irritability, insomnia, and quasi-psychotic experience (e.g., magical thinking, feelings of paranoia). The prodromal phase develops into a psychotic episode, during which the most florid psychotic symptoms are present and seriously interfere with functioning. A psychotic episode usually requires acute management, frequently including hospitalization. Recovery from an acute episode of psychosis is followed by a period of remission or partial remission with maintenance doses of antipsychotic medication. It is not uncommon for residual symptoms to remain during the recovery and remission phase, and in some cases, there is little recovery at all. Treatment aims and strategies for CBTp vary depending on the phase of the disorder. For example, during the prodromal phase, the aim is to prevent transition into a full psychotic episode; during an acute episode, the aim is to speed recovery; during partial remission, the aim is to reduce residual symptoms and to prevent further relapse; and in full remission, the aim is to keep the patient well. The specifics of CBTp may vary de    CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  pending on these aims and the phase of the disorder in which they are applied. For example, during an acute admission for a psychotic episode, the patient is often disturbed, distressed, and agitated. Thus, therapy sessions are often brief and frequent, whereas for chronically ill patients living within the community, therapy sessions follow the normal outpatient format. In all cases, therapy is tailored to the tolerance of the patient. In all but the most exceptional cases, CBTp is used in addition to appropriate antipsychotic medication. The various phases of the disorder and appropriate treatment strategies are outlined in Table 12.1.  Associated Features and Disability  It is important that the clinician attend to associated features and complicating factors, as well as the symptoms of the disorder. These vary from the effects of the disorder on basic psychological processes (e.g., attention) to clinical issues (e.g., suicide risk) to social issues (e.g., social deprivation and poor employment opportunities). These associated features are outlined in Table 12.2.  The crucial point is that the clinician be aware that these problems can arise. Some of them can be dealt with by keeping the message simple and brief, but with plenty of repetition (i.e., use of overlearning in teaching coping strategies). Writing down simple points for the patient as a memory aid can also be helpful, as can creating a small “workbook,” so that the patient has a continuous record of these points. This is usually more effective than providing handouts, which are rarely  read and frequently are lost. It is important to balance the nature and duration of sessions against the patient’s level of tolerance. Initially, it might be best to keep sessions brief or allow the patient to leave when he/she has had enough. The one-to-one nature of therapy is highly stressful, so initial sessions may serve merely to provide habituation to the social stress of being with the clinician. Teaching the patient simple strategies to deal with tension and anxiety (e.g., brief relaxation) may be helpful in habituating to the therapy situation and may also provide a concrete task on which to focus attention. Simple attention-focusing tasks, such as focusing on some item in the room for a short period, may be helpful in reducing the effect of irrelevant stimuli on the patient’s conscious awareness. It is also important to recognize that the verbal and nonverbal cues the therapist might expect to indicate severe distress, depression, or suicidality may not be expressed by someone with schizophrenia. Affect may be flat or inappropriate, which may result in the therapist missing important signs of risk. This can be avoided, in part, by knowing the person and how he/she reacts, by never making assumptions about mental state, and by having the patient agree from the outset that he/she will inform the therapist of important changes in his/her life or mood.  Unfortunately, some issues, such as social conditions, are often beyond the therapist’s power to change but may well have an impact on the treatment process. However, there is nothing wrong in assuming an advocacy role or in helping patients to empower themselves by aiding their attempts to improve their own circumstances. Finally, it is important that therapists adopt a  table 12.1. treatment aims and Methods in different Phases of the schizophrenia illness  Phase Aim Treatment method Preillness Prevention of translation CBT for early signs and prodrome into full psychosis prevention of symptom escalation Acute episode Speed recovery CBT and coping training Partially remitted Symptom reduction CBT, coping training, self-esteem residual symptoms enhancement Remission Relapse prevention CBT for staying well and family intervention Relapse prodrome Abort relapse Early signs identification and relapse prevention   Schizophrenia and Other Psychotic Disorders  table 12.2. associated features of schizophrenia: features that need to be assessed and Considered as Potential difficulties in the Psychological treatment of schizophrenia  Psychological  •• Disrupted or slowed thought processes •• Difficulty discriminating signal from noise •• Restricted attention •• Hypersensitivity to social interactions •• Difficulty in processing social signals •• Flat and restricted affect •• Elevated arousal and dysfunctional arousal regulation •• Hypersensitivity to stress and life events •• High risk of depression and hopelessness •• Effects of trauma •• Stigmatization •• Low self-esteem and self-worth •• High risk of substance and alcohol abuse •• High risk of suicide and self-harm •• Interference of normal adolescent and early adult development due to onset of illness  Psychosocial  •• Hypersensitivity to family and interpersonal environment (including that created by professional staff)  •• Risk of perpetrating or being the victim of violence  Social  •• Conditions of social deprivation •• Poor housing •• Downward social drift •• Unemployment and difficulty in competing in the job market •• Restricted social network •• Psychiatric career interfering with utilization of other social resources  noncritical approach and learn to accommodate their own frustrations if therapy is progressing more slowly than they had hoped. Aspects of schizophrenia can make some patients difficult to deal with, and the therapist needs to be aware of this and develop a tolerant approach. The lack of a positive relationship between case managers and patients has been shown to be associated with poorer prognosis (Tattan & Tarrier, 2000).  the coNtext of theraPy  It is highly probable that by the time a referral is made for CBT the patient will be under the care of a multidisciplinary mental health team, and be receiving antipsychotic medication and some type of case management. People who develop a psychotic illness are usually diag   nosed by a general practitioner or primary care team, or in an accident and emergency department, and referred on to mental health services. Mental health services are organized in different ways in different countries, depending on health care philosophies and structures, but what is delivered in terms of therapy content may be independent of how that service is organized. Thus, the therapeutic procedures described in this chapter can be utilized in different types of service structure and organization. We have provided CBTp to patients on closed and open wards, in hospital and health center outpatient facilities, in community facilities, and in the patients’ own homes. It is probable that the more flexible the system, the more likely the patient will be engaged and attend. To this end we often deliver treatment in the patient’s home, which is a common procedure in the United Kingdom.   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  Evidence from research trials indicates that cognitive-behavioral treatments are delivered over about 20 treatment sessions. These can be intensive, over 3 months, or less intensive, over 9 months or longer. Clinical impressions indicate that some patients benefit from continued, although less intensive treatment, whereas others benefit from booster sessions. The clinician should always be led by the clinical need of the patient and take a collaborative approach rather than adhering to a rigid “one size fits all” protocol. It should be remembered that CBT does not “cure” schizophrenia, but it does help the patient cope with a chronic illness.  The presence of possible associated factors, as outlined earlier, signifies that patients may present with a number of clinical difficulties, as well as psychotic symptoms. The clinician needs to be aware that this may be the case and be prepared to address or treat these presenting problems before moving on to treat the psychotic symptoms. It may be necessary to tackle clinical problems such as high levels of anxiety, depression, hopelessness, and suicidal behavior and risk because they are not only clinical priorities but also there may be important interactions between these other disorders and the psychosis.  The treatment described here is for individual CBTp. It is possible to deliver treatment in a group format. Groups are well received by some patients and are advantageous, in that patients can learn from each other. The results suggest clinical benefits in terms of enhanced self-esteem, but reductions in symptoms are modest compared to those in individual treatments (e.g., Barrowclough et al., 2006), and any improvements appear to get lost at follow-up (Lecomte, Leclerc, & Wykes, 2012).  Other psychosocial treatments may also be available, such as family interventions. There is a considerable literature on family interventions, which have been shown to reduce relapse rates in at-risk individuals, for those in the early stages, and in later psychosis (Bird et al., 2010; Onwumere, Bebbington, & Kuipers, 2011; Onwumere & Kuipers, 2011). Details of family intervention are beyond the scope of this chapter (for the clinical application of family interventions, see Barrowclough & Tarrier, 1992; Kuipers, Onwumere, & Bebbington, 2010; Mueser & Glynn, 1995; see also Miklowitz, Chapter 11, this volume). We have combined individual CBT and family intervention with some success and suggest that therapists consider whether this strategy would be clinically beneficial. Others have offered family thera   py to those with co-occurring schizophrenia spectrum diagnoses and substance misuse, with some benefits in symptoms and functioning for both clients and their relatives (Mueser et al., 2013). Concomitant family intervention may reduce stressful home environments and help to sustain improvement. Many patients live alone or are estranged from their relatives, so family intervention may not be an option.  Patient Variables  Patients with schizophrenia represent a heterogeneous group of whom 20–45% may be resistant to medication treatment (Kane, 1999) and 5–10% show no benefit from antipsychotic medication (Pantelis & Barns, 1996). Although there is confusion among the terms “treatmentresistant,” “incomplete recovery,” and “treatment intolerance,” it is clear that conventional treatment with antipsychotic medication is ineffective in a significant number of patients, in spite of well-publicized advances in antipsychotic medication. It is important, therefore, in tailoring and refining treatments to understand what factors predict a good response to psychological treatment and perhaps the converse, which patients do not derive benefit. Unfortunately, little is known in any great detail about which patients will or will not benefit from cognitive-behavioral treatments (Tarrier & Wykes, 2004). Factors that have been associated with poor outcome include negative symptoms of affective flattening and alogia (cognitive impoverishment) (Tarrier, 1996). Factors associated with better outcome include a shorter duration of illness, a younger age (Morrison, Turkington, et al., 2012), greater pretherapy coping ability (Premkumar et al., 2011) and better clinical and cognitive insight (Emmerson, Granholm, Link, McQuaid, & Jeste, 2009; Perivoliotis et al., 2010), less severe symptoms at pretreatment (Tarrier, Yusupoff, Kinney, et al., 1998), higher baseline functioning and educational achievement (Allott et al., 2011) and receptiveness to hypothetical contradiction (Brabban, Tai, & Turkington, 2009; Garety et al., 1997). These results suggest that those patients who are younger with less severe illness, fewer severe cognitive deficits, and better functioning may respond better, but no hard-and-fast rules are currently supported by evidence. Treatment dropout is a further issue of importance. There is some evidence that patients who drop out of treatment tend to be male, unemployed and unskilled, and single, with a low level of educational attainment and a low premorbid IQ. They have a long duration of illness but at the   Schizophrenia and Other Psychotic Disorders  time of discontinuation are not necessarily severely ill and can function at a reasonable level. Fewer negative symptoms, cannabis or other drug use, and factors such as not having a family member involved with treatment have been found to predict disengagement (Stowkowy, Addington, Liu, Hollowell, & Addington, 2012). Dropouts suffer from both hallucinations and delusions, are paranoid, although not necessarily suspicious of the treating clinician, and depressed and moderately hopeless. The majority cannot see the point of psychological treatment or think that they will not personally benefit from treatment (Tarrier, Yusupoff, McCarthy, Kinney, & Wittkowski, 1998).  Therapist Variables  Therapist variables encompass a number of factors, including training, experience, competency, supervision, and personal style. There is a tendency for health care planners to expect, mainly on economic grounds, that these complex therapies will be delivered by minimally qualified clinicians. This may well be a mistake (Tarrier et al., 1999). Psychological treatment of someone with psychosis is complex, and besides having the skills and experience to treat the psychotic disorder itself, as outlined in this chapter, the clinician may well need to be able to treat a range of comorbid disorders, including anxiety, posttraumatic stress, depression, and addictive disorders. It seems reasonable that to treat successfully someone with a severe mental illness and very possibly a range of comorbid disorders, the clinician should be experienced and sufficiently well trained in CBT to be able to react to various clinical demands and levels of complexity. A recent study showed better outcomes from CBTp to be associated with therapists who spend the majority of their clinical time delivering this specific intervention, and who receive frequent supervision (Steel, Tarrier, Stahl, & Wykes, 2012). In our opinion the treatment of psychotic disorders does not lend itself well to merely following a highly prescriptive manual. As indicated in the previous section on associated features and disabilities, the clinician needs to be competent in recognizing and prioritizing a range of presenting clinical problems for treatment. Similarly, the clinician needs to have personal qualities that engage the patient, who may well be difficult to manage or disturbed, and to tailor the treatment to that individual. Previous research suggests that the absence of a positive relationship is associated with a poorer outcome (Tattan & Tarrier, 2000), so the clinician needs the ex   perience and patience to develop that relationship and maintain engagement. A recent study used the Delphi method to examine what experts in the field viewed as important ingredients in CBTp. Elements such as a detailed assessment, use of a cognitive model and formulation, implementation of change strategies, and the attitudes that should be held by therapists (e.g., normalizing rationale) were agreed to be essential (Morrison & Barratt, 2010).  the ProceDure of cBt: the MaNchester MoDel  A Clinical Model: The Coping–Recovery Model  The model developed and described by Tarrier bears many similarities to other models and has benefited from contact and discussion with other clinical researchers in the field. The basic tenet is the recovery model, in which patients are coping with a potentially persistent illness that may well change many aspects of their lives, affect their hopes and aspirations, and be associated with comorbid disorders such as depression and anxiety disorders. The therapist aids the patient in facilitating, as much as possible, the process of recovery. The coping model strongly resembles and uses many methods of other CBT approaches but emphasizes coping with symptoms rather than curing them, and intervenes to modify cognitive processes (e.g., attention), as well as cognitive content and behavior.  The clinical model that guides treatment is presented in Figure 12.1. It assumes that the experience of psychotic symptoms, hallucinations, and delusions is a dynamic interaction between internal and external factors. Internal factors may be either biological or psychological and can be inherited or acquired. For example, genetic factors may influence both the biochemical functioning of the brain and cognitive capacity. Alternatively, biological and psychological dysfunction may be acquired, for example, in deficits in cognitive flexibility and in the development of maladaptive attitudes. Such internal factors increase individuals’ vulnerability to psychosis, and their risk is further increased through exposure to environmental stress, such as certain interpersonal or excessively demanding environments. The interaction between internal and external factors is important both in the origins of the disorder and in maintaining symptoms. A dysfunction in the processing of information, such as source monitoring   CLINICAL HANDBOOK OF PSYCHOLOGICAL DISORDERS   FIGURE 12.1. A clinical model of the origins and maintenance of psychotic symptoms.  in hallucinations (i.e., a belief about where the voice is coming from) and probabilistic reasoning in delusions, in combination with dysfunctions in the arousal system and its regulation, result in disturbances of perception and thought that are characteristic of psychosis. The individual is reactive to these experiences, and there is a process of primary and secondary appraisal in which the individual attempts to interpret these experiences and give them meaning, then react to their consequenc   es. Often patients’ appraisal of experience results in feelings of threat to their physical integrity or social standing and concomitant emotional reactions, and avoidant and safety behavior. The immediate reaction to the psychotic experience is multidimensional, including emotional, behavioral, and cognitive elements. Secondary effects, such as depressed mood, anxiety in social situations, and the effect of trauma may further compound the situation.   Schizophrenia and Other Psychotic Disorders  The important aspect of the model is that appraisal (including beliefs about experience) and reaction to the psychotic experience feedback through a number of possible routes and increase the probability of the maintenance or recurrence of the psychotic experience. For example, the emotional reaction to hearing threatening voices or experiencing strong feelings of paranoia may well be anxiety or anger. Both these emotions include elevated levels of autonomic arousal that act either directly, through sustained increased levels of arousal, or indirectly, through further disrupting information processing, to increase the likelihood of psychotic symptoms. Similarly, behavioral responses to psychotic symptoms may increase exposure to environmental stress or increase risk of trauma (e.g., becoming involved in violence or indulging in dangerous behavior) that maintains or aggravates psychotic symptoms. For example, paranoid thoughts may result in interpersonal conflict or, alternatively, social avoidance and withdrawal. Both situations are likely to increase the probability of symptoms occurring. Interpersonal conflict is likely to be interpreted as evidence for persecution, whereas withdrawal and isolation probably result in confirmatory rumination and resentment, with a lack of opportunity to disconfirm these paranoid beliefs. The appraisal of the content of voices or delusional thoughts as valid and true may result in behavior consistent with these beliefs and a confirmatory bias to collecting and evaluating evidence on which to base future judgments of reality.  Psychotic experiences can lead to dysfunctional beliefs that are then acted on in a way that leads to their confirmation or a failure to disconfirm. This can be termed the experience–belief–action–confirmation, or EBAC, cycle. It is suggested that such cycles maintain psychotic experience through reinforcement of maladaptive beliefs and behavior. The generic model indicated in Figure 12.1 provides an overarching picture of how the patient’s problems arise and are maintained. Embedded within this model are the microelements of specific, time-linked events such as the EBAC cycle (see Figure 12.2).  Assessment  The clinician needs to be able to assess and develop a formulation of the determinants of the patient’s psychotic symptoms. Clinicians may find the use of standardized assessment instruments helpful (there are many of   figUre 12.2. The experience–belief–action–confirmation (EBAC) cycle.  these, and they assess a range of functions; see Barnes & Nelson, 1994, for a detailed description and review of assessments). We recommend the Psychotic Symptom Rating Scales (PSYRATS; Haddock, McCarron, Tarrier, & Faragher, 1999) as an effective method of assessing the multidimensional nature of positive psychotic symptoms. The clinician needs to understand the individual variation in psychotic symptoms. This can be achieved by the use of a semistructured interview (the Antecedent and Coping Interview [ACI]; for more details, see Tarrier, 2002, 2006) that covers the nature and variation of positive psychotic symptoms experienced by the patient, including beliefs about psychotic symptoms, emotional reactions that accompany each symptom, antecedent stimuli and context in which each symptom occurs, consequences resulting from the symptoms and how the patient’s behavior and beliefs are affected, and methods the patient uses to cope and manage his/her experiences. This allows the clinician to build up a comprehensive picture of how the patient experiences the psychosis on a daily basis and how his/ her affect, behavior, and beliefs are changed. The clinician should be careful to identify avoidance and safety behaviors that occur because of psychotic symptoms, and examples in which the patient fails to disconfirm irrational or delusional beliefs. The clinician should use the clinical models shown in Figures 12.1 and 12.2 as a guide.   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  Intervention  Coping Strategies  When the clinician has constructed a comprehensive picture of the patient’s psychotic experience, he/she can discuss this with the patient and present the rationale for CBTp. There may well be patients who are completely convinced of the truth of their delusional thoughts and will not accept any alternative view, in which case coping with distress should be advanced as a suitable goal.  The characteristics of CBTp and coping training are that  •• They are based on an individualized assessment or formulation. •• They emphasize a normal and general process of dealing with adversity. •• They emphasize that this is part of the recovery process. •• They are carried out systematically through overlearning, simulation, and role play.  •• They are additive in that different strategies can be added together in a sequence that progresses to in vivo implementation.  •• They are based on providing a new response set that will be a method of coping with an ongoing problem rather than being curative.  •• Cognitive coping skills are learned through a process of external verbalization that is slowly diminished until the required procedure is internalized as thought under internal control.  •• They enhance executive function.  •• The learning of cognitive and behavioral coping skills develops through a process of graded practice or rehearsal.  •• They provide opportunities for reappraisal and reattributions.   These coping methods include the following changes in cognitive processes, cognitive content, and behavior.  ATTenTion sWiTCHing  A process whereby patients actively change the focus of their attention from one subject or experience to another, “attention switching” involves inhibiting an ongoing response and initiating an alternative. Patients are trained within the session to switch attention on cue through rehearsal to external stimuli (e.g., an aspect  of their environment, such as describing a picture or being aware of background traffic noise) or to internal stimuli, often to a set of positive images. For example, one patient who was asked to choose a positive scene to which to attend chose a restaurant in Blackpool, where he had had an enjoyable meal. He was trained to be able to elicit a visual image of the restaurant by describing the scene, furniture, decorations, and such in great detail. He was then asked to remember the experience of the meal in all his senses: the visual memory of the food; its smell and taste; the feel of holding the knife and fork in his hands; the experience of eating; and so on. He continually rehearsed the memory of the meal in the restaurant until he was able to elicit it at will. He then rehearsed switching his attention away from delusional thoughts to images of the meal. He was taught to use the onset of a delusion as a cue for attention switching (see “Awareness Training” below).  ATTenTion nArroWing  In “attention narrowing,” a process whereby patients restrict the range and content of their attention, many patients talked about “blanking” their mind or focusing their attention as a method of coping. Evidence suggests that one problem faced by patients with schizophrenia is an inability to filter information input adequately, to distinguish signal from noise. Training patients to focus their attention and improve attentional control may assist them in overcoming this difficulty by narrowing and regulating their attention.  MoDifieD self‑sTATeMenTs AnD inTernAl DiAlogUe  That patients’ use of self-statements can be incorporated successfully into intervention has been known for some years. The use of self-statements and internal dialogue may take on a number of functions in emotion control, such as teaching patients to overcome negative emotions associated with their voices and in cueing goal-directed behavior, and in cueing and directing reality testing. In each case the patient is taught statements that direct the appropriate response, such as “I don’t need to be afraid,” “I need to keep going and get on the bus,” or “Why do I think that man is looking at me when I’ve never seen him before?” Within the session, the patient is first asked to repeat the set of statements or questions out loud when given the appropriate cue. The verbalized statements are then gradually re    Schizophrenia and Other Psychotic Disorders  duced in loudness until they are internalized. The patient then practices these in simulated situations within the session. Learning such questioning statements is a useful stage in generating and evaluating alternative explanations for experience.  reATTriBUTion  Patients are asked to generate an alternative explanation for an experience, then practice reattribution statements when that experience occurs. Initially, when we started coping training, we used reattributions that were illness related, such as “It’s not a real voice, it’s my illness.” We have since abandoned this as unhelpful. We now try to use other, alternative explanations: “It may seem like a real voice, but it’s just my own thoughts” and “It may seem as though people are looking at me, but they have to look somewhere.” If patients do make changes that increase their control over their symptoms or circumstances, or challenge the omnipotence or infallibility of their voices, then these changes can be evidence for a reattribution concerning the nature of their symptoms or their ability to exert control—for example, “How can the voice be all powerful if it talks rubbish?” or “I don’t have to believe it if it isn’t true.”  AWAreness TrAining  Patients are taught to be aware of and monitor their positive symptoms, especially their onset. Patients not only become aware of their experiences but they also try to accept these experiences but not react to them. Patients are aware of their voices but do not react to them or become captured by their content. One function of awareness training is to make patients aware of the form and characteristics of their thoughts and perceptions rather than the content—for example, to monitor the physical onset of a voice, then use attention switching to reduce the emotional impact of the content. The aim is twofold: to assist patients in becoming mentally disengaged from their symptoms, especially the content, and to use symptoms as a cue to alternative action.  DeAroUsing TeCHniqUes  Because high levels of arousal have been implicated in the psychopathology of schizophrenia and frequently occur as both antecedents and responses to psychotic experience, teaching patients to cope with these is im   portant. These coping strategies may be simple passive behaviors to avoid agitation, such as sitting quietly instead of pacing up and down, or they may be more active methods of arousal control, such as breathing exercises or quick relaxation. We have not favored lengthy relaxation training, such as traditional progressive relaxation exercises, because these are time-consuming and off the point. What is functional here is a quick, usable skill.  inCreAseD ACTiViTy leVels  Many patients with schizophrenia are vulnerable to delusional thought or hallucinations during periods of inactivity, a problem to which they appear particularly prone. Many patients report that finding something to do is helpful. Thus, simple activity scheduling can be a powerful coping strategy, especially if implemented at the onset of the symptom, thus creating a dual task competing for attentional resources. Besides increasing purposeful activity this also reduces exposure to conditions under which symptoms are aggravated.  soCiAl engAgeMenT AnD DisengAgeMenT  Although many patients tolerate social interactions poorly, surprisingly, many also find social engagement a useful method of coping. Possibly this may occur because social interaction serves as a dual task and source of distraction, and because it may help patients rationalize maladaptive thinking. It is beneficial to be able to titrate the amount of social stimulation involved in any interaction with the tolerance level of a particular patient, and to teach the patient that levels of social disengagement may be used to help develop tolerance of social stimulation. Social withdrawal and avoidance are common responses to experiencing overstimulation as a result of social interaction. However, patients can learn less drastic methods of disengagement, such as leaving the room for a short period and then returning, temporarily moving away from the social group, and practicing functional disengagement by not conversing for short periods or lowering their gaze. By using these methods, patients can control and tolerate social stimulation. Patients may also initiate social interaction more confidently as a method to reduce the impact of their symptoms, if they feel they have some control over the intensity of those interactions. Simple training in specific skills for interaction and role plays can facilitate this.   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  Belief MoDifiCATion  Patients can learn to examine their beliefs and to challenge them if they are inappropriate by examining the evidence and generating alternative explanations. Many patients do this to some extent already, but the level of arousal experienced, or the level of isolation and avoidance, can make these attempts unsuccessful. These methods are very similar to those used in traditional cognitive therapy except that the patient may need more prompting, and the goal is to incorporate the skills of belief modification into a self-regulatory process. Patients can be encouraged to question their beliefs as they occur: “What would be the purpose of someone spying on me; how much effort and cost would it take; how would this be resourced and organized; and for what gain?” Similarly, patients can be encouraged to look for inconsistencies and use these to challenge their beliefs. For example, the patient who was involved in a fight 15 years earlier, and still avoids young men because he fears that the same group is out to get revenge, may be asked to reflect on the fact that because the members of the gang are now in their middle to late 30s, he has been vigilant for the wrong age group. This can be used to challenge his fear that he needs to be vigilant to stay safe. In effect, his safety behaviors have not protected him from the source of danger. Patients can also learn to examine evidence to challenge their beliefs about the voices they hear. When patients perceive their voices as omnipotent and truthful, clinicians can investigate to see whether they have been wrong or incorrect. For example, the patient whose voices told him he was going to be murdered because he was a spy, concluded that the voices must be true and that he must deserve this fate. However, the voices also told him that he was soon to be married, and because he could find no supporting evidence for this, he decided it was untrue. However, he had never thought to challenge the voices’ veracity concerning the threat of murder. Realizing that he was unlikely to be married in the near future, as the voices had asserted, helped him to challenge the idea that he was to be murdered by doubting the truthfulness of the voices and to look for further supporting, objective evidence of the spy ring, which was not forthcoming.  reAliTy TesTing AnD BeHAViorAl exPeriMenTs  Probably the strongest way to test beliefs is to test them out in reality by some type of action; behavior change is probably the best way to produce cognitive change. Pa   tients sometimes do this naturally, although a tendency toward biased interpretation and hypothesis protection may lead them to erroneous conclusions. Patients can learn to identify specific beliefs and to generate competing predictions that can be tested. The failure to do this in real life usually leads to patterns of avoidance, which can be reversed to challenge the beliefs that they underpin.  Enhancing Coping Strategies  Coping methods develop over time and vary in their complexity, from simple and direct attempts to control cognitive processes, such as attention, to more complex, self-directed methods that modify cognitive content and inference. Frequently, combinations of different coping strategies are built up, for example, the use of attention switching and dearousing techniques helps to dull the strength of a delusion, so that reality testing can be implemented. Without these initial coping methods the patient would not be able to undergo reality testing. Furthermore, the initial coping strategies can be used to challenge the strength of the delusion of the omnipotence of the voices and provide an increase in self-efficacy. The therapist may ask questions, such as “You’ve used these attention-switching methods to cope effectively with your voices. What does that tell you about them being in total control and you being helpless?” The patient may well make statements that indicate the voices have been demonstrated to be fallible and he/she has some control over the situation, which can then be used as self-statements or a modified internal dialogue to further enhance self-efficacy and coping.  Modification of Behavior or Cognition  Changes in behavior and cognition complement each other, and one is not necessarily better than the other. Changes in behavior should always be used to examine and potentially challenge maladaptive thoughts and beliefs or as learning experiences. Similarly, changes in cognition should be used as opportunities to change behavior and to establish new behaviors. The therapist should always look for opportunities to prompt patients to reappraise their beliefs. This can be carried out as part of formal behavioral experiments, naturally occurring changes, and frequent reflections on what has been achieved in treatment. In assessment and during formulation the therapist should always be alert to patients’   Schizophrenia and Other Psychotic Disorders  avoidance or safety behaviors, or when patients do not behave in a way that could disconfirm their fears, delusions, or maladaptive cognitions. These can be used very early on in treatment as behavioral experiments to test out patients’ beliefs or to provide opportunities for quick improvements to challenge despondent or hopelessness beliefs, such as “Nothing is worth it if I cannot change” or “I have no control over my life or circumstances.” The belief of “no control” is often present and can be refuted by many small behavioral changes that may be repeated and referred to frequently. Finally, it is often helpful at the beginning of treatment to obtain some behavior changes, although often small, and increase activity that may have a number of associated benefits and provide the opportunity for reappraisal.  Modification of Cognitive Content or Cognitive Process  Therapists frequently face the choice of whether to try to modify the content of hallucinations or delusions, or the attentional processes that these phenomena have captured. Traditionally, in cognitive therapy the content of cognition is the main focus. In the coping model intervention, this is broadened to modification of cognitive processes because modifying cognitive processes provides greater clinical flexibility, and because deficits of the regulation of attention and executive function are often present in psychotic disorders. In practice, these tactics can work together. Initial modification of attentional processes through attention switching, for example, can decrease the emotional impact of the experience. A similar effect can be produced by attending to the physical characteristics of a hallucination rather than what the voice is actually saying. This can provide not only an opening to challenge the truth of the content of the voice or delusional thought but also a sense of control over these experiences. Take, for example, a young man who is experiencing voices that accuse him of having committed a murder and also say he is Russian. Initially, he can be taught to turn his attention away from the voices in a systematic way to reduce their emotional impact. This technique can be used to weaken the emotional strength of the experience, to elicit a sense of control, and to challenge the belief that the voices are all-powerful. With increased self-efficacy and a greater sense of power, the patient can later challenge the content of the voices that accuse him of murder by investigating the objective evidence that a murder has been committed. Furthermore, the  untruthfulness of the voices in saying he is Russian can be used to challenge the veracity of the murder accusation; if the voices had been wrong about one issue, then they could be wrong about the other. Modification of cognitive process and content provides the therapist with two basic routes to intervention and the flexibility to move from one tactic to the other.  case stuDy  The following case example gives some indication of how CBTp works.  History  Jim, a 28-year-old man, developed a psychotic illness when he was 22. During his first episode, Jim became increasingly paranoid and accused people, including his friends, of stealing his money. He said that he could feel people taking money and his wallet from his pockets when he was socializing in his local pub and also when he was traveling by bus. The feeling that “something was wrong” had been with him for a few months, and Jim then began to hear voices warning him that people were against him and scheming to “do me down.” These voices talked to Jim, warning him against “the schemes” and telling him who was involved and to be on his guard. These voices were especially insistent that those closest to Jim were the people most against him and the “worst schemers.” The voices also told Jim that his girlfriend was unfaithful, and he experienced “visions,” sent by the voices, of his girlfriend having sex with other men. He did not actually believe that his girlfriend was unfaithful, but he became very angry that the voices should make these accusations. On some occasions, Jim did lose control and confronted some male friends about having affairs with his girlfriend. Usually he accepted their denials.  Jim also heard voices talking about him. These different voices were usually “scheming” and making insulting and accusatory comments. Sometimes these voices would laugh at Jim because his girlfriend was cheating on him, and make remarks about his sexual inadequacy, to which they attributed her infidelity.  Jim’s friends and family noticed that he began to withdraw and became increasingly disheveled. He was often found muttering to himself or making sarcastic comments to family members about how they were “growing rich on my hard work.” The voices also told   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  him to “look for signs that the scheming is coming to a head.” Jim began to write down an account of everyday events, such as the time certain buses arrived near his house and the type of advertisements on their sides. His parents, who would find these writings left around the house with various passages heavily underlined, were increasingly worried about Jim and also concerned that he was drinking considerable amounts of alcohol. Jim’s friends began to avoid him and he was increasingly isolated. He broke up with his girlfriend, who could no longer deal with his accusations of infidelity.  The situation deteriorated very rapidly during the summer months, and Jim was hospitalized one evening and detained under the Mental Health Act. He had gone out early to his local pub. A number of his friends were there, but he kept away from them, drinking alone in a corner. Suddenly Jim got out of his seat and began shouting at his friends, accusing them of stealing his money, undermining his confidence, and spreading rumors about him. He took some loose change from his pockets and threw it at his friends. They tried to ignore him, but Jim became increasingly agitated and aggressive, and finally physically attacked one of them. A number of people became involved, and the situation became more chaotic as a fight broke out. The police were called and Jim was arrested. He had suffered minor physical injuries, so he was taken to the accident and emergency department of the local hospital and from there was admitted to the psychiatric ward. Jim spent about 5 weeks in the hospital, during which time he was treated with antipsychotic medication. His health care plan included counseling, and his family received psychoeducation, in that they were given information about his diagnosis of schizophrenia and general advice on how to manage him at home. Jim’s symptoms remitted during his hospital stay, and he was discharged, with frequent outpatient appointments with his psychiatrist and home treatment with the assertive outreach team.  Over the intervening years Jim had five more relapses, during which a similar pattern would follow. He would become paranoid, hear voices and become isolated, and have increasing difficulty in caring for himself. Each relapse was followed by a short period of hospitalization with increased medication. However, residual symptoms became common following an episode, and in spite of increased medication and changes to atypical antipsychotics, Jim continued to experience auditory hallucinations, paranoid delusions, and delusions of reference. He often avoided going out or con   tacting people because of his paranoia. He was able to initiate and maintain a relationship, although the voices continued to send him “visions” and to question his girlfriend’s faithfulness.  Jim was referred for CBT to treat his persistent positive psychotic symptoms as part of a multidisciplinary approach to his care and to promote recovery.  Current Situation  Jim now lives in his own apartment. He has good relations with his parents, who live quite close by and whom he sees every few weeks. He is unemployed and receives disability benefits. Jim attends a day center for people with mental health problems 2 or 3 days a week. He had attended a local college to study computers but recently discontinued schooling because he found the social contact too stressful. Jim has a steady girlfriend, Sue, whom he sees regularly. He has lost contact with the friends he had before he became ill, and although he occasionally sees them, he avoids them and places he thinks they might go. He receives antipsychotic medication, attends monthly outpatient appointments with a psychiatrist, and is visited at home once a week by a community psychiatric nurse who provides counseling and support, and monitors his mental state.  Mental State at Referral  Jim experienced auditory hallucinations in the form of a variety of voices talking to and about him. He described these as “helpful” voices and “evil” voices. The “helpful” voices warned him of the “schemes” of others and told him about dangerous situations and times when he was under threat. They warned him to avoid “dodgy people” who might attack or assault him. Jim thought their warnings were very helpful and was convinced that acting upon these warnings kept him from harm. The “evil” voices generally spoke about him, saying that he was “stupid, useless, and no good,” “not up to it sexually,” and other personally defamatory statements.  There were voices that told Jim that his girlfriend Sue was unfaithful and cheating on him. He was unsure whether these voices were “helpful” or “evil.” These voices also sent Jim pictures of Sue being unfaithful and simultaneously told him that he was stupid and useless to put up with it. He described these pictures as “visions” that he found extremely distressing. Although Jim said he did not believe that Sue was unfaithful, the   Schizophrenia and Other Psychotic Disorders  voices became increasingly more intense and compelling, and he was unable to resist shouting back at them. Sue was able to reassure Jim that his fears were groundless.   Engagement  Initially Jim was resistant to contact with the clinician (in this case, Jim had been referred to a clinical psychologist for CBT). At the time of referral he was quite paranoid, and when he was visited at his home for the first appointment, having failed to attend his clinic appointment, Jim refused to open the door. (It is common practice for mental health professionals in the United Kingdom to do home visits.) A short conversation through the letter box ensued, ending with the clinician’s statement that he would return at a more convenient time. Two further visits resulted in Jim refusing to open the door. The strategy here was just to make contact to reassure Jim that his views were perfectly valid and that another visit would be made at a later date to see how he felt about things then. In situations in which the initial engagement is problematic, the best strategy is to “roll with resistance” and try to defuse the situation and reduce any agitation, maintain contact, and return at another time.  On the next occasion Jim was more relaxed and allowed the clinician into his flat. Given Jim’s paranoia, it was important for the clinician just to establish a positive interaction and relationship at this point, and not to introduce the topic of symptoms or psychological treatment until Jim was completely comfortable with him. So, in Jim’s case, the first couple of sessions were kept brief and covered his general well-being and topics of interest for him. The clinician’s primary focus was to keep Jim engaged and to develop the beginnings of a therapeutic relationship. It is not always the case that assessment and treatment cannot be embarked upon more quickly, but maintaining engagement is essential.  The fourth session was longer and the clinician introduced the possibility of psychological treatment. This necessitated a discussion of Jim’s symptoms, along the following lines:  “I understand you have been hearing voices when no one is there? What do you make of this? Have you any idea what these voices are? Are the voices a difficulty for you? Would you want to try and do something about these voices?”  These questions not only raise the topic of the psychotic experience and the suggestion of treatment but also attempt to obtain an idea of the patient’s beliefs about the voices and whether they are perceived as real or not.  Similarly, the clinician can ask questions about the paranoid delusions:  “It is true that you are having difficulties with people?”   “Are you feeling that some people are against you? What do you make of these thoughts and feelings? Why do you think it is happening?”  “Are they a difficulty for you?” “Would you want to try and do something about these thoughts and worries?”  Again, the clinician attempts to assess quickly how strongly Jim holds these delusions and whether he would consider treatment.  Jim was not enthusiastic about treatment. He thought that his fears, as well as the voices, were real, and that psychological treatment was not appropriate in his case. This reaction is often encountered in patients with residual and persistent psychotic symptoms. A number of important points should be considered:  •• What needs to be done to maintain engagement? •• How can a clinically relevant problem be identified and mutually agreed upon? •• How can treatment be framed so that the patient sees it as achieving a positive and desired benefit?  First, it is important to validate the experience, but it is not necessary to agree on the cause. For example, in this case, it was important to agree that Jim did hear voices and believe that some people were against him. This can be done without agreeing that the voices come from a real entity or that people are actually against him. This helps to separate Jim’s belief about what is happening to him from the experience; that is, that Jim has the belief is not the same as that belief being true. Similarly, that Jim hears voices is not the same as believing these voices exist as an independent and real entity. It may not necessarily be possible to agree on these points at this time, but the clinician can return to these issues. At the moment, engagement is more important.  Next, it is often helpful to investigate the consequences of the experience. Some of the voices cause distress, and Jim’s paranoid ideas cause him to be fear    CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  ful. Thus, distress and fear are more likely to be problems that Jim will be willing to address. This can be introduced as follows:  “You have told me that the voices sometimes make you feel very upset. Perhaps that upset is something I can help you with and that you would like to work on?”  “The thoughts that some people out there are against you and want to harm you make you very frightened. Perhaps that fear is something we can work on together, so you feel less afraid? Maybe if you were less afraid you could cope better with dealing with people. Would that be helpful to you?”  So in cases when patients are very deluded or lack insight into their symptoms, trying to persuade them to eliminate their symptoms and the experiences they believe to be real can be counterproductive and jeopardize engagement. However, trying to reduce distress may be a viable alternative for a collaborative goal. There is also an assumption from the model that reducing emotional reactions to symptoms may well weaken the symptoms themselves.  However, Jim remained unenthusiastic about this treatment goal as well. His view was that being fearful about people was a reasonable reaction given that there were people who would harm him, and this emotion kept him on his “edge,” so that he was more vigilant for threat and danger. His belief was that such vigilance actually kept him safe from harm, so there was little motivation to change and put himself in harm’s way.  To protect engagement, it is important not to dispute or argue with the patient, and most definitely not at this early stage, when the patient is not convinced that there is any benefit to be gained from treatment. The next strategy the clinician used to engage Jim was to ask about his goals in life.  clinician: Jim, what sort of goals do you have? Is there anything you would like to achieve personally? Is there anything you would like to do that you haven’t been able to do, for whatever reason?  Jim: Yes, lots of things. I’d like to get a job that’s well paid. I’d like to go back to college. That would help me get a good job.  clinician: Going to college would help you get a good  job. That is a very good idea. Would you like to go  back to college?  Jim: I would, but when I went before I had problems.  clinician: What sort of problems were they?  Jim: Well, I got scared of the people there. I thought some of them were scary, dodgy, money grubbers. The voices told me not to go. I have to do what the voices tell me.  clinician: So one of your important goals is to get to college so as to help you get a good job, but being scared of the people there and the voices is stopping you from going to college and achieving your goals. Is that about it?  Jim: Yes, I suppose you are right.  In this way Jim has realized that his important goals are being impeded by his psychosis, and he and the clinician are able to agree on a problem that needs to be addressed. Thus, Jim can see a benefit to receiving treatment.  As well as maintaining engagement, the clinician has learned quite a lot about Jim and his problems. The voices warn Jim about certain situations, and he listens to them and takes avoidant action; thus, he has developed a number of safety behaviors that protect him from perceived harm. Opportunities to test out or refute these threat cognitions by dropping safety behavior are not taken up. However, there are situations that lend themselves to reality testing. Jim experiences command hallucinations (voices that give him a direct order) to which he responds. The likelihood that Jim thinks the voices are powerful, and that he has little or no control over them, provides future opportunity to refute these attributions. Jim experiences some feelings of dissonance in that he is now aware that his valued goals are impeded.  Case Formulation  Treatment naturally follows from an accurate assessment of the patient’s problems, and it is important to establish details of the antecedents and consequences of psychotic symptoms (see Tarrier & Calam, 2002, for a discussion of case formulation in general). In this case, Jim has many psychotic symptoms, and it is probably best to deal with them in stages.   Schizophrenia and Other Psychotic Disorders  Paranoid Delusions  Jim has paranoid delusions that occur in a number of situations. When alone in his flat, Jim worries that his old friends and family have stolen all his money and are scheming against him. This is reinforced by the voices telling Jim he needs to be on his guard. Jim also becomes very paranoid when he goes out. For example, in the street he scans the crowds for signs of his old friends, so that he can make good his escape if he sees them or “scary people” who might assault him. He is also paranoid at the day center, just as he was at college. The voices tell him the situation is dangerous, that there are dangerous people about, and that he must take care. Jim knows the voices will warn him of danger, so he listens out for them and is attentive to them when they occur. At the day center Jim becomes more agitated the longer he is there, and he usually goes home after a short time. In doing so he feels reassured that the voices have helped him and kept him from harm. Jim also wonders why the voices help him and concludes that it must be because he is special in some way. This puzzles him because the “evil” voices are unpleasant and nasty to him. Jim concludes that because he is special, he is being tested by the “evil” voices to see whether he is worthy of their help. Only special people would be helped and be tested. In thinking this way, Jim has resolved the dissonance posed by experiencing both “helpful” and “evil” voices.  The clinician and Jim decide jointly to focus on the difficult situation at the day center:  clinician: OK, Jim, I’d like you to talk me through what happens at the day center. The reason I ask this is because you remember that attending college was an important goal you wanted to achieve but couldn’t because you felt suspicious of people there. Well, the situation at the day center is a lot like that at college, so we might learn how you can cope with returning to college if we examine the day center situation. Does that sound OK to you?  Jim: OK. Well one of the things that happens is that I know the voices know I’m vulnerable because they can tell when I’m like that, which is when they attack me, but they also want to help me, so they warn me about the scary people there.  clinician: How do the voices know you are vulnerable?   Jim: They can tell because they know how I feel.  clinician: How do you feel when you are vulnerable?  Jim: All shaky and on edge.  clinician: Is that like a feeling of being anxious or stressed? Jim: Yes, a bit like that.  It appears that Jim becomes anxious in anticipation of going to the day center. There may be a range of reasons for this, such as anticipatory and situational anxiety, social anxiety, fear of being attacked, or general elevated levels of arousal. One hypothesis is that Jim picks up on this feeling of anxiety and misattributes it to being “vulnerable” to the voices. This is because his increased anxiety is associated with an increased probability of experiencing auditory hallucinations, but Jim attributes meaning to this association. Voices are imbued with attributes of power and intent.  clinician: OK, Jim, so you’re feeling anxious and vulnerable. What happens next?  Jim: Well usually the voices will start. They can say a lot of things, but they will warn me about danger. I know that the voices will attack me, but I want to keep safe, and they will warn me so I listen out for them.  Here, Jim is indicating that not only do the voices occur in this situation but also his attention is focused on listening out for them, which may indicate that the threshold for detecting them is being lowered. This suggests that a redirection of attention may be a helpful method of coping with this situation. The clinician does not suggest this method at this stage but he may call upon it later.  clinician: When they warn you, how does it happen?  Jim: The voices will see someone that is dangerous and they will say, “See him? He’s going to get you, he’ll attack you. You better get out of here.” When they say that, I can see this guy looks vicious and he’s going to have a go at me, so I get out of there as fast as I can.  clinician: Then what happens?  Jim: I get out of there, and I feel real relieved that I’ve escaped. I feel real lucky that I’ve got the voices to   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  keep me safe. Otherwise, I’d be in for it, I’d be in terrible trouble. The more I think about it, the more lucky and special I feel. They keep me safe.  It appears that Jim attributes both personal meaning to his voices and power to keep him safe. In fact he has developed a type of safety behavior that reduces his anxiety and helps him escape a feared consequence. His avoidant behavior also reinforces his feeling of being special.  This establishes a useful behavior cycle that the clinician may utilize to help Jim abandon his safety behaviors and to disprove his catastrophic predictions that he will be attacked. First, it is helpful to establish a little more detail.  clinician: You said that the voices warn you about danger at the day center most of the time. Does this always happen?  Jim: No, not every time. I always listen out very carefully for the voices, but sometimes they aren’t there. clinician: So when the voices aren’t there, what happens? Jim: Sometimes I still feel vulnerable, but I just get on with it.  clinician: Do you mean you don’t leave, you stay there? Jim: Yes, sometimes I get bored and go home, but usually I stay and have a chat and a cup of tea.  clinician: Tell me, Jim, is it pretty much the same people there whether you hear the voices or not? Jim: Yes that’s it, pretty much the same people all the time.  clinician: So sometimes the voices tell you someone is dangerous, and you get out pretty quick and feel relieved you weren’t attacked, and at other times the voices aren’t there, but you stay with the same people, those that you thought were dangerous before, and nothing happens. Doesn’t that mean that at times they are dangerous and other times they’re not dangerous? Isn’t that strange?  Jim: Yes, I suppose it is. I’d not thought about that before.   Here, the clinician is looking for inconsistencies in situations that can be used to refute Jim’s beliefs. The clinician highlights the inconsistency in the logical pres   ence of threat and feeds it back to Jim, asking him what he makes of it. The clinician pursues the point about the inconsistency of the occurrence of the voices.  clinician: Sometimes the voices aren’t there. Why is that?  Jim: I don’t know that either. Maybe they have to look after someone else on that day. Yes, that must be it. There must be other special people that they have to look after and they are helping them. Just goes to show how important the voices are if they have lots of special people to look after. Means I’m really special, too, one of the real special people.  At this point Jim appears to be confabulating and absorbing this new information into his delusional thought network. New information is processed in a way that protects rather than challenges the delusional system. This is useful because an alternative explanation—that the voices occur when Jim attends to them and feels stressed and are less likely to occur if he is more relaxed and engaged—can be advanced and tested as an alternative belief.  The clinician now needs to motivate Jim to test out some of his beliefs. He compares the day center situation with college and the achievement of an important goal to motivate Jim to attempt to cope better at the day center. Furthermore, it is established that generally Jim enjoys going, although ambivalence is maintained by his fear of attack. Being taught how to manage his fear and be more relaxed in the situation is also a motivating factor.  Jim needs to have a plausible set of alternative explanations of what is going on, so that he may process any new information differently and not reinforce his delusions. In the past Jim has been told that he is paranoid because he has a mental illness involving an imbalance of biochemicals in his brain. This is not a particularly attractive explanation to Jim. It does not reflect his actual experience, and it is stigmatizing. Jim needs to be presented with an alternative model of his experiences that allows him to collaborate in his psychological treatment.  The clinician might suggest that paranoia is a result of misunderstanding or misinterpreting situations, and that if Jim feels stressed and anxious, as he does at the day center, then he may misattribute this physical state to a “vulnerability.” He is more likely to experience the voices when he is anxious, but this does not mean that   Schizophrenia and Other Psychotic Disorders  the voices know he is vulnerable. The clinician might also suggest that Jim ignore the voices when they tell him he is about to be attacked and just get on with what he is doing at the day center. Because the same people are there, and they do not attack him when the voices are absent, it is unlikely that he will be attacked when the voices are present. Thus, a behavior experiment can be established to test out whether the voices keep Jim safe. This may help challenge Jim’s belief that the voices are both truthful and helpful, and that they are powerful and all knowing.  When Jim did enter these situations, he was acutely aware that his voices might occur, so that he developed an internal focus to monitor for feeling “vulnerable” and an external attention scan for hearing the voices. The former meant that he was more likely to amplify any internal sensations. The latter meant that he was more likely to verbalize what the voices usually said to him as a match and also, paradoxically, to focus his attention internally. This process of internal focus and attention scanning was more likely to trigger the voices. Intervention here involved persuading Jim to use other attentional strategies when he entered these situations. These strategies were rehearsed in the sessions and prompted with appropriate internal dialogue.  Jim also made a number of attributions about the voices. He believed that the voices warned him of threat because he “might be special”; he thought they might be able to do this through telepathy, and that he had little control over this process. Jim was troubled because the voices were often unpleasant, and he could not understand why they would be so if they were helping him to avoid danger. But Jim concluded that because he was special he needed to “be tested” by the voices, which in turn confirmed his belief that he was special. Of course, much of this explanation had been built up on the incorrect premise that the voices were actually warning him of a real danger, which could be challenged. An alternative explanation of his experience could be based on a normalization of this experience. Everyone has self-referent or bizarre thoughts at times, and in Jim’s case these are perceived as external voices rather than being identified as part of the self and merely thoughts. Jim found this explanation plausible, although he was not entirely accepting of it. This is not unusual; however, it did seed doubt in his mind and could be referred to constantly, further weakening his delusional explanations.  Two difficulties arose with Jim. He did not have an alternative explanation for the voices other than they represented some, albeit vague and poorly defined, powerful entities or beings (delusional), or that they were the manifestation of a biochemical imbalance in his brain (disease). The clinician suggested to Jim that his voices might be his own thoughts or a leakage from memory into consciousness that was not identified as being part of his self. This was why the voices often reflected Jim’s fears or concerns, or aspects of his past.  The voices warned Jim when he was in danger. He believed that the voices helped and protected him in these situations. For example, on one occasion when Jim was walking down a road, the voices told him that a man coming from the other direction was going to attack him. Jim crossed the road to avoid the man and believed that in doing so he had avoided being attacked. He also noticed that the man looked “suspicious,” which further confirmed his belief that the voices had saved him from danger. Here is an example of an EBAC cycle to which we referred earlier in the chapter.  •• Experience—Voices tell him of a suspicious per   son approaching. •• Belief—He is in imminent danger. •• Action—He crosses the road. •• Confirmation—He has avoided being attacked.  This can be used as another therapeutic example:  clinician: You’ve told me that when the man approached you in the street, he was looking at you and the voices told you you were in danger. What happened next?  Jim: Well, I knew he would go for me, so I crossed the street and got away.  clinician: When you crossed the street, did the man look at you or follow you, or say anything? Jim: No, I don’t think so.  clinician: Isn’t that strange, if he was out to attack you? Jim: Yes, I suppose so. I’d not thought about that before, I was so glad to get away.  clinician: Tell me, Jim, when you walk down the street, where do you look? Jim: Well, where I’m going, of course. That’s a daft question!   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  clinician: Well, it may seem so, but think where was  the man going when you thought he was looking at  you to attack you.  Jim: Well, he was walking toward me, and he was looking in that direction.  The clinician continues his questioning, so that Jim keeps returning to the conclusion that the man happened to be looking at him because Jim was in his line of vision, nothing more. There was no evidence of an intent to attack, and once Jim was out of his line of vision, the man paid no further attention to him. Experiments can be constructed to further emphasize this point. Sometimes Jim may be drawing attention to himself by his own actions, which make people look at him (the self-fulfilling prophecy). Again, this can be drawn out by a similar line of questioning and tested. A similar approach can be taken with other examples of Jim’s paranoid behavior, and his behavior with friends and family. The clinician always comes back to these past examples of successful belief and behavior change, and asks Jim how he feels about them and whether he can identify any common factors between these past successes and current problems.  “Visions” Sent by the Voices  Jim was very upset with the “visions” he experienced of his girlfriend having sex with other people. He thought these visions were sent by the voices, also by a process of telepathy. Jim did not believe his girlfriend was unfaithful, but he became very upset and angry when the voices told him this. He tried to push the images out of his mind, but when this strategy failed, he became further convinced that the images were sent via telepathy. The more angry and upset Jim became, the more difficult he found it to resist the belief and to view the experience of the visions as collateral evidence. An alternative explanation was that the visions were mental images that had become very vivid and occurred in response to his catastrophic thoughts about his girlfriend’s infidelity and persisted because Jim attempted to suppress them. The voices were his own thoughts, which again posed questions about his girlfriend’s fidelity, because his constant ruminations on the topic had made Jim feel insecure about his relationship. This alternative explanation, in conjunction with a review of the objective evidence regarding the security of his  relationship, significantly weakened Jim’s delusional beliefs about infidelity, telepathy, and the reality of the voices. The clinician introduced thought suppression exercises to demonstrate the rebound effect of Jim pushing the images out of his mind. Exposure to the “visions” was also useful in this case (although it might not be in all cases), demonstrating that images held in attention fade with time, along with the distress they cause, which was further evidence of an internal phenomenon and not external telepathy. Jim was also taught to identify the onset of the voices and to switch his attention to alternative stimuli as a way to reduce their impact and to demonstrate that these experiences were more likely generated internally rather than coming from an external entity. The clinician compared these experiences with anxiety disorders in which catastrophic beliefs and images serve to fuel irrational and threatening beliefs, pointing out that vivid imagery of “what might happen” or an imagined “catastrophe” would produce a sudden cascade of intense emotions. These experiences could then be relabeled as unpleasant but highly improbable situations rather than reality.  Any slight reduction in the strength of a delusional belief was also used to challenge Jim’s general beliefs about control, threat, and veracity.  low self‑esteeM: a coMMoN ProBleM  Patients with schizophrenia frequently have a poor perception of themselves and low self-esteem. These global concepts can be hypothesized to be manifest in terms of a negative self-schema. This is postulated as being a consequence of severe mental illness and all that goes with this. This can involve suffering the stigma of a mental illness and even harassment and exclusion, the effects of social rejection and negative interpersonal environments, and the projected sense of being valueless and devalued. Patients with depression and suicidal ideation may feel increased feelings of low self-worth because of their depressed mood. Furthermore, an attribution process can make them think that if they feel they want to kill themselves, then they must be worthless and deserve to die.  The factors that potentially impact upon and maintain negative self-schemas are represented in Figure  12.3. As can be seen, the factors that influence and maintain negative self-schema are strong, multiple, and relentless. The consequence of having a severe mental  Schizophrenia and Other Psychotic Disorders   figUre 12.3. Maintenances of negative schemas.  illness is the formation of such negative self-schemas, which then serve to bias the way information is assimilated, so that these negative schemas are maintained and strengthened rather than being challenged and modified.  Feelings of low self-worth can both inhibit the effective use of coping strategies and increase the risk of depression and self-harm.  Improving the Patient’s Self‑Esteem  The aim of this set of techniques is to produce generalizations of positive attributes, challenge negative self-schemas, improve global self-esteem, and elicit positive emotional reactions. This method can be carried out in two stages. The first stage elicits positive cognitions about the self, and the second elicits a positive emotional response. Alternatively, the two stages can be combined, so that the processes of cognitive and emotional responding occur together. The procedure for the two-stage process is described for convenience as follows:  Stage 1: Cognitive Responding  •• Ask the patient to produce up to 10 positive qualities about him/herself (the number can be varied dependent on the patient’s capabilities; it is important that the patient not fail in generating the required number).  •• Once the patient has produced a list of these qualities, ask him/her to rate each on how much he/she really believes it to be true on a 0- to 100-point scale (where 0 = Not at all and 100 = Completely).  •• Ask the patient to produce specific examples of evidence of each quality; prompt specifically for actions that have occurred recently and can be time linked, such as “last week”; also use your knowledge of the patient to elicit examples. Prompt and list as many examples as possible.  •• Ask the patient to rehearse the list of examples for each quality, which may be done through verbal description and mental imagery of the event, then to rerate his/her belief that he/she possesses this quality. (Usually the belief rating changes to show an increase;   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  it should be emphasized to the patient that his/her belief can change depending on the evidence on which he/she focuses attention.)  •• The patient is given a homework exercise to monitor his/her behavior over the next week and to record specific evidence to support the contention that he/she has these qualities. The aim is to produce generalization and experiential learning of a number of positive attributes.  •• At the next session, provide feedback on examples and prompt further examples. Again, ask the patient to rerate his/her belief that he or she actually has these qualities, and further point out any changes in these beliefs.  •• Ask the patient to reflect on the effect that eliciting and focusing on specific behaviors and evidence has on beliefs and qualities about him/herself and how this could affect the general opinion of him/herself. Reinforce all positive attributes and the process whereby the patient comes to a more positive view of him/ herself.  •• Continue to repeat this procedure. Continually emphasize that the patient’s beliefs about him/herself vary depending on what is the focus of attention, and that self-esteem can be greatly affected by belief and is thus amenable to change.  The case of “Dave” illustrates implementation of this procedure. Dave had very successfully learned to cope with his symptoms, which had been markedly reduced, and he had significantly improved his level of functioning. Dave produced a number of attributes that he thought he might have: “helpful,” which he gave a belief rating of 60 out of 100; “friendly,” which he rated 50; and “a good father,” which he rated as 30. He was then asked to suggest concrete and specific evidence to support all of these. For “helpful,” he cited having lent money to a friend some months before, opening a door to someone the previous week, and helping his father in the garden that week. He rerated this belief as 90.  For “friendly,” Dave cited that he had had many friends of 10 to 20 years’ standing; his friends contacted him regularly and enjoyed his company; he could talk comfortably to people in pubs or on buses. He got on well with the friends of his parents. Dave thought he got on well with the therapist and enjoyed speaking to him, and that he could talk to different types of  people from different backgrounds without difficulty or reserve. He rerated this belief as 100.  For being a “good father,” Dave said that he enjoyed taking his son and daughter out every week (he was divorced from their mother, who had custody). He was upset when he did not see them. He liked to buy them presents. He was happy for them to decide on activities rather than doing things purely for convenience, and this in itself gave him pleasure. Dave rerated this belief as 60. However, at this point he introduced some negative evaluations. He felt that he could not be a good father because he did not live with his children. He did not get on with their mother. He said that it was always easier for absent fathers who saw their children for short periods of time and tended to spoil them. This was not responsible parenting in his view. At this point it was helpful for the clinician to go through the model of how negative views such as this are maintained (see Figure 12.3), to discuss these thoughts as being negative schema–congruent, and to indicate that the statements were “overgeneralizations,” a process by which negatives are maximized and positives minimized. Furthermore, although these thoughts and beliefs had a depressing effect on his mood and maintained Dave’s negative beliefs about himself, they did not accurately reflect circumstances. To challenge Dave’s views of himself as a bad father, various exercises where undertaken: He was asked to define a “bad father” in explicit terms, then objectively compare his behavior to this definition. He was asked to compare his behavior with that of others in similar circumstances. Last, he was asked to give a realistic and objective appraisal of his performance and circumstances. While carrying out these exercises, the clinician emphasized the potential for negatively biased self-appraisals, along with strategies for coping with this in the future.  Stage 2: Affective Responding  Dave was also asked to explain why these qualities were important and the potential benefits of possessing them. The clinician used guided discovery and imagery during this process to ensure that the qualities selected were meaningful and important to Dave. He was then asked to generate practical examples of each quality. Particular emphasis was placed on describing specific behaviors associated with the quality and the context in which they were carried out. Attention was directed to Dave’s emotional experiences when displaying that   Schizophrenia and Other Psychotic Disorders  quality, thus generating the positive affect associated with that experience. Dave was asked to imagine the positive emotional reaction that another person would experience in interaction with him as he displayed a positive quality, and to vividly imagine the other person’s experience and describe how he/she would feel and attempt to mimic this experience. Dave was then asked to describe how he himself felt when he had evoked the positive emotion in the other person.  For example, in displaying generosity by helping out a friend, Dave was asked to imagine through guided imagery how that friend felt when assisted by Dave. He was asked to intensify and sustain this positive emotion. Then, through a similar process, Dave was asked to imagine and describe how he himself felt when he realized how positive his friend had felt in being helped out. Again, Dave was asked to intensify and sustain this emotion. A similar process should be carried out for all positive characteristics and scenarios.  PreveNtioN of relaPse  Relapses rarely occur without any forewarning. They are usually preceded by a period of prodromal symptoms that can last for days, or more usually weeks, and in some cases, months; the average prodrome is, however, about 4 weeks (Birchwood, Macmillan, & Smith, 1994). Common prodromal signs and symptoms include nonpsychotic symptoms (e.g., mild depression or dysphoria, anxiety, insomnia, irritability, mood fluctuations and interpersonal sensitivity) and low-level psychotic symptoms (e.g., suspiciousness, magical thinking, ideas of reference, feelings that “something is strange or wrong” and that the individual does not “fit in” with others around him/her). During the prodromal phase, patients display behavior change, such as becoming more withdrawn, avoiding social contact, abandoning hobbies or interests, appearing more preoccupied, and being unable to continue with work or other routine or demanding activities. As the prodrome progresses, these signs and symptoms intensify and patients may exhibit strange and bizarre behavior, such as being unable to care for themselves, becoming socially or sexually inappropriate, making accusations against others, muttering to themselves, and disconnecting the television or telephone.  Patients may be asked to recall prodromal signs and symptoms that preceded previous episodes and relaps   es, which can be based on the onset of the episode or admission to the hospital, then identify when changes were first noticed, what changes occurred, and how they progressed and in what sequence. Each sign or symptom may be written on a card, and the patient may be asked to arrange them in temporal order of occurrence. In this way the patient’s relapse signature, that is, the individual set of signs and symptoms that characterized the patient’s prodrome and its time course leading to relapse, can be identified. Family members or professional mental health staff, if available, can help identify prodromal changes and their sequence. Clinicians may find the use of standardized assessments of prodromal symptoms helpful, such as the Early Signs Scale (Birchwood et al., 1989). Such instruments can also help the clinician cue or inquire about possible prodromal symptoms not spontaneously recalled by the patient. The patient needs to be able to discriminate between an actual relapse prodrome and normal mood fluctuations that do not signal a relapse. This is done through a process of discrimination training, whereby the patient monitors mood and experiences over a number of weeks, with a goal of learning to distinguish a real prodrome from the “false alarm” of a normal fluctuation in affect.  The next stage is to formulate a “game plan” to deal with a prodrome should one occur. Coping strategies can be formulated and rehearsed, the help of others can be elicited, and the assistance of psychiatric services can be requested, which may include an increase or change in medication. With an understanding of the time course of patients’ prodromes, the clinician can identify different actions for different phases of the prodrome and the “window of opportunity” to intervene. An important part of the treatment approach is to plan for the future, especially for potentially stressful events that may occur and how to be aware of emerging symptoms and relapse. Patients can be monitored by returning to the clinician postcards that indicate they are well or that a prodrome may have started. Technology such as cell phones and e-mail may provide new, innovative platforms and methods for clinicians to monitor patients and maintain contact, to identify early signs of relapse, and to intervene at the optimal time. Such technological advances may also result in real-time assessment and intervention, and the development of intelligent systems to identify critical periods and deliver individualized interventions (Kelly et al., 2012).   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  cliNical ProBleMs aND Difficulties  Thought Disorder  Thought disorder, typically characterized by disruption to language, makes it difficult to comprehend the meaning that the patient is imparting. However, with experience and patience, it is often possible to follow some internal logic in the patient’s speech. This can be accomplished by asking the patient to explain the meaning, or by reflecting back one’s own understanding, which is then rephrased in more coherent language. Progressing through these organized steps in a calm manner can help prevent the patient from feeling overloaded with the emotional content of the discussion, which can occur, especially when the material being discussed is emotionally salient.  Intractable Psychotic Symptoms  Regrettably, there are cases in which the therapist’s best efforts and optimum medication produce little improvement in the patient’s symptoms. A number of options are available in such intractable cases. First, it is necessary to ensure that appropriate support services are in place, so that the patient’s quality of life is maximized. Second, there should be regular reviews of treatment, especially of medication and of environmental circumstances, so that excessive stresses are avoided. Last, it is always worth continuing with a few simple and direct cognitive-behavioral strategies because, over a long period of time, these may begin to have an effect.  Risk of Suicide and Self‑Harm  The risk of suicide in patients with schizophrenia is significant. Risk factors include being young and male, having a chronic illness with numerous exacerbations, high levels of symptomatology and functional impairment, feelings of hopelessness in association with depression, fear of further mental deterioration, and excessive dependence on treatment or loss of faith in treatment. In one study, two paths to suicide risk, both of which were mediated by hopelessness, were also identified: (1) increased social isolation, to which longer illness duration, more positive symptoms, older age, and being unemployed contributed, and (2) greater negative views of the self, higher frequency of criticism from relatives, and more negative symptoms, to which being male, unmarried, and unemployed signifi   cantly contributed (Tarrier, Barrowclough, Andrews, & Gregg, 2004). A more recent cohort study and systematic review have confirmed and extended previous findings. Being young and male with a history of violent offending were identified as predictors of suicide, although this latter finding was restricted specifically to those with lower IQ (Webb, Långström, Runeson, Lichtenstein, & Fazel, 2011). A systematic review of 51 studies additionally identified important illness-related predictors such as depressive symptoms, hallucinations and delusions, and comorbid physical illness and substance misuse (Hor & Taylor, 2010).  It is important for therapists to be aware that suicide attempts are a very real possibility while treating someone with schizophrenia. Unfortunately, patients with schizophrenia often commit suicide impulsively and use lethal methods, such as jumping from heights, immolation, or firearms. The presence of suicidal ideation needs to be assessed, and the patient needs to be asked whether he/she has made any specific plans or taken any actions, and whether the normal barriers to selfharm and suicide have broken down. It is necessary to be aware of factors that can elevate risk, including erosion of self-esteem; increased sense of hopelessness and despair, especially related to the patient’s perception of the illness and recovery; disruptive family or social relationships; and any changes in social circumstances or loss of supportive relationships (e.g., changes in mental health staff, staff holidays, or leave). Furthermore, the occurrence of major life events, loss, or shameful experiences can lead to despondency.  Some factors that can increase risk for suicide are quite unique to the psychotic disorders, such as the experience of command hallucinations telling patients to self-harm. Other examples are more idiosyncratic. One of the authors (N. T.) had a patient who experienced strange physical sensations that he interpreted as the Queen of England entering his body. As a loyal subject, he thought he should vacate his body to give her sole possession, and he attempted to kill himself by slashing his wrists. This was not the result of a will to die, but was more driven by some sense of social protocol toward royalty. Fortunately, the attempt was unsuccessful.   Many clinicians hypothesize that psychotic symptoms have a protective aspect in masking the harsh realities of the burden of serious mental illness. Improvement in insight and symptomatology can bring with it an increased exposure to this burden, thus increasing the probability of potential escape through suicide. The   Schizophrenia and Other Psychotic Disorders  clinician needs to be aware of all these factors, to know his/her patients well, and to monitor changes in their circumstances or mood that may be problematic. It is important to be aware of predictable changes and plan for them, to establish good communication with other mental health workers, and to address depressed mood and hopelessness in an open manner. Assessing acute suicide risk is further complicated by patients’ flat or incongruous affect, so that the cues a clinician would look for in a depressed patient may not be exhibited by a patient with schizophrenia. When risk is high, emergency psychiatric services should be called.  Dual Diagnosis: Comorbidity of Alcohol and Substance Use  Comorbid substance use disorders are an escalating problem in patients with schizophrenia. Dual-diagnosis patients tend to do worse than patients with schizophrenia alone on a range of outcomes. They tend to be more persistently symptomatic; to have more frequent and earlier relapse and readmission; to be more likely to present to the emergency services; and to have higher levels of aggression and violence, and greater risk of suicide and self-harm.  Motivational interviewing has been used effectively to enhance motivation to change substance use behavior in schizophrenia patients (Barrowclough et al., 2001; Haddock et al., 2003). Motivational interviewing has been termed a “style” rather than a specific intervention, and can be incorporated into a CBT approach to increase the patient’s motivation to change substance or alcohol use behavior and concurrently address the psychosis. It is postulated that an important interaction between alcohol or substance use and psychotic symptoms requires this dual-treatment approach. Many patients do not consider their alcohol or substance use a problem and perceive the positive benefits, such as self-medication, peer identification, or enjoyment, as outweighing any negative consequences. The aim during the initial sessions is to elicit change or motivational statements from the patient. The therapist uses the motivational interviewing skills of reflective listening, acceptance, and selective reinforcement to elicit such statements. Once the patient identifies substance or alcohol use as a problem and expresses a desire to change, therapy can then progress to practical ways to achieve this goal. The largest RCT to date compared a combined condition of TAU, motivational interviewing, and CBT with TAU alone in those with psycho   sis and co-occurring substance use. Results showed treatment to be beneficial in improving motivation to change substance use, and significantly reduced the amount of substance consumed per day, with this latter finding being maintained at 24-month follow-up. However, there were no effects on clinical outcomes such as relapse rates, symptoms, and functioning (Barrowclough et al., 2010).  coNclusioN  CBTp does have significant benefits for patients with schizophrenia and psychosis. It should be carried out as part of a comprehensive care plan. It is unlikely to “cure” patients, but it may assist them in coping with and recovering from their illness. Intervention is based on a detailed assessment and formulation. It does require considerable skill, experience, and knowledge of CBT and psychosis, and it does not lend itself easily to a simple protocol format. Further research on theoretical aspects of understanding psychosis from a psychological perspective is important to inform and further develop CBT procedures. Research into dissemination and how new psychological treatments penetrate into mental health services and become accessible to patients are required.  referenCes  Allot, K., Alvarez-Jimenez, M., Killackey, E. J., Bendall, S., McGorry, P. D., & Jackson, H. J. (2011). Patient predictors of symptom and functional outcome following cognitive behaviour therapy or befriending in first-episode psychosis. Schizophrenia Research, 132, 125–130.  Barnes, T. R. E., & Nelson, H. E. (1994) The assessment of psychoses: A practical handbook. London: Chapman & Hall.  Barrowclough, C., Haddock, G., Lobban, F., Jones, S., Siddle, R., Roberts, C., et al. (2006). Group cognitive behaviour therapy for schizophrenia: Randomized controlled trial. British Journal of Psychiatry, 189, 527–532.  Barrowclough, C., Haddock, G., Tarrier, N., Lewis, S., Moring, J., O’Brian, R., et al. (2001). Randomised controlled trial of motivational interviewing and cognitive behavioural intervention for schizophrenia patients with associated drug or alcohol misuse. American Journal of Psychiatry, 158, 1706–1713.  Barrowclough, C., Haddock, G., Wykes, T., Beardmore, R., Conrod, P., Craig, T., et al. (2010). Integrated motivational interviewing and cognitive behavioural therapy for people   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  with psychosis and comorbid substance misuse: Randomised controlled trial. British Medical Journal, 341, c6325.  Barrowclough, C., & Tarrier, N. (1992). Families of schizophrenic patients: A cognitive-behavioural intervention. London: Chapman & Hall.  Birchwood, M., Macmillan, F., & Smith, J. (1994). Early intervention. In M. Birchwood & N. Tarrier (Eds.), Psychological management of schizophrenia (pp. 77–108). Chichester, UK: Wiley.  Birchwood, M., Peters, E., Tarrier, N., Dunn, G., Lewis, S., Wykes, T., et al. (2011). A multi-centre randomised controlled trial of cognitive therapy to prevent harmful compliance with command hallucinations. BioMed Central Psychiatry, 11, 155–160.  Birchwood, M., Smith, J., MacMillan, F., Hogg, B., Prasad, R., Harvey, C., et al. (1989). Predicting relapse in schizophrenia: The development and implementation of an early signs monitoring system using patients and families as observers. Psychological Medicine, 19, 649–656.  Bird, V., Premkumar, P., Kendall, T., Whittington, C., Mitchell, J., & Kuipers, E. (2010). Early intervention services, cognitive-behavioural therapy and family intervention in early psychosis: Systematic review. British Journal of Psychiatry, 197, 350–356.  Bolton, C., Gooding, P., Kapur, N., Barrowclough, C., & Tarrier, N. (2007). Developing psychological perspectives of suicidal behaviour and risk in people with a diagnosis of schizophrenia: We know they kill themselves but do we understand why? Clinical Psychology Review, 27, 511– 536.  Brabban, A., Tai, S., & Turkington, D. (2009). Predictors of outcome in brief cognitive behavior therapy for schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 35, 859–864.  Brooker, C., & Brabban, A. (2006). Measured success: A scoping review of evaluated psychosocial interventions training for work with people with serious mental health problems. London: National Health Service, National Institute for Mental Health in England.  Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences (2nd ed.). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.  Dixon, L. B., Dickerson, F., Bellack, A. S., Bennett, M., Dickinson, D., Goldberg, R. W., et al. (2010). The 2009 schizophrenia PORT psychosocial treatment recommendations and summary statements. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 36, 48–70.  Doll, R. (1998). Controlled trials: The 1948 watershed. British Medical Journal, 317, 1217–1220.  Drury, V., Birchwood, M., Cochrane, R., & Macmillan, F. (1996). Cognitive therapy and recovery from acute psychosis: A controlled trial: I. Impact on psychotic symptoms. British Journal of Psychiatry, 169, 593 –601.  Dunn, G., Fowler, D., Rollinson, R., Freeman, D., Kuipers, E., Smith, B., et al. (2012). Effective elements of cognitive behaviour therapy for psychosis: Results of a novel type  of subgroup analysis based on principal stratification. Psychological Medicine, 42, 1057–1068.  Emmerson, L. C., Granholm, E., Link, P. C., McQuaid, J. R., & Jeste, D. V. (2009). Insight and treatment outcome with cognitive-behavioral social skills training for older people with schizophrenia. Journal of Rehabilitation Research and Development, 46, 1053–1058.  Fowler, D., Hodgekins, J., Painter, M., Reilly, T., Crane, C., Macmillan, I., et al. (2009). Cognitive behaviour therapy for improving social recovery in psychosis: A report from the ISREP MRC trial platform study (improving social recovery in early psychosis). Psychological Medicine, 39, 1627–1636.  Freeman, D. (2011). Improving cognitive treatments for delusions. Schizophrenia Research, 132, 135–139.  Garety, P. A., Fowler, D. G., Freeman, D., Bebbington, P., Dunn, G., & Kuipers, E. (2008). Cognitive-behavioural therapy and family intervention for relapse prevention and symptom reduction in psychosis: Randomised controlled trial. British Journal of Psychiatry, 192, 412–423.  Garety, P. A., Fowler, D., Kuipers, E., Freeman, D., Dunn, G., Bebbington, P., et al. (1997). London–East Anglia randomised controlled trial of cognitive-behavioural therapy for psychosis: II. Predictors of outcome. British Journal of Psychiatry, 171, 420–426.  Garety, P., Kuipers, E., Fowler, D., Freeman, D., & Bebbington, P. E. (2001). A cognitive model of the positive symptoms of psychosis. Psychological Medicine, 31, 189–195.  Gould, R. A., Mueser, K. T., Bolton, E., Mays, V., & Goff,  D. (2001). Cognitive therapy for psychosis in schizophrenia: An effect size analysis. Schizophrenia Research, 48, 335–342. Grant, P. M., Huh, G. A., Perivoliotis, D., Stolar, N. M., & Beck, A. T. (2012). Randomized trial to evaluate the efficacy of cognitive therapy for low-functioning patients with schizophrenia. Archives of General Psychiatry, 69, 121–127.  Haddock, G., Barrowclough, C., Tarrier, N., Moring, J., O’Brien, R., Schofield, N., et al. (2003). Randomised controlled trial of cognitive-behavior therapy and motivational intervention for schizophrenia and substance use: 18 month, carer and economic outcomes. British Journal of Psychiatry, 183, 418–426.  Haddock, G., McCarron, J., Tarrier, N., & Faragher, B. (1999). Scales to measure dimensions of hallucinations and delusions: The Psychotic Symptom Rating Scales (PSYRATS). Psychological Medicine, 29, 879–890.  Haddock, G., Tarrier, N., Morrison, A. P., Hopkins, R., Drake, R., & Lewis, S. (1999). A pilot study evaluating the effectiveness of individual inpatient cognitive behavioural therapy in early psychosis. Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology, 34, 254–258.  Hall, P. H., & Tarrier, N. (2003). The cognitive-behavioural treatment of low self-esteem in psychotic patients: A pilot study. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 41, 317–332.   Schizophrenia and Other Psychotic Disorders  Hor, K., & Taylor, M. (2010). Review: suicide and schizophrenia: A systematic review of rates and risk factors. Journal of Psychopharmacology, 24, 81–90.  Jackson, H. J., McGorry, P. D., Killackey, E., Bendall, S., Allott, K., Dudgeon, P., et al. (2008). Acute-phase and 1-year follow-up results of a randomized controlled trial of CBT versus befriending for first-episode psychosis: The ACE project. Psychological Medicine, 38, 725–735.  Johnson, J., Gooding, P., & Tarrier, N. (2008). Suicide risk in schizophrenia: Explanatory models and clinical implications, the schematic appraisal model of suicide (SAMS). Psychology and Psychotherapy, 81, 55–71.  Kane, J. M. (1999). Management strategies for the treatment of schizophrenia. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 60(Suppl. 12), 13–17.  Kelly, J. A., Gooding, P., Pratt, D., Ainsworth, J., Welford, M., & Tarrier, N. (2012). Intelligent real time therapy (iRTT): Harnessing the power of machine learning to optimise the delivery of momentary cognitive-behavioural interventions. Journal of Mental Health, 21(4), 404–414.  Kuipers, E., Onwumere, J., & Bebbington, P. (2010). Cognitive model of caregiving in psychosis. British Journal of Psychiatry, 196, 259–265.  Lecomte, T., Leclerc, C., & Wykes, T. (2012). Group CBT for early psychosis—Are there still benefits one year later? International Journal of Group Psychotherapy, 62, 309– 321.  Lewis, S. W., Tarrier, N., Haddock, G., Bentall, R., Kinderman, P., Kingdon, D., et al. (2002). Randomised controlled trial of cognitive-behaviour therapy in early schizophrenia: Acute phase outcomes. British Journal of Psychiatry, 181(Suppl. 43), 91–97.  Lynch, D., Laws, K. R., & McKenna, P. J. (2010). Cognitive behavioural therapy for major psychiatric disorder: Does it really work?: A meta-analytical review of well-controlled trials. Psychological Medicine, 40, 9–24.  Morrison, A. P., & Barratt, S. (2010). What are the components of CBT for psychosis?: A Delphi study. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 36, 136–142.  Morrison, A. P., French, P., Stewart, S. L. K., Birchwood, M., Fowler, D., Gumley, A. I., et al. (2012). Early detection and intervention evaluation for people at risk of psychosis: Multisite randomised controlled trial. British Medical Journal, 344, e2233.  Morrison, A. P., French, P., Walford, L., Lewis, S., Kilcommons, A., Green, J., et al. (2004). A randomised controlled trial of cognitive therapy for the prevention of psychosis in people at ultra-high risk. British Journal of Psychiatry, 185, 291–297.  Morrison, A. P., Hutton, P., Wardle, M., Spencer, H., Barratt, S., Brabban, A., et al. (2012). Cognitive therapy for people with a schizophrenia spectrum diagnosis not taking antipsychotic medication: An exploratory trial. Psychological Medicine, 42, 1049–1056.  Morrison, A. P., Turkington, D., Wardle, M., Spencer, H.,  Barratt, S., Dudley, R., et al. (2012). A preliminary exploration of predictors of outcome and cognitive mechanisms of change in cognitive behaviour therapy for psychosis in people not taking antipsychotic medication. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 50, 163–167.  Mueser, K., & Glynn, S. M. (1995). Behavioral family therapy for psychiatric disorders. Needham Heights, MA: Allyn & Bacon.  Mueser, K. T., Glynn, S. M., Cather, C., Xie, H., Zarate, R., Fox Smith, L., et al. (2013). A randomized controlled trial of family intervention of co-occurring substance use and severe psychiatric disorders. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 39(3), 658–672.  National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (NICE). (2009). Schizophrenia: core interventions in the treatment and management of schizophrenia in adults in primary and secondary care, updated guideline. London: Author.  Nuechterlein, K. H. (1987). Vulnerability models for schizophrenia: State of the art. In H. Hafner, W. F. Gattaz, &  W. Janzarik (Eds.), Search for the cause of schizophrenia (pp. 297–316). Heidelberg, Germany: Springer-Verlag. Onwumere, J., Bebbington, P., & Kuipers, E. (2011). Family interventions in early psychosis: specificity and effectiveness. Epidemiology and Psychiatric Sciences, 20(13), 113–119.  Onwumere, J., & Kuipers, E. (2011). Cognitive-behavioral family intervention in psychosis. In M. Rimondini (Ed.), Communication in cognitive behavioral therapy (pp. 185– 201). New York: Springer.  Pantelis, C., & Barns, T. R. E. (1996). Drug strategies in treatment resistant schizophrenia. Australian and New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry, 30, 20–37.  Perivoliotis, D., Grant, P. M., Peters, E. M., Ison, R., Kuipers, E., & Beck, A. T. (2010). Cognitive insight predicts favorable outcome in cognitive behavioral therapy for psychosis. Psychosis, 2, 23–33.  Pilling, S., Bebbington, P., Kuipers, E., Garety, P., Geddes, J., Orbach, G., et al. (2002). Psychological treatments in schizophrenia: I. Meta-analysis of family interventions and cognitive behaviour therapy. Psychological Medicine, 32, 763–782.  Pocock, S. J. (1996). Clinical trials: A practical approach. Chichester, UK: Wiley.  Premkumar, P., Peters, E. R., Fannon, D., Anilkumar, A. P., Kuipers, E., & Kumari, V. (2011). Coping styles predict responsiveness to cognitive behaviour therapy in psychosis. Psychiatry Research, 187, 354–362.  Rector, N. A., & Beck, A. T. (2001). Cognitive behavioral therapy for schizophrenia: An empirical review. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 189, 278–287.  Richardson, A., Baker, M., Burns, T., Lilford, R. J., & Muijen,  M. (2000). Reflections on methodological issues in mental health research. Journal of Mental Health, 9, 463–470. Salkovskis, P. M. (2002). Empirically grounded clinical interventions: Cognitive behaviour therapy progresses   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  through a multidimensional approach to clinical science. Behavioural and Cognitive Psychotherapy, 30, 3–10.  Sarin, F., Wallin, L., & Widerlöv, B. (2011). Cognitive behavior therapy for schizophrenia: A meta-analytical review of randomized controlled trials. Nordic Journal of Psychiatry, 65, 162–174.  Slade, M., & Priebe, S. (2001). Are randomised controlled trials the only gold that glitters? British Journal of Psychiatry, 179, 286–287.  Steel, C., Tarrier, N., Stahl, D., & Wykes, T. (2012). Cognitive behaviour therapy for psychosis: The impact of therapist training and supervision. Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics, 81(3), 194–195.  Stowkowy, J., Addington, D., Liu, L., Hollowell, B., & Addington, J. (2012). Predictors of disengagement from treatment in an early psychosis program. Schizophrenia Research, 136, 7–12.  Tarrier, N. (1996). A psychological approach to the management of schizophrenia. In M. Moscarelli & N. Sartorius (Eds.), The economics of schizophrenia (pp. 271–286). Chichester, UK: Wiley.  Tarrier, N. (2002). The use of coping strategies and selfregulation in the treatment of psychosis. In A. Morrison (Ed.), A casebook of cognitive therapy for psychosis (pp. 79–107). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.  Tarrier, N. (2006). A cognitive-behavioural case formulation approach to the treatment of schizophrenia. In N. Tarrier (Ed.), Case formulation in cognitive behaviour therapy: The treatment of challenging and complex clinical cases (pp. 167–187). London: Routledge.  Tarrier, N., Barrowclough, C., Andrews, B., & Gregg, L. (2004). Suicide risk in recent onset schizophrenia: The influence of clinical, social, self-esteem and demographic factors. Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology, 39, 927–937.  Tarrier, N., Barrowclough, C., Haddock, G., & McGovern,  J. (1999). The dissemination of innovative cognitivebehavioural treatments for schizophrenia. Journal of Mental Health, 8, 569–582. Tarrier, N., & Calam, R. (2002). New developments in cognitive-behavioural case formulation: Epidemiological, systemic and social context: An integrative approach. Cognitive and Behavioural Psychotherapy, 30, 311–328.  Tarrier, N., Haddock, G., Lewis, S., Drake, R., Gregg, L., & the Socrates Trial Group. (2006). Suicide behaviour over 18 months in recent onset schizophrenic patients: The effects of CBT. Schizophrenia Research, 83, 15–27.  Tarrier, N., Lewis, S., Haddock, G., Bentall, R., Drake, R., Kinderman, P., et al. (2004). Cognitive-behavioural therapy in first-episode and early schizophrenia 18-month follow-up of a randomised controlled trial. British Journal of Psychiatry, 184, 231–239.  Tarrier, N., & Wykes, T. (2004). Is there evidence that cognitive behaviour therapy is an effective treatment for schizophrenia: A cautious or cautionary tale? (Invited essay). Behaviour Research and Therapy, 42, 1377–1401.  Tarrier, N., Yusupoff, L., Kinney, C., McCarthy, E., Gledhill, A., Haddock, G., et al. (1998). A randomised controlled trial of intensive cognitive behaviour therapy for chronic schizophrenia. British Medical Journal, 317, 303–307.  Tarrier, N., Yusupoff, L., McCarthy, E., Kinney, C., & Wittkowski, A. (1998). Some reason why patients suffering from chronic schizophrenia fail to continue in psychological treatment. Behavioural and Cognitive Psychotherapy, 26, 177–181.  Tattan, T., & Tarrier, N. (2000). The expressed emotion of case managers of the seriously mentally ill: The influence of EE and the quality of the relationship on clinical outcomes. Psychological Medicine, 30, 195–204.  Trower, P., Birchwood, M., Meaden, A., Byrne, S., Nelson, A., & Ross, K. (2004). Cognitive therapy for command hallucinations: Randomised controlled trial. British Journal of Psychiatry, 184, 312–320.  Webb, R. T., Långström, N., Runeson, B., Lichtenstein, P., & Fazel, S. (2011). Violent offending and IQ level as predictors of suicide in schizophrenia: National cohort study. Schizophrenia Research, 130, 143–147.  Wykes, T., Everitt, B., Steele, C., & Tarrier, N. (2008). Cognitive behaviour therapy for schizophrenia: Effect sizes, clinical models and methodological rigor. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 34, 523–537.  Zimmermann, G., Favrod, J., Trieu, V. H., & Pomini, V. (2005). The effect of cognitive behavioural treatment on the positive symptoms of schizophrenia spectrum disorders: A meta-analysis. Schizophrenia Research, 77, 1–9.   CHaPter 13  Alcohol Use Disorders  BarBara s. MccraDy  Clinicians working with individuals with alcohol use problems, as well as clinicians in training, have found this chapter to be an extraordinarily useful resource in guiding their treatment approaches. in this thoroughly updated and edited revision, the author begins by describing how recent societal trends and legislative initiatives have altered the nature of the clientele with drinking problems that comes for treatment. After briefly reviewing the available empirical evidence on treatment approaches that range from Alcoholics Anonymous to brief interventions to intensive inpatient treatment, the author describes the myriad factors that every clinician must consider in choosing and carrying out appropriate interventions for individuals with drinking problems. Using a variety of illuminating case vignettes, Barbara McCrady illustrates important therapeutic strategies, including methods for motivating these patients to begin treatment. in a manner that emphasizes the humanity of the couple and makes the partners come to life, the extended case study in this chapter illustrates the all‑too‑frequent tragic consequences of excessive drinking. in the context of this case description, the author describes in great detail what clinicians will not find in books that simply lay out various treatment procedures— that is, the thrusts and parries of a superb and experienced clinician in overcoming the roadblocks that inevitably emerge during treatment.—D. H. B.  Alcohol use disorders are a heterogeneous group of problems ranging in severity from the heavy-drinking college student who occasionally misses classes to the person with severe and chronic alcoholism who experiences serious medical and social consequences of drinking. Although the prevalence of alcohol use disorders is higher in males than in females and in younger than in older adults, these problems affect individuals from any sociodemographic, racial/ethnic, or occupational background. In mental health and medical settings, at least 25% of clients are likely to have an alcohol use disorder as part of their presenting problems (e.g., Zimmerman, Lubman, & Cox, 2012), so clinicians in health and mental health professions need to be competent to identify, assess, and plan an effec   tive course of treatment for these clients. This chapter describes the social context of drinking and drinking problems, provides an integrative model for conceptualizing and treating alcohol use problems, and presents both a series of case vignettes and an extended case study to illustrate the clinical model.  The clinician functioning in the 21st century must provide treatment within a complex and contradictory treatment network; must have formal and systematic training in the treatment of alcohol and other drug use disorders; must have tools to work with involuntary and voluntary clients, those who adhere passionately to a traditional recovery perspective, and those who are offended by it; and must work either to promote major and enduring changes in alcohol use or to decrease the  533   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  harm that individuals and groups may experience from their use. The need for clinicians who are competent in treating alcohol and other substance use disorders (AUDs and other SUDs) will increase because of two Federal laws passed in recent years. The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, passed in 2010 in the United States, mandates alcohol and drug screening and brief intervention in primary care settings as a covered benefit, and the Wellstone–Domenici Mental Health Parity and Addiction Equity Act of 2008 mandates comparable health care coverage for treatment for physical health, mental health, and addictions problems. If these laws are implemented successfully, more individuals with AUDs will be identified and referred to treatment.  Although the need for clinicians who are competent to treat AUDs is likely to increase, many clinicians may shy away from this population given the notorious reputation of persons with AUDs for being difficult and frustrating to treat. This chapter assumes that the clinician who has useful and effective tools for working with persons with drinking problems, and who has a bit of success with these tools, will find positive reasons to see these clients. Persons with drinking problems are treatable; they are both challenging and rewarding to treat; and when they change successfully, the clinician has the rare opportunity to participate in helping people make major and satisfying changes in their lives.  DefiNitioNs aND DiaGNosis of alcohol ProBleMs  Diagnosis  The diagnosis of alcohol problems in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, fifth edition (American Psychiatric Association, 2013), treats AUDs as a single disorder, ranging along a spectrum of severity. Previous editions of the DSM discriminated between alcohol abuse and dependence; this distinction no longer applies. To be diagnosed with an AUD, an individual must meet at least two of 11 criteria, and the AUD is classified as mild (two to three symptoms), moderate (four to five symptoms) or severe (six to eleven symptoms). The 11 diagnostic criteria combine the DSM-IV criteria for alcohol abuse and alcohol dependence, eliminating “repeated alcohol-related legal consequences,” and adding “craving.” Thus, the diagnostic criteria include (1) failing to fulfill major social  role obligations, such as those related to work, home, or school; (2) drinking repeatedly in a ways that that have the potential to create physical harm (e.g., drinking and driving); (3) continuing to drink despite the fact that drinking is causing social or interpersonal problems;  (4) having the desire to or attempting to cut down or stop without success; (5) drinking larger amounts or alcohol or drinking over longer periods of time than planned, (6) exhibiting signs of physical tolerance; (7) showing signs of physical withdrawal; (8) neglect of other activities; (9) spending considerable time obtaining alcohol, drinking, and recovering from its effects; (10) continuing to use despite knowing that alcohol is causing recurrent physical or psychological problems; and (11) experiencing persistent craving for alcohol. Alcohol dependence also may be classified as being in “partial remission” or in “full remission”; remission may be “early” (at least 3 months) or “sustained” (1 year or more). Alternative Definitions  In contrast to the formal psychiatric diagnosis of an AUD, behavioral researchers and clinicians have suggested that alcohol problems represent one part of a continuum of alcohol use, ranging from abstinence through nonproblem use to different types and degrees of problem use. DSM-5 is more aligned with this perspective but still considers a cutoff indicative of a disorder. From the alcohol problems continuum perspective, problems may be exhibited in a variety of forms— some that are consistent with a formal diagnosis, and others that are milder or more intermittent. By using an alcohol problems perspective, the clinician can focus more clearly on the pattern of drinking, negative consequences that the client has accumulated, his/her behavioral excesses and deficits across various areas of life functioning, and his/her particular strengths. A deemphasis on diagnosis forces the clinician to consider clients from a more individual perspective. Therefore, although formal diagnosis is useful for identifying and defining the severity of a client’s problems and is necessary for formal record keeping, the approach to clinical assessment emphasized in this chapter attends less to diagnostic issues and more to problem identification.  This chapter views alcohol use problems as a multivariate set of problems, with alcohol consumption as a common defining characteristic. These problems vary in severity from severe alcohol dependence to mild and circumscribed problems. For some, alcohol consump    Alcohol Use Disorders  tion itself is a major presenting problem; for others, the consequences of alcohol use—such as disruption of a relationship, occupational problems, or health problems—are the major reason for seeking treatment. In viewing alcohol problems as multivariate, this chapter also assumes the existence of multiple etiologies for these problems, with genetic, psychological, and environmental determinants contributing in differing degrees for different clients.  Complicating Problems  Drinking problems are complicated by a variety of concomitant problems. Of significance is the comorbidity of AUDs with other psychiatric diagnoses. A high percentage of those diagnosed with an AUD also experience other psychological problems, which may be antecedent to, concurrent with, or consequent to their drinking (Rosenthal, 2013). The most common Axis I disorders are other SUDs, depression, and anxiety disorders, occurring in up to 60% of males in treatment. The most common Axis II disorder comorbid with an AUD in males is antisocial personality disorder, with rates ranging from 15 to 50%. Females more often present with depressive disorders; 25 to 33% of women with an AUD experience depression prior to the onset of their AUD.  Alcohol problems also are complicated by problems with cognition, physical health, interpersonal relationships, the criminal justice system, the employment setting, and the environment. Many people with alcoholism have subtle cognitive deficits, particularly in the areas of abstract reasoning, memory, cognitive flexibility, problem solving, and difficulties in emotional differentiation (for a review of this literature, see Oscar-Berman & Marinkovi, 2007). Because verbal functioning is usually unimpaired, these cognitive problems are not always immediately apparent. Heavy drinking also causes a variety of medical problems and can affect any organ system in the body. Heavy drinking may cause conditions such as cardiomyopathy, liver diseases, gastritis, ulcers, pancreatitis, and peripheral neuropathies. Even when obvious medical conditions are not present, the effects of heavy drinking can be insidious and debilitating. Many people eat poorly when drinking, which results in nutritional deficits, poor energy, or vague and diffuse physical discomfort. Mortality rates among persons of all ages are elevated with alcohol dependence, and are higher among women than among men.  Interpersonal relationships also may be disrupted. The rates of separation and divorce range up to seven times those of the general population (Paolino, Mc- Crady, & Diamond, 1978); spousal violence is higher among both men and women with AUDs (Smith, Homish, Leonard, & Cornelius, 2012); and emotional and behavioral problems are more common among their spouses/partners and children (Moos & Billings, 1982; Moos, Finney, & Gamble, 1982). Health care utilization is elevated among the spouses and children of actively drinking individuals with AUDs (Spear & Mason, 1991).  Persons presenting for treatment of a drinking problem may be involved with the legal system because of charges related to driving while intoxicated (DWI), other alcohol-related offenses (e.g., assault), or involvement with the child welfare system. Drug-related charges also may bring a client to treatment. Clients vary in the degree to which they recognize that their drinking is creating problems, and in their degree of motivation to change their drinking patterns.  In conclusion, the client presenting for treatment may be drinking in a manner that creates concern, be formally diagnosed as having AUD, and also meet criteria for one or more Axis I or Axis II disorders. The person also may have other major problems, such as cognitive impairment, physical health problems, interpersonal or occupational problems, and/or legal problems. Problem recognition and motivation to change may be low. How does the clinician develop a rational approach to conceptualizing and treating this rather complicated clinical picture?  TheoreTical Model  The model presented in this chapter assumes that treatment planning must be multidimensional, and that there is more than one effective treatment for alcohol problems. Unlike certain disorders for which one treatment approach has demonstrable superiority over others, in the alcohol field there are a number of legitimate and empirically supported approaches to treatment (for a review, see Hallgren, Greenfield, Ladd, Glynn, & Mc- Crady, 2012). These treatments are based in different conceptualizations of the etiology, course, treatment goals, and length of treatment for alcohol problems. Among the treatments with the best support are brief and motivationally focused interventions, cognitivebehavioral treatment, 12-step facilitation treatment,   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  behavioral couple therapy, cue exposure treatment, and the community reinforcement approach. A number of factors seem to be common to effective treatments. These are summarized in Table 13.1. A key therapist responsibility is to help a client find a treatment approach and treatment setting that is effective for him/ her, rather than slavishly adhering to a particular treatment model or setting. A second and equally important therapist responsibility is to enhance the client’s motivation to continue to try, even if the initial treatment setting is not effective. This treatment model takes into account seven major considerations: (1) problem severity, (2) concomitant life problems, (3) client expectations, (4) motivation and the therapeutic relationship,  (5) variables maintaining the current drinking pattern, (6) social support systems, and (7) maintenance of change. Problem Severity  Problem severity is relatively atheoretical, and is most important in decision making about the types of treatments to be offered, the intensity of the treatment, and the initial treatment setting. Severe alcohol dependence can best be conceptualized as a chronic, relapsing disorder (McLellan, Lewis, O’Brien, & Kleber, 2000), with relapses occurring even after extended periods of abstinence. As with other chronic disorders, such as diabetes, cardiovascular disease, or rheumatoid arthritis, the clinician necessarily takes a long-term perspective, and maximizing periods of positive functioning and minimizing periods of problem use should be the primary goals. In contrast, other individuals have alcohol-related problems that may be circumscribed and not progressive (Finney, Moos, & Timko, 2013). Epidemiological data suggest that for the majority of those with alcohol-related problems, the problems will resolve or remit without any need for formal treatment or intervention. The clinician encountering individuals at the mild end of the severity spectrum should plan a brief, motivationally enhancing intervention to complement the natural change process and inspire these individuals to make changes in their drinking.  Concomitant Life Problems  Clients with AUDs often have problems in multiple areas of life functioning—physical, psychological/psychiatric, familial, social/interpersonal, occupational, legal, child care, housing, and transportation. Assess   ment of multiple areas of life functioning is crucial for the planning and delivery of effective treatment. Research suggests that targeting client problem areas successfully can result in appreciable changes in these problems, even with clients who are severely alcohol dependent and homeless (Cox et al., 1998). Furthermore, providing treatment directed at multiple problem areas enhances positive alcohol and drug use outcomes as well (McLellan et al., 1997; Morgenstern et al., 2006; Rynes, McCrady, Morgan, Violette, & Pandina, 2012).  Client Expectations  Clinicians should provide clients with accurate expectations about the intensity of their treatment and the probable course of their problems. To date, limited research has examined ways to affect such client expectations, although the recent development of the Psychosocial Treatment Expectation Questionnaire suggests that clients have expectancies about the purpose and atmosphere of treatment, as well as the likelihood that treatment will impact their daily lives (Leite, Seminotti, Freitas, & Drachler, 2011). Because research is limited, the recommendations provided here derive only partly from empirical findings about the course and treatment of AUDs and remain to be tested.  The clinician can inform clients with circumscribed, less severe problems that treatment will be short in duration, that they are likely to be successful in reducing their drinking, and that the long-term prognosis is good. Such clients also can be told that now or at some point in the future they may decide to stop drinking completely (Miller, Leckman, Delaney, & Tinkcom, 1992), or that they may continue to drink in a moderated fashion.  Clients with more severe and chronic AUDs, however, should be given a different set of expectations about treatment and the likely course of their problems. It is fair to tell them that about 25% of clients maintain sustained abstinence for at least 1 year after treatment, that another 10% will use alcohol in moderation and without problems, that, on average, clients will reduce the amount they drink by about 87%, and that alcoholrelated problems will decrease by about 60% (Miller, Walters, & Bennett, 2001). The challenge for such clients is to learn skills to manage their drinking in a way that makes it minimally disruptive to their lives. Chronic illness metaphors may be helpful. For example, like a patient with diabetes, a client with a severe AUD needs to make and maintain significant lifestyle   Alcohol Use Disorders  table 13.1. Principles for treatment of substance Use disorders  1. Structure and organization of the treatment setting •• Clear and well organized •• Actively involve the clients in the program •• Provide a supportive and emotionally expressive environment •• Emphasize self-direction, work, and social skills development •• Expect clients to take responsibility for their treatment and follow through 2. Type of provider and what the provider does •• Treatment by addictions specialists or mental health clinicians •• Development of an effective therapeutic alliance is crucial ||Accurate empathy  ||Respect for the experience of clients in therapy  ||Avoidance of confrontational struggles  •• Provide goal direction for the clients  •• Provide a moderate level of structure for the therapy  •• Handle ambivalence about changing or being in treatment:  ||Titrate level of confrontation to the level of clients’ reactance ||Avoid arguing with angry clients ||Avoid pushing clients hard to accept their diagnosis or the need to change  3. Level of care, continuity of care, and elements of treatment •• Pay attention to retaining clients in treatment •• Determine the intensity and length of treatment partly by considering the severity of the substance use disorder. ||For heavy drinkers with low alcohol dependence, less intense, briefer treatments are appropriate and intensive inpatient therapy yields poorer outcomes. ||Clients with severe alcohol dependence have better outcomes with more intensive initial treatment, and respond most positively to treatment that focuses on 12-step counseling and involvement with 12-step groups. •• Assess and arrange for attention to clients’ other social service and medical care needs  4. Contextual factors •• Involve a significant other •• Help clients restructure their social environments to include persons that support change and abstinence. •• With clients who have little commitment to remain in treatment or change their substance use, involve the family or other member of the social support system in the treatment to foster retention in treatment •• In the treatment of adolescents with substance use disorders, use approaches that involve multiple systems, including the family, peers, and others  5. Client characteristics •• Greater client readiness to change is associated with greater treatment success •• Greater severity of the substance use disorder is associated with a poorer response to treatment 6. Specific therapeutic elements •• Focus on client motivation •• Help clients develop awareness of repetitive patterns of thinking and behavior that perpetuate their alcohol or drug use •• Attend to the affective experiences of clients •• Consider the role of conditioning in the development and maintenance of substance use disorders. Clinicians  should carefully assess for indicators of specific conditioned responses to alcohol or drugs, and develop ways to change these conditioned responses •• Enhance positive outcome expectancies  7. Client–treatment matching •• Assess for comorbid disorders and use empirically supported treatments for additional presenting problems •• Use female-specific treatment with women clients Note. From Haaga, McCrady, and LeBow (2006). Copyright 2006 by Wiley Journals, Inc. Reprinted by permission.   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  changes to support healthy functioning. Like the patient with diabetes, the client with a severe AUD needs to know warning signs that he/she may be getting into trouble and know what to do. And neither individual can afford to forget or ignore his/her chronic problem.  Motivation and the Therapeutic Relationship  Clients vary in the degree to which they recognize their drinking is problematic and in their readiness to change. Motivational models suggest that individuals initiate change when the perceived costs of the behavior outweigh the perceived benefits, and when they can anticipate some benefits from behavior change (Cunningham, Sobell, Sobell, & Gaskin, 1994). Prochaska and DiClemente (2005) proposed a continuum of stages of readiness for change. The continuum includes the stages of “precontemplation,” in which a person does not recognize a behavior as problematic; “contemplation,” in which the person considers that a behavior pattern might be problematic; “determination” or “preparation,” in which the individual resolves to change; and “action,” in which a person initiates active behaviors to deal with the problem. Following “action” is “maintenance,” if the behavior change is successful, or “relapse,” if the person returns to the problem behavior. Miller and Rollnick (2002) suggested that several factors influence a person’s readiness to change, including awareness of problem severity, awareness of positive consequences for changing the behavior, and the perception of choice in making changes. Clients’ apparent stage of change and self-perception of their problems should guide a clinician’s initial approach to treatment and treatment planning.  Contemporary models view motivation as a state that can be influenced by therapeutic behaviors and the client’s life experiences. Therapeutic approaches to enhance motivation lead clients to talk more about changing their drinking than continuing to drink, and in turn this “change talk” predicts better outcomes (Moyers, Martin, Houck, Christopher, & Tonigan, 2009). Motivationally enhancing approaches appear to be particularly effective with clients who enter treatment very angry and hostile (Project MATCH Research Group, 1997b). Miller and Rollnick (1991) described six common elements to enhance motivation, summarized in the acronym FRAMES: personalized feedback (F) to the client about his/her status; an emphasis on the personal responsibility (R) of the client for change; provision of clear advice (A) about the need for change,  given in a supportive manner; providing the client with a menu (M) of options for how to go about changing, rather than insisting upon one treatment or treatment goal; providing treatment in a warm, empathic (E), and supportive style; and enhancing the client’s perceived self-efficacy (S) for change.  Factors Maintaining the Current Drinking Pattern  Case conceptualization for treatment planning focuses on factors maintaining the problematic drinking pattern. Different treatment models use different frameworks for conceptualizing current factors that maintain drinking. Presented here is a cognitive-behavioral approach to case conceptualization (see Epstein & Mc- Crady, 2009). The cognitive-behavioral case formulation assumes that drinking can best be treated by examining current factors maintaining drinking rather than historical factors. Factors maintaining drinking may be individual, or related to environmental circumstances or interpersonal relationships. The model assumes external antecedents to drinking that have a lawful relationship to drinking through repeated pairings with positive or negative reinforcement, or through the anticipation of reinforcement. The model assumes that cognitions and affective states mediate the relationship between external antecedents and drinking behavior, and that expectancies about the reinforcing value of alcohol play an important role in determining subsequent drinking behavior. Finally, the model assumes that drinking is maintained by its consequences, and that the sources of these consequences may be physiological, psychological, or interpersonal.  To integrate these assumptions about drinking, my colleagues and I use a functional analytic framework, in which the drinking response (R) is elicited by environmental stimuli (S) that occur antecedent to drinking; that the relationship between the stimulus and response is mediated by cognitive, affective, and physiological, or organismic (O) factors; and that the response is maintained by positive or the avoidance of negative consequences (C) as a result of drinking. Various individual, familial, and other interpersonal factors are associated with drinking. At the individual level, environmental antecedents may be associated with specific drinking situations, times of the day, or the mere sight or smell of alcohol. Organismic variables may include craving for alcohol; withdrawal symptoms; negative affects such as anger, anxiety, or   Alcohol Use Disorders  depression; negative self-evaluations or irrational beliefs; or positive expectancies about the effects of alcohol in particular situations. Individual reinforcers may include decreased craving or withdrawal symptoms, decreases in negative affect or increases in positive affect, decreased negative self-evaluations, or decreased focus on problems and concerns.  At the familial level, various antecedents to drinking occur. Alcohol may be a usual part of family celebrations or daily rituals. Family members may attempt to influence the problematic drinking behavior by nagging the person to stop or by attempting to control the drinking through control of the finances or liquor supply. These actions may become antecedents to further drinking. Families in which a member is drinking heavily may develop poor communication and problemsolving skills, as well as marital/couple, sexual, financial, and child-rearing problems that then cue further drinking. The person with the drinking problem may have a variety of reactions to these familial antecedents, experiencing negative affect, low self-efficacy for coping with problems, and/or retaliatory thoughts. Family behaviors may serve to reinforce the drinking. The family may shield the person from negative consequences of drinking by taking care of the drinker when intoxicated or assuming his/her responsibilities. A number of investigators have observed positive changes in marital/couple interactions associated with drinking, such as increases in intimate exchanges or increased assertiveness by the drinker, suggesting that these positive behaviors may reinforce the drinking (e.g., Frankenstein, Hay, & Nathan, 1985).  There also are other interpersonal antecedents to drinking. These may include social pressures to drink; work-related drinking situations; friendships in which alcohol consumption plays a major role; or interpersonal conflicts with work associates, friends, or acquaintances. The person may react to interpersonal antecedents to drinking with craving, positive expectancies for alcohol use, social discomfort, or negative self-evaluations for not drinking. Positive interpersonal consequences of drinking may include decreased craving or social anxiety, an enhanced sense of social connectedness or fun, or increased social comfort or assertiveness.   Social Support  The behaviors of family and other members of the client’s social network are integral to the case conceptu   alization. The availability of general social support, as well as social support for abstinence or moderate drinking, is crucial to successful treatment. Support from the client’s social network for abstinence is associated with better drinking outcomes; support for continued drinking is associated with poorer outcomes (Longabaugh, Wirtz, Zywiak, & O’Malley, 2010). Clients in a social network that is strongly supportive of drinking may need to take deliberate steps to detach from that social network and access new social networks that support abstinence or moderate drinking. Some data suggest that involvement with Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) can serve such a function (Longabaugh, Wirtz, Zweben, & Stout, 1998), and data on natural recovery from alcohol problems suggest that finding a new love relationship or involvement in religious activities also may be viable avenues for change (Vaillant & Milofsky, 1982).  Maintenance of Change  Implicit in much of the preceding discussion is a view that individuals with severe AUDs have a high probability of relapse, an ever-present consideration, both because long-term, ingrained habits are difficult to change, and because of the permanent physiological and metabolic changes stimulated by heavy drinking (Woodward, 2013). Several models have been proposed to conceptualize the maintenance or relapse process, with associated treatments. The most prominent maintenance models include the relapse prevention (RP) model (Marlatt & Gordon, 1985; Witkiewitz & Marlatt, 2004), and the disease model, best exemplified by the practices common to AA. The RP model, an extension of the functional-analytic model described earlier, focuses on the interplay among environment, coping skills, and cognitive and affective responses in maintaining successful change. In the RP model, relapse occurs in response to a high-risk situation for which the client either lacks or does not apply effective coping skills. Low self-efficacy for coping with the situation may contribute to the difficulties. If the client does not cope effectively, use of alcohol is likely. Marlatt and Gordon (1985) suggested that, following initial drinking, a cognitive factor, the “abstinence violation effect” (AVE), is activated. The AVE represents allor- nothing thinking; after drinking, the client makes a cognitive shift to viewing him/herself as “drinking”; therefore, he/she continues to drink. RP treatment focuses on several points of intervention common to cognitive-behavioral treatment, such as identification   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  of high-risk situations and acquisition of coping skills, as well as cognitive restructuring to help the client view a drinking episode as a “lapse” from which he/she can learn and return to abstinence rather than a “relapse” into previous drinking patterns. RP also focuses on lifestyle changes to decrease the presence of high-risk situations, and encourages development of a balance between pleasures and desires, and obligations and responsibilities (a “want–should” balance) in the client’s life. In his more recent work, Marlatt (Marlatt & Donovan, 2005; Witkiewitz & Marlatt, 2004) described relapse as “multidimensional and dynamic” (Marlatt & Donovan, 2005, p. 21), and considered the influence of longer-term risk factors such as family history and social supports, and well as more proximal influences on relapse. He also suggested that there are reciprocal interactions among cognitions, coping skills, affect, and drinking.  Disease model perspectives view alcoholism as a chronic, progressive disease that can be arrested but not cured. Treatment based on the disease model focuses on helping the client recognize that he/she has this disease, that abstinence and a lifelong program of recovery are the only means to arrest the disease, and that involvement in AA or other 12-step groups is essential to successful maintenance of change (e.g., Slaymaker & Sheehan, 2013).  The model presented in this chapter is most closely allied with the RP model, but clinicians should be knowledgeable about the disease model underlying AA and recognize that some clients are drawn to it because they find the model and the program helpful and relevant to them.  cliNical aPPlicatioN of the theoretical MoDel  Overview  The major elements of the treatment model have direct implications for facilitating problem recognition and entry into treatment, and for the planning and delivery of treatment. If an individual has not entered treatment, there are techniques to help that individual recognize his/her drinking as problematic and in need of change. For a client seeking alcohol treatment, the therapist must make decisions about the most appropriate setting in which to provide treatment and select the therapeu   tic modalities most appropriate to him/her. Therapeutic techniques must be tailored to the client’s needs related to drinking and other life problems. The therapist also must consider the social context in which drinking occurs, as well as the social context for change. He/she must be cognizant of the subtle and nonspecific aspects of providing treatment to clients with drinking problems and utilize a therapeutic stance that enhances the client’s motivation to continue to engage in the change process. The therapist must attend to the client’s own views about treatment and change, and provide the client with accurate long-term expectations about drinking outcomes. Core components of the treatment model are listed in Table 13.2.  Case Identification and Entry into Treatment  Before discussing applications of the model to active treatment, it is important to consider how to help clients enter the treatment system.  Case Identification and Screening  Many individuals who drink do not think they have problems related to drinking. They may be unaware of the high-risk nature of their drinking pattern, or unaware of the negative consequences that are occurring. Feeling ashamed or guilty, they may be reluctant to tell others about their problems, or they may perceive  table 13.2. steps in treatment  1. Case identification and motivation to enter treatment 2. Assessment 3. Selection of treatment setting 4. Selection of treatment modalities 5. Enhancing and maintaining motivation to change 6. Selection of drinking goals 7. Initiation of abstinence 8. Developing a functional analysis 9. Early sobriety strategies 10. Coping strategies 11. Partner/family involvement 12. Long-term maintenance 13. Managing complicating conditions 14. Self-help groups  Alcohol Use Disorders  health care professionals as uninterested or unconcerned about drinking. Routine queries about drinking and its consequences in both medical and mental health care settings can obviate some of these difficulties. Given the high prevalence of drinking problems among individuals seeking health and mental health services, questions about drinking should be part of all clinicians’ intake interviews. The Affordable Care Act will require screening for alcohol and drug problems of all patients who are seen in primary care settings. Given the increased integration of psychological services into primary care, mental health professionals may take the lead in introducing appropriate screening tools into these health care settings.  Many screening interviews and questionnaires have been developed to identify clients with alcohol problems. At a minimum, all clients should be asked whether they drink, and drinkers should be asked follow-up questions about the quantity and frequency of their drinking. Drinking should be considered as heavy or high-risk if a man drinks more than 28 standard drinks in a week, or a woman drinks more than 21 standard drinks in a week.1 Concern should also be heightened if a client reports heavy drinking (five drinks for men, four for women) twice or more than per month. Followup questions may be used to inquire about subjective and objective consequences of drinking. The CAGE (cut down, annoyed, guilty, eye-opener; Mayfield, McLeod, & Hall, 1974; see Table 13.3) and the Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test (AUDIT; Saunders, Aasland, Babor, de la Fuente, & Grant, 1993) are two useful screening measures. Two affirmative responses to the CAGE suggest a high probability of an AUD, but even one positive response warrants further clinical inquiry. The AUDIT includes both direct and subtle approaches to alcohol screening; therefore, it may be useful with clients who are reluctant to self-identify drinking problems. The CAGE and AUDIT questions are reproduced in Table 13.3.  Motivating a Drinker to Enter Treatment  The initial challenge for a clinician is to stimulate the client to initiate any change. Methods for motivating clients to enter treatment vary; a clinician may draw upon motivational interviewing techniques (Miller & Rollnick, 2002), may involve family and concerned others in collaborative, client-centered work (Miller, Meyers, & Tonigan, 1999; Smith & Meyers, 2004), or  may use confrontational approaches, such as an “intervention” (Liepman, 1993). Implementation of motivational principles and techniques in ongoing clinical practice, however, presents creative challenges to the clinician. Three examples illustrate the application of different approaches to motivating clients to enter treatment.   Bill was a retired chemist with a long history of heavy drinking, multiple phobias, and bipolar disorder. I was initially contacted by his wife Diana, who told me that her husband had a 20-year drinking history, that his drinking had increased since his retirement, and that she did not know what to do: The children were angry and threatening to break off contact with him; she and Bill were arguing frequently; and she was beginning to feel increasingly anxious and depressed herself. Diana had consulted with a certified addictions counselor, who told her that they should set up an “intervention”—a meeting in which Diana and the children would confront Bill about his drinking, insist that he get treatment, then take him directly to an inpatient treatment facility. When Diana was hesitant, the counselor told her she was codependent and enabling him. She left the counselor’s office discouraged, certain that she did not want to initiate an intervention, but also certain that something should be done. I tried the most minimal intervention first. Over the telephone, I suggested that Diana speak with Bill one morning (before he had begun drinking) and say, “Bill, I am concerned about your drinking. I have spoken with a psychologist who specializes in alcohol treatment, and she said that she would be happy to see you for an evaluation. At the end of the evaluation, she’ll give us feedback about what we could do.” I told her not to elaborate on this statement, but simply to respond to Bill’s questions. If he refused, she was to get back in touch with me.  I next heard from Diana a month later. Bill had refused her request, and she wondered what else she could do. I suggested an individual consultation with me to discuss how to change her own actions to motivate Bill toward change. Diana came in, and after some further assessment of both Bill’s drinking history and her current functioning, I suggested three basic behavioral strategies, which I drew from Thomas’s unilateral family therapy (Thomas, Yoshioka, & Ager, 1996) and the community reinforcement and family training (CRAFT) model (Smith & Meyers, 2004). First, I instructed Diana to leave Bill to his drinking as much as possible, to let negative consequences occur naturally.   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  table 13.3. Questions to screen for alcohol Use and Problems  CAGEa  1. Have you ever felt you should cut (C) down on your 3. Have you ever felt bad or guilty (G) about your drinking? drinking? 4. Have you ever had a drink first thing in the morning 2. Have people annoyed (A) you by commenting on your (eye-opener [E])? drinking? Alcohol Use Disorders Test (AUDIT)b  These 10 questions are about your use of alcohol during the past 12 months.  1. How often do you have a drink containing alcohol? 0) Never [Skip to questions 9–10] 1)Monthly or less 2) 2 to 4 times a month 3) 2 to 3 times a week 4) 4 or more times a week 2. How many alcohol units do you have on a typical day when you are drinking? 0) 1 or 2 1) 3 or 4 2) 5 or 6 3) 7, 8, or 9 4) 10 or more 3. How often do you have seven or more units on one occasion? 0)Never 1) Less than monthly 2)Monthly 3) Weekly 4) Daily or almost daily 4. How often during the last year have you found that you were unable to stop drinking once you had started? 0)Never 1) Less than monthly 2)Monthly 3) Weekly 4) Daily or almost daily 5. How often during the last year have you failed to do what was normally expected from you because of drinking? 0)Never 1) Less than monthly 2)Monthly 3) Weekly 4) Daily or almost daily 6. How often during the last year have you needed a first drink in the morning to get yourself going after a heavy drinking session? 0)Never 1) Less than monthly 2)Monthly 3) Weekly 4) Daily or almost daily 7. How often during the last year have you had a feeling of guilt or remorse after drinking? 0)Never 1) Less than monthly 2)Monthly 3) Weekly 4) Daily or almost daily 8. How often during the last year have you been unable to remember what happened the night before because you had been drinking? 0)Never 1) Less than monthly 2)Monthly 3) Weekly 4) Daily or almost daily 9. Have you or someone else been injured as the result of your drinking? 0)No 2) Yes, but not in the last year 4) Yes, during the last year 10. Has a relative, friend, or a doctor or other health worker been concerned about your drinking or suggested you cut down? 0)No 2) Yes, but not in the last year 4) Yes, during the last year aFrom Mayfield, McLeod, and Hall (1974). bFrom http://whqlibdoc.who.int/hq/2001/who_msd_msb_01.6a.pdf. Copyright by the World Health Association. Reprinted by permission. Complete scoring is available from this source.   Alcohol Use Disorders  Second, I encouraged her to give him factual feedback about negative behaviors related to his drinking, but only at times when he was sober. The structure of the feedback was as follows: “Bill, I am concerned that X happened last night when you were drinking.” Third, I encouraged her to spend time with him in positive pursuits when he was not drinking. Given that they were going to Florida for the winter, I suggested that just before they returned, she should repeat her request that he come to see me for an evaluation.  I next heard from Diana in the spring, when she called me to make an appointment for the two of them to come in for an evaluation. They both attended. What follows is our initial discussion.2 (In this and other dialogues in this chapter, I am the therapist.)  tHeraPist: I’m so glad to get to meet you. As you know, Diana first spoke with me a few months ago, so I feel as though I know you a bit. I understand that you were initially reluctant to come in, and I’m pleased that you decided to come. How did that come about?  Bill: Well, Diana asked me, and I know she’s been concerned, so I agreed. But I only agreed to come to- day—I’m not making any kind of commitment here.  tHeraPist: I understand that and certainly won’t try to push you to do anything you’re not comfortable with. What I’d like to do today is to get a better understanding about your drinking and the kinds of problems it might be causing. At the end of our time together, I’ll give you some feedback and we can discuss some options for you, if you decide you want to make any changes. If I ask you anything that you’re not comfortable answering, just let me know. OK?  Bill was visibly uncomfortable, and pushed his chair as far back into the corner of my office as possible. He sat with his body turned away from Diana and often looked up at the ceiling or sighed when she was speaking. Despite his visible discomfort, he gave a clear account of his drinking. He had been drinking heavily for the past 25 years, and at one point had been drinking a pint of Jack Daniels whiskey each evening. He was diagnosed with colon cancer in his early 60s and treated surgically. Since the surgery, he had been concerned about his health and had attempted to reduce his drinking. His current pattern was almost daily drinking, in the evenings, ranging from two to four bottles of  Grolsch beer to an occasional (approximately twice per month) pint of Jack Daniels. He reported no withdrawal symptoms on days when he did not drink, and no apparent medical sequelae of his drinking. He said that he did not feel that he had control over his drinking, and expressed sadness that Diana was so upset. His love for her, apparent in his speech and demeanor, was clearly the primary reason he had come to see me.  Given Bill’s discomfort, I did not try to complete any standardized assessment instruments or even to structure the initial interview as I might have with other clients. Instead, I followed his lead, made frequent comments reflecting the emotions he was expressing, and at times asked Diana not to interrupt, so that Bill could express himself. In the last 15 minutes of the 1-hour interview, we shifted to feedback and discussion:  tHeraPist: I’d like to stop asking you so many questions now, and see if we can talk about possible options. I am glad that you came in and appreciate that this was not easy for you. From what you and Diana have told me, it does seem that it makes sense to be concerned about your drinking. The amount you’re drinking is above the recommended levels for safe and healthy drinking; you are concerned by your own feelings of lack of control; and your drinking has been upsetting to your family, which is painful to you. What do you think?  Bill: I guess talking about all of this at once makes it clearer that I’m drinking too much. I don’t want to stop, though—I appreciate good beer, and look forward to having a bottle or two in the evening. I just don’t want to overdo it to the point of hurting Diana.  tHeraPist: So you are concerned and think that some kind of change makes sense, but you’re not sure exactly what those changes should be?  Bill: Exactly.  tHeraPist: I think you have a number of options. Making some kind of change makes sense given the problems we’ve discussed. Probably your safest choice is to stop drinking—you can’t create future health problems from drinking if you don’t drink, and in some ways it might be easiest given that you’re in a pretty daily routine of drinking now. But if you don’t want to stop, we could also work toward your reducing your drinking to a level that is safer and healthier, and one that Diana and your children are comfortable with. I’d be willing to work with you   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  to try to reach that goal. I don’t think that you need intensive treatment in a hospital program right now, but you would probably benefit from some help to make changes. What do you think?  Bill: I’m surprised that you think I could reduce my  drinking. I have to think about this. I’ll have Diana  get back to you.  The discussion continued with input from Diana as well, and the session ended with a commitment only to think about our discussion. Several days later, Diana called to indicate that Bill wanted to begin treatment with me, and we scheduled an appointment.  Dorothy, a 78-year-old, widowed, retired schoolteacher, was hospitalized at a local medical center after a fall in her apartment. Her blood alcohol level (BAL) on admission was 185 mg%, and she had extensive evidence of old bruises, as well as a dislocated shoulder and broken wrist from the fall. She was immediately started on medication for alcohol withdrawal, and our addictions consultation team was called in to see her on the second day of her hospitalization. Dorothy’s son John was in the room when I came to see her. With his assistance, I was able to obtain a lengthy history of alcohol consumption that dated back to her early 40s. Although Dorothy had wanted to stop drinking, she had never been successful for more than a few days at a time, and had never received any form of alcohol treatment. Since her husband’s death 2 years earlier, she had been consuming a pint bottle of blackberry brandy each day. She had completely withdrawn from her previous social activities with friends, her hygiene had deteriorated, and she had had multiple accidents in her house. Dorothy provided this information tearfully, expressing a great sense of shame about her behavior. John described her home as “a mess” and said that he was angry and disgusted with her. Dorothy’s family history revealed many family members with alcohol dependence, including her father, two brothers, and a maternal uncle. Despite the medication, she showed visible signs of alcohol withdrawal during the interview. Dorothy was tearful and stated repeatedly that she was a “sinful, bad” person. My interviewing style with her was empathic: I asked her about her concerns, inquired how she felt, and reflected back her obvious distress with her current situation. I then told her that there were treatments available to help people with problems like hers. Her immediate and strong reaction was to say that she was too bad, and that her drinking  was a sin. Although not usually a strong proponent of labeling alcohol dependence as a disease, I decided that this framework might in fact be acceptable and supportive to her. Given her long history of alcohol dependence with physiological dependence, and her heavy family history of alcohol dependence, such a framework seemed plausible and appropriate.  “Dorothy, it is clear to me that you are very, very upset by your drinking and by all the problems it has caused for you and your family. I understand that you blame yourself and seem to think your drinking shows that you are a bad person. There is another way of thinking about your drinking that I’d like to tell you about. You may or may not agree with me, but I hope you’ll think about what I say. Some people say that alcoholism is a disease. In your case, I think that is true. You probably have genes that made you very vulnerable to alcohol—your father, your uncle, and your brothers all seem to have the same disease. We know that the vulnerability to alcoholism can be inherited, and I would guess that you inherited it. Over time, your body has become adapted to your drinking—it is more comfortable with alcohol than without it. If you try to stop, your body reacts badly. The shaking and nausea that you’re experiencing now are signs that your body has become hooked on alcohol.  “What does all this mean? It means that your body reacts differently to alcohol than other people’s, and probably has from the beginning of your drinking. It is no more your fault that you have a drinking problem than it is the fault of a diabetic that her body can’t make insulin. People are not responsible for the diseases they develop. But they are responsible for making the decision to take care of their disease, for getting help, and for following the advice of the people who give them that help. Except for the problems your drinking has caused, you’re healthy, and you obviously have people who care about you. If you can get help, you have a good chance of getting better.”  Dorothy initially was skeptical of this reframing of her problems. Without my prompting, when her son left the hospital that day, he picked up some brochures about alcoholism as a disease and brought them back for his mother to read. When I came to see her the next day, she had many questions about this disease notion and about treatment, which I answered as factually as   Alcohol Use Disorders  possible, still maintaining a motivational interviewing stance—not trying to push her into treatment, but reflecting her interest and concern. By my third visit, she agreed to enter a treatment program. She entered a short-term residential rehabilitation program, followed by longer-term outpatient group therapy. She began to volunteer at the hospital where I first saw her, and she remained sober and an active volunteer for several years, until advancing age required that she retire.  Dennis was a 41-year-old dentist with a history of abuse of alcohol, prescription opiates, and benzodiazepines. Dennis’s case illustrates the need for a full armamentarium of clinical techniques to motivate individuals to enter treatment. At the time that I saw Dennis, our center had a contract with the state dental association to provide assessment, motivation, referral, and monitoring services for dentists with alcohol and drug problems. I was called about Dennis on a Friday afternoon by an emergency room physician. Dennis had taken an overdose of medications and had been rushed to the emergency room by his office staff. His condition had been stabilized, and he was now insisting that he leave the hospital. The physician wanted our program to “do something.” In rapid succession, I received calls from the office staff, from Dennis’s wife, and from another dentist, who had been serving as his AA sponsor. By telephone, they provided me with a horrific history of abuse of multiple substances, domestic violence, canceled afternoons of appointments with patients, extraction of the wrong tooth from a patient, and repeated failures in AA and outpatient treatment. Each caller described Dennis as intractable, and all were desperately concerned that he would kill himself. I asked them all to meet me at the hospital, and left my office to join them there. I informed the emergency room physician that I would be coming to the hospital, and asked him to hold Dennis there until I arrived.  When I arrived at the hospital, I first spoke with Dennis individually. He was alert, oriented, belligerent and angry, and utterly unwilling to speak with me at any length or to agree to any kind of plan of care. My best motivational interviewing skills failed completely with him. Given the crisis nature of the situation and his extremely severe SUD, I decided to utilize a more confrontational technique—the intervention (Liepman, 1993). Interventions are designed to confront the resistant client and create a forced plan of action. Research suggests that two-thirds of families will not follow through with an intervention (as was the case with Diana and Bill), but that if an intervention is implemented,  the probability of the client’s entering treatment is very high (Miller et al., 1999). I gathered the office staff, Dennis’s wife, and his AA sponsor together and asked them whether they would be willing to sit down to talk with Dennis about his problems. They were relieved and eager to do so. We spent about 30 minutes together, during which time I outlined the basic requirements for the intervention: (1) Each person’s feedback should begin with an expression of caring or concern; (2) each should provide concrete, behavioral feedback related to Dennis’s drinking and drug use (e.g., mentioning his canceling appointments rather than saying he was irresponsible); (3) at the end of his/her feedback, each person should repeat the expression of concern and request that Dennis get help. We then sat down with Dennis, and each person spoke. Dennis began to cry and after a lengthy period of time agreed that he needed help and would follow my recommendations for treatment.  Assessment  Once a client has entered treatment, the therapist should begin with an initial assessment of drinking, other drug use, and problems in other areas of life functioning. (Donovan, 2013, provides a comprehensive description of assessment for SUDs; Green, Worden, Menges, & McCrady, 2008, provide an evaluation of the psychometric properties of various assessment instruments for AUDs). Assessment of motivation, as well as resources that the client brings to the treatment, is important. If the therapist provides cognitive-behavioral treatment, assessment for a functional analysis of drinking is necessary. If the client’s spouse/partner or other family members are involved in the treatment, their role in the drinking, as well as overall relationship functioning, should be assessed.  Drinking Assessment  The clinical interview is used to assess drinking history and client perceptions of his/her current drinking. Major topics to cover in the clinical interview are outlined in Table 13.4. Typically, we use a handheld breath alcohol tester at the beginning of each session to assess current BAL. In addition to the clinical interview, two structured interviews—the Timeline Follow-Back Interview (TLFB; Sobell & Sobell, 1995), designed to assess drinking and drug use behavior each day in a set window of time before treatment; and the alcohol and drug sections of the Structured Clinical Interview   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  table 13.4. topics to Cover in initial Clinical interview (if both Partners are Present)  1. Initial orientation a. Introductions b. Breathalyzer reading c. Brief questionnaires 2. Initial assessment a. Presenting problems b. Role of drinking/drug use in presenting problems c. Other concerns d. How the drinking has affected the partner e. How the drinking has affected the relationship 3. Drinking/drug use assessment a. Identified patient i. Quantity, frequency, pattern of drinking ii. Last drink/drug use iii. Length of drinking/drug problem iv. Negative consequences of drinking/drug use v. DSM-5 symptoms vi. Assessment of need for detoxification b. Partner i. Quantity, frequency, pattern of drinking ii. Last drink/drug use iii. Length of drinking/drug problem iv. Negative consequences of drinking/drug use v. DSM-5 symptoms vi. Assessment of need for detoxification 4. Assessment of other problems a. Psychotic symptoms b. Depression c. Anxiety d. Cognitive impairment e. Health status 5. Assessment of domestic violence a. This assessment is done privately with each partner alone b. Review of Conflict Tactics Scales i. Identification of episodes of physical aggression ii. Determination of level of harm/injury from aggression iii. Assessment of individual’s sense of safety in couple therapy for DSM-IV (SCID; Spitzer, Williams, Gibbon, & First, 1996)—provide standardized information about quantity, frequency, pattern of drinking, and other information needed to establish a formal diagnosis. Alternative structured interviews, such as the Form-90 (Tonigan, Miller, & Brown, 1997), may be used to obtain information about drinking history, patterns, and consequences of use. Self-report measures may be used to assess severity of alcohol dependence (the Alcohol Dependence Scale [ADS]; Skinner & Allen, 1982) and negative consequences of drinking (the Drinker Inventory of Consequences [DrInC] or the Short Inventory of Problems [SIP]; Miller, Tonigan, & Longabaugh, 1995).  Assessment of Other Problem Areas  The clinician can draw from a wide variety of measures to assess other life problems. Assessment may range from unstructured interviews to the use of simple problem checklists to formal interviewing techniques. The Addiction Severity Index (ASI; McLellan et al., 1992) is a widely used measure of client functioning across multiple domains; subscales include Medical, Psychological, Family/Social, Legal, Employment, Alcohol, and Drug. The ASI is in the public domain, and the instrument, instructions, and scoring programs can be downloaded from http://triweb.tresearch.org/ index.php/tools/download-asi-instruments-manuals. The ASI can be administered as an interview in about 45 minutes, and computer-assisted interview versions are available. The ASI, however, does not provide diagnostic information for any psychological disorders, and the cautious clinician should use formal diagnostic screening questions to assess for the possible presence of other psychological disorders.  Assessment of Motivation  Assessment of motivation should consider (1) reasons why the client is seeking treatment, with careful attention to external factors involved with help seeking; (2) the client’s treatment goals; (3) the client’s readiness to change; and (4) the degree to which the client sees negative consequences of his/her current drinking pattern and envisions positive consequences of change. Clinical interviewing provides information about reasons for seeking treatment, and drinking goals may be assessed either by asking the client directly or by using   Alcohol Use Disorders  We would like to know the one GOAL you have chosen for yourself about drinking at this time. Please read the goals listed below and choose the ONE goal that best represents your goal at this time by checking the box next to the goal and by filling in any blanks as indicated for that goal.    I have decided not to change my pattern of drinking. I have decided to cut down on my drinking and drink in a more controlled manner—to be in control of   how often I drink and how much I drink. I would like to limit myself to no more than drinks (upper limit amount) per (time period). I have decided to stop drinking completely for a period of time, after which I will makea new decision   about whether I will drink again. For me, the period of time I want to stop drinking is for   (time). I have decided to stop drinking regularly, but would like to have an occasional drink when I really have the urge.   I have decided to quit drinking once and for all, even though I realize I may slip up and drink once in   a while. I have decided to quite drinking once and for all, to be totally abstinent, and to never drink alcohol ever again for the rest of my life.   None of this applies exactly to me. My own goal is   figUre 13.1. Goal choice questionnaire.  a simple goal choice form (see Figure 13.1). The Readi-Hall, 1992), and the Stages of Change Readiness and ness Ruler (Hesse, 2006) is a simple 10-point scale on Treatment Eagerness Scale (SOCRATES; Miller & Towhich clients can indicate their readiness to change. It nigan, 1996) all measure stage of change. Perception also can be used to assess the client’s desire to change of negative consequences of drinking and positive conand confidence in being able to change. The University sequences of change also may be assessed through the of Rhode Island Change Assessment Scale (McCon-clinical interview, or by developing a Decisional Balnaughy, Prochaska, & Velicer, 1983), the Readiness ance Sheet (Marlatt & Gordon, 1985) with the client to Change Questionnaire (Rollnick, Heather, Gold, & (see Figure 13.2).  Not Drinking Drinking Pros Cons   figUre 13.2. Decisional Balance Sheet.   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  Urges Drinks/Drugs Time Strength (1–7) Trigger? Time Type Amount % Alcohol Trigger?   Relationship satisfaction: 123456 7 Worst Greatest ever ever figUre 13.3. Sample client self-recording card.  Functional Analysis  Two assessment techniques may be used to identify antecedents to drinking. A self-report questionnaire, the Drinking Patterns Questionnaire (DPQ; Menges, McCrady, Epstein, & Beem, 2008), lists potential environmental, cognitive, affective, interpersonal, and intrapersonal antecedents to drinking or drinking urges. The Inventory of Drinking Situations (Annis, Graham, & Davis, 1987), a shorter measure that assesses situations in which a client drinks heavily, also is available. Daily self-recording cards (Figure 13.3) are used throughout the treatment to record clients’ drinks and drinking urges. Discussing events associated with drinking or drinking urges can help both client and clinician to develop a clearer picture of drinking antecedents and consequences. Self-recording cards also allow the clinician to track progress in terms of quantity and frequency of drinking, as well as frequency and intensity of urges to drink.  Partner Assessment  Questionnaires and self-recording cards can be used to assess how the client’s partner has coped with the drinking. Each day, the partner who is involved with treatment records his/her perceptions of the drinker’s  drinking and drinking urges on a Likert scale (None, Light, Moderate, or Heavy; see Figure 13.4). In addition, the partner may complete the Coping Questionnaire (Orford, Templeton, Velleman, & Copello, 2005) to describe the variety of ways the partner has tried to cope with drinking. These include engaged, tolerant– inactive, and withdrawal coping. It also is important to assess other aspects of the couple’s relationship, if both partners are to be involved in treatment. The Areas of Change Questionnaire (ACQ; Margolin, Talovic, & Weinstein, 1983) and the Dyadic Adjustment Scale (DAS; Spanier, 1976) are excellent self-report measures of relationship problems and satisfaction. The Revised Conflict Tactics Scales (Straus, Hamby, Boney-McCoy, & Sugarman, 1996) provides a succinct measure of relationship conflict, including physical violence.  Selection of Treatment Setting  Information from the assessment of drinking, concomitant problem areas, and motivation is used to determine the appropriate setting in which to initiate treatment. As with other areas of health and mental health care, the principle of least restrictive level of care should apply to alcohol and drug treatment. Residential rehabilitation of fixed length (usually 28–30 days) historically   Alcohol Use Disorders  Day Date Drinking Druguse Urgeintensity Relationshipsatisfaction NoLMHNoLMH0123456701234567 NoLMHNoLMH0123456701234567 NoLMHNoLMH0123456701234567 NoLMHNoLMH0123456701234567 NoLMHNoLMH0123456701234567 NoLMHNoLMH0123456701234567   Note.Usethereversesideofthecardtotrackbehaviorsyouarelearningtochange.   figUre 13.4 Sample spouse self-recording card.  was seen as the treatment of choice. However, studies comparing the effectiveness of different levels of care (e.g., see Fink et al., 1985; Longabaugh et al., 1983; McCrady et al., 1986) have found that most clients can be treated effectively in an ambulatory treatment setting, and health care insurers typically require preauthorization of episodes of care. Outpatient treatment is the predominant form of treatment, with the ratio of clients seen in outpatient versus inpatient treatment at about 10:1 (Roman, 2013).  Both the Institute of Medicine (1990) and Sobell and Sobell (2000) have proposed stepped-care models for making decisions about level of care. The stepped-care model proposes brief interventions as the modal initial approach to treatment, with treatment “stepped up” to more intensive or extensive treatment based on the client’s response to the initial treatment. Such models are economically conservative and maintain the principle of least restrictive level of care. However, some clients with more severe problems might not be served well by very brief treatment (e.g., Rychtarik et al., 2000), and studies using American Society of Addiction Medicine (ASAM) criteria suggest that patients have poorer outcomes if they receive less intensive treatment than suggested by these criteria (Magura et al., 2003).  Proposed decision-making models to determine level of care have been implemented in many states. The ASAM (2001) has proposed a multidimensional decision-making model for selecting initial level of care. ASAM criteria consider need for supervised withdrawal, medical conditions that might require monitoring, comorbid psychiatric conditions, motivation for  change and degree of treatment acceptance or resistance, relapse potential, and nature of the individual’s social environment in recommending an initial level of care. These criteria are mapped onto five major levels of care, including early intervention, outpatient, intensive outpatient/partial hospitalization, residential/inpatient, and medically managed intensive inpatient treatment. Table 13.5 summarizes how the major criteria are applied to level of care determinations. Studies of the ASAM criteria suggest a number of barriers to using the criteria in clinical practice. For example, among homeless individuals, treatment facilities may be inaccessible because of lack of insurance or money to pay. Also, such individuals often are placed on waiting lists because programs are full. Some programs also may lack adjunctive services needed by a homeless population, such as assistance with pragmatic issues (food stamps, housing, unemployment, medical care, mental health care, or family treatment) (O’Toole et al., 2004). Among other patients seeking alcohol treatment, some may receive treatment that is more intensive than that suggested by ASAM criteria because their insurance or Medicaid only covers inpatient treatment, there may have been pressure from the family for inpatient treatment, or a specific level of care was mandated by an external agency (e.g., Employee Assistance Program). Patients also may receive treatment that is less intensive than that suggested by ASAM criteria because of their work schedule or reluctance to commit to more (Kosanke, Magura, Staines, Foote, & DeLuca, 2002). Additional considerations in determining initial level of care are discussed below.   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  table 13.5. american society of addiction Medicine general guidelines for selection of treatment settings  Level of care Criteria Level 0.5. Early intervention •• At risk for developing an SUD •• Insufficient information to establish and SUD diagnosis Level I. Outpatient treatment •• No serious risk for major withdrawal or withdrawal seizures •• No acute or chronic medical or psychiatric problems that could interfere with treatment •• Some openness to change •• Some ability to maintain change •• Reasonable environmental support for change Level II. Intensive outpatient treatment •• No serious risk for major withdrawal or withdrawal seizures •• No acute or chronic medical or psychiatric problems that could be managed with intensive supervision and •• Some reluctance to change or •• Limited ability to maintain change or •• Limited environmental supports for change Level III. Medically monitored intensive •• At least two: ||Risk for withdrawal inpatient treatment ||Some level of acute or chronic medical or psychiatric problems that could be managed with intensive supervision ||Reluctance to change ||Limited ability to maintain change ||Limited environmental supports for change Level IV. Medically managed intensive inpatient treatment •• Serious risk for major withdrawal or withdrawal seizures or •• Acute or chronic medical or psychiatric problems that could interfere with treatment  Need for Detoxification  If a client is physically dependent on alcohol, then he/she will experience alcohol withdrawal symptoms when drinking is decreased or stopped. A number of signs suggest that a client may be physically dependent on alcohol, including daily drinking, drinking regularly or intermittently throughout the day, and morning drinking. Awakening during the night with fears, trembling, or nausea, or experiencing such symptoms upon first awakening, also suggests dependence. Cessation or a substantial decrease in drinking will result in the appearance of minor withdrawal symptoms, such as tremulousness, nausea, vomiting, difficulty sleeping, irritability, anxiety, and elevations in pulse rate, blood pressure, and temperature. Such symptoms usually begin within 5–12 hours. More severe withdrawal symptoms (e.g., seizures, delirium, or hallucinations) may also occur, usually within 24–72 hours of the ces   sation of drinking. If a client has not consumed alcohol for several days prior to initial clinical contact, concerns about alcohol withdrawal are not relevant. If the client has stopped drinking within the last 3 days, the clinician needs to inquire about and observe the client for signs of withdrawal. The Clinical Institute Withdrawal Assessment (CIWA, Sullivan, Sykora, Schneiderman, Naranjo, & Sellers, 1989) provides an objective measure of current withdrawal symptoms. If the client currently is drinking, the clinician must rely on drinking history, pattern, and the results of previous attempts to stop drinking to determine whether detoxification will be necessary.  If the client needs detoxification, five alternatives are available: inpatient or partial hospital medical detoxification, inpatient nonmedical detoxification, or outpatient medical or nonmedical detoxification. Inpatient, medically assisted detoxification is essential if   Alcohol Use Disorders  the client has a history of disorientation, delirium, hallucinations, or seizures during alcohol withdrawal, or is showing current signs of disorientation, delirium, or hallucinations. If the client does not believe that he/she can stop drinking without being physically removed from alcohol, but does not show any major withdrawal signs, is in good health, and does not abuse other drugs, a social setting detoxification may be appropriate. If the client has some social supports, then detoxification can be initiated on a partial hospital or outpatient basis. The choice between these two latter settings is determined by how much support the person will need during withdrawal, and whether a structured program will be needed after detoxification. If the client needs a fairly structured program, then the partial hospital is the preferred setting for detoxification. If a client has a mild to moderate AUD, a program to reduce alcohol consumption gradually over several weeks also can be managed (Cohn et al., 2010).  Medical Problems  The clinician who is considering the best setting for detoxification should take into account the presence of other medical problems. A cautious approach dictates that every client should have both a thorough physical examination and blood and urine studies at the beginning of treatment. The clinician should routinely include questions about physical health in the first contact with a client, and if significant physical complaints are noted, the client should receive immediate medical attention. Some clients have medical problems that require hospitalization; if so, the hospitalization should initiate the treatment.  Treatment History  After physical health issues have been considered, the clinician should examine the client’s previous treatment history. Questions to consider include the following:   1. Has the client attempted outpatient treatment in the past and been able to stop or decrease drinking successfully? If so, then another attempt at outpatient treatment may be indicated. 2. Has the client dropped out of outpatient treatment in the past? If so, and there is no indication that any variables have changed in the interim, then a more intensive partial hospital or inpatient program should be considered.  3. Has the client dropped out of, or drunk repeatedly, while in a partial hospital program? If so, then inpatient treatment may be indicated. 4. Did the client relapse immediately after discharge from an inpatient program? If so, then a partial hospital or outpatient setting may be appropriate because relapse may have been associated with problems in generalization from the inpatient to the natural environment. Alternatively, a halfway house may be considered to provide a longer-term structured environment. Previous Quit Attempts  Many clients have successfully decreased or stopped drinking on their own at some time. Outpatient treatment is more likely to be successful for a client with a history of stopping successfully on his/her own than for a client without any history of successful change.  Social Support Systems  Social support systems are a critical variable to consider in determining the appropriate setting for initial treatment. If a client has support from another person, and that person is perceived as an important source who is willing to provide support and reinforcement, then the client is a good candidate for ambulatory treatment. If the client is lacking in social support, or is in an environment that supports heavy drinking, then inpatient or partial hospital treatment may be advisable. Alternatively, a halfway house may provide a good treatment setting for persons who do not have current social supports and have not been successful at developing them in the past, even during periods of abstinence.  Personal Resources  The next area to consider encompasses the client’s personal psychological resources. Has he/she been successful in other areas of life in setting goals, changing behavior, and completing tasks? If so, outpatient treatment is more feasible. Another aspect of personal resources is cognitive functioning. If the client shows significant cognitive deficits in memory, attention, abstraction, or problem solving, a higher level of care may be considered. Otherwise, the client may have difficul    CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  ty with retaining information presented in treatment or generating successful ways to avoid drinking.  Other Psychological Problems  As noted earlier in the chapter, persons with drinking problems often have other, significant psychological problems. The clinician must not only assess these problems but also determine level of care based on the appropriate setting for treatment of these other problems. A client who presents with serious depression must be assessed for suicidality and appropriate precautions should be taken.  Attitudes about Treatment  Although difficult areas to assess, the client’s commitment to treatment and desire to change are important factors in selecting level of care. The client who is ambivalent but willing to come to treatment may respond better to a more intensive program that provides higher density reinforcement for attending treatment and making changes. However, sometimes ambivalence makes it impossible to provide treatment in a more intensive setting because the client is unwilling to disrupt his/her life to the extent required for such a program.  Practical Concerns  There are a number of practical concerns that the clinician must consider. Although in certain therapeutic approaches these issues might be considered evidence of client “denial,” I view practical matters as real barriers to treatment and work with the client to overcome these barriers. Some practical barriers revolve around employment—whether the client can get time off from work, whether the job is in jeopardy, whether the employer is willing to support treatment, or whether missing any more work would result in termination of employment.   A second concern is the client’s financial condition. Can the client afford to take time off from work and experience a reduction in income while he/she collects temporary disability (if sick time is not available)? If not, outpatient treatment, or a partial hospital program that allows the person to work, is appropriate. Another financial concern is the client’s ability to pay for treatment.  Other practical concerns revolve around transportation and child care. Can the client get to outpatient ap   pointments? Does he/she have a driver’s license, and if not, is other transportation available? Is child care available if the person has to be hospitalized? If not, a day treatment setting may be preferred. The clinician must consider a range of pragmatic barriers to treatment.   Personal Preferences  Finally, the client’s own preferences about the treatment must be considered carefully. If the client feels strongly about wanting to be in a hospital or residential treatment program, the clinician should listen carefully to this request, even if the initial assessment suggests that outpatient treatment may be feasible. Similarly, if the client wants outpatient treatment, the clinician should perhaps attempt it, even if he/she believes that a more intensive treatment is preferable.  General Considerations  In general, the selection of the initial treatment setting must be seen as a tentative decision. Often an initial contract may be established that includes the client’s preferred setting, but with specification of the circumstances that will dictate a different level of care. For example, if the clinician believes that the client will find it extremely difficult to discontinue drinking on an outpatient basis, but this is the client’s desire, then an initial contract may involve a plan for reducing or stopping drinking, learning skills to support that plan, and a time limit. If the person is unsuccessful within the specified time frame, then the contract is reviewed and alternative settings are considered. Thus, although the initial setting decision is important, continuing to consider and discuss other treatment settings is an important early step in the treatment process.  Selection of Treatment Modalities  If a client is referred to inpatient, residential, or intensive outpatient treatment, a mixture of treatment modalities is included in the treatment. Six major treatment modalities are available for the provision of alcohol treatment: self-help groups, individual therapy, group therapy, couple therapy, family therapy, and intensive treatment programs. In the ambulatory setting, the clinician has more flexibility in selecting from among these treatment modalities.   Alcohol Use Disorders  Self-Help Groups  AA is the most commonly utilized self-help group. With groups in all 50 states, as well as more than 150 countries throughout the world, AA is widely available. It offers a specific approach to recovery, rooted in the view that alcoholism is a physical, emotional, and spiritual disease that can be arrested but not cured. Recovery is viewed as a lifelong process that involves working the 12 Steps of AA and abstaining from the use of alcohol (for a detailed description of AA, see Mc- Crady, Horvath, & Delaney, 2003). The only requirement for membership in AA is a desire to stop drinking, and members do not have to pay dues or join the organization. Persons who become involved with AA usually attend different meetings; have a relationship with an AA sponsor who helps them with their recovery; and become involved with other AA-related activities, ranging from making the coffee before meetings to going on “commitments,” in which members of one AA group speak at another group. More active involvement is correlated with more successful change (reviewed in McCrady & Tonigan, in press).  Research suggests that persons most likely to affiliate with AA have a history of using social supports as a way to cope with problems, experience loss of control over their drinking, drink more per occasion than persons who do not affiliate, experience more anxiety about their drinking, believe that alcohol enhances their mental functioning, and are more religious or spiritual (McCrady & Tonigan, in press). Outpatient treatment to facilitate involvement with AA (12-step facilitation) has been found to be as effective as other forms of outpatient therapy in controlled trials, and some evidence suggests that clients receiving 12-step facilitation are more likely to maintain total abstinence from alcohol than clients receiving more behaviorally oriented treatments (Project MATCH Research Group, 1997a). Twelve-step facilitation treatment appears to be particularly successful for individuals with social systems that support them in drinking heavily (Longabaugh et al., 1998).  Alternative self-help groups have developed in recent years. Self-Management and Recovery Training (SMART) is a self-help approach based largely on cognitive-behavioral principles. SMART offers several steps to recovery, emphasizing awareness of irrational beliefs, self-perceptions, and expectancies as core to successful change. SMART suggests abstinence as a preferred drinking goal but emphasizes personal  choice. Secular Organizations for Sobriety/Save Ourselves (SOS) was developed largely in response to the spiritual aspects of AA and does not invoke a Higher Power as a part of the change process. Women for Sobriety, a self-help approach for women, emphasizes women’s issues such as assertiveness, self-confidence, and autonomy as a part of the change process. Moderation Management (2006) draws on behavioral principles to accomplish moderate drinking outcomes. All of these alternative approaches are more compatible with behavioral approaches than is AA, but none are as widely available to clients.  Individual Treatment  Individual therapy is offered primarily on an outpatient basis. Few data are available to guide the choice of individual versus group therapy. The literature on women with alcoholism is replete with suggestions that women respond better to individual than to group therapy, but empirical support for that assertion is lacking. Similar assertions apply to the treatment of older persons who have alcoholism, with a similar lack of empirical support.   Group Therapy  There is a strong belief in the alcohol field that group therapy is preferable to individual therapy (but see the previous comments in regard to women and older adults). Group therapy is more economical to provide, and interaction among group members provides opportunities for modeling, feedback, and behavioral rehearsal that are less available in the individual setting. Behavioral models for providing group therapy (Monti, Kadden, Rohsenow, Cooney, & Abrams, 2002; Sobell & Sobell, 2011) are well documented. Clients who are able to function in a group setting and do not require intensive individual attention because of other psychological problems can be assigned to group therapy.  Couple Therapy  A number of studies have suggested that involving the spouse/partner in alcoholism treatment increases the probability of a positive treatment outcome (McCrady, Epstein, Cook, Jensen, & Hilderbrand, 2009; McCrady, Owens, & Brovko, 2013). Despite the empirical evidence, traditional alcoholism counselors prefer individ    CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  ual or group therapy over couple therapy, emphasizing the importance of a focus on personal change before relationship change. Models for treatments that integrate individual and relationship treatment are available (McCrady & Epstein, 2009). Couple therapy is most appropriate for clients who have a stable relationship in which the partner is willing to be involved in treatment and can function in a supportive manner in the early phases of treatment. Couples who have experienced severe domestic violence, or in which one partner’s commitment to the relationship is highly ambivalent, are less appropriate for couple therapy.  Techniques also have been developed to provide treatment to partners of people with AUDs when the drinker will not seek help. Behavioral groups that emphasize personal decision making, communication, and limit-setting around drinking are effective in motivating individuals to seek treatment or to decrease drinking (Miller et al., 1999; Sisson & Azrin, 1986; Smith & Meyers, 2004; Thomas, Santa, Bronson, & Oyserman, 1987). Al-Anon offers a self-help approach to partners and other family members affected by alcoholism.  Family Therapy  Despite a strong interest in AUDs in the family therapy field, models for working with whole families in which an AUD is present are scarce. Within the selfhelp area, Alateen is available for teens affected by a family member’s alcoholism, and Alatot is available for younger family members.  Intensive Treatment Programs  Although, technically, a treatment setting rather than a modality, intensive treatment programs have such a specific and defined role in alcohol treatment that they can be considered a treatment modality. The “Minnesota model” (Slaymaker & Sheehan, 2013) is an intensive treatment approach that includes group therapy, education, self-help group involvement, and some individual counseling. Programs based on the Minnesota model emphasize confrontation of denial, acceptance that one is an alcoholic who is powerless over alcohol, development of caring and interdependent relationships, and commitment to AA involvement. Over time, Minnesota model programs have incorporated many behavioral strategies and techniques, including social skills and relaxation training, as well as RP techniques. Minnesota model programs have been marketed as  the most effective approach to alcoholism treatment, but data to support these claims are lacking. Most research on these programs has involved the evaluation of a single treatment program, and all the evaluations have been of private treatment centers. The evaluations suggest substantial levels of abstinence among persons receiving treatment (see, e.g., Filstead, 1991; Stinchfield & Owen, 1998), but the subjects in these studies tend to be good-prognosis patients, and without appropriate controls, conclusions cannot be drawn about the relative efficacy of these treatments compared to other approaches. Slaymaker and Sheehan (2013) reviewed more recent experimental and quasi-experimental studies of intensive treatments based on the disease model that were similar to Minnesota model programs, concluding that these studies supported the efficacy of the treatment model. Their wide visibility has made them the choice of many individuals with alcoholism and their families.  Enhancing and Maintaining Motivation to Change  Once a decision has been made about the level of care and the client has entered treatment, the clinician needs to continue to focus on motivation to be in treatment and to change. Techniques to enhance motivation include feedback, use of motivational interviewing techniques, mutual goal setting and decision making, treatment contracting, and the instillation of hope. Three clinical examples illustrate some of these techniques.  Bill (described earlier in this chapter) began treatment quite tentatively. He was willing to complete a standardized assessment of his drinking, so we completed a 1-month TLFB (Sobell & Sobell, 1995), the DrInC (Miller et al., 1995), and a Decisional Balance Sheet (Marlatt & Gordon, 1985; see Figure 13.2). Based on this information, I provided him with a standardized feedback sheet (Figure 13.5) about his drinking. The sheet provided data about how his drinking compared to national norms (Epstein & McCrady, 2009), as well as information about his peak BAL, usual BAL, and negative consequences of his drinking. Bill found the feedback interesting and asked questions about alcohol metabolism, epidemiological surveys, and alcohol and health effects. Although his wife, Diana, was somewhat impatient with this conversation, I thought that Bill’s interest in learning more about alcohol and its effects was a positive sign.   Alcohol Use Disorders  For the Drinker   1. Based on the information I obtained during the assessment, I calculated the number of “standard drinks” you consumed in a typical week, during the last month: Total number of standard drinks per week Average number of standard drinks per day  2. When we look at everyone who drinks in the United States, you have been drinking more than approximately percent of the population of women/men in the country. 3. I also estimated your highest and average blood alcohol level (BAL) in the past month. Your BAL is based on how many standard drinks you consume, the length of time over which you drink that much, whether you are a man or a woman, and how much you weight. So, Your estimated peak BAL in an average week was Your estimated average BAL in an average week was  This is a measure of how intoxicated you typically become. In New Jersey, the legal intoxication limit is 80 mg% or higher.  4. You have experienced many negative consequences from drinking. Here are some of the most important: For the Partner   1. You have been trying many ways to cope with your wife/husband’s drinking. The things you have tried the most include: For the Couple   1. You havea number of areas of your relationship that you are concerned about. Some are concerns for both of you: 2. Some concerns are mostly concerns for the husband: 3. Some concerns are mostly concerns for the wife: figUre 13.5. Drinking feedback sheet for a couple.   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  We discussed drinking goals, and I suggested the Moderation Management (2006) drinking guideline for men of no more than 14 drinks in a week, no more than 4 days’ drinking per week, and no more than four drinks per occasion. Bill indicated that he wanted to continue with daily drinking, but with a limit of three drinks per day. Diana was agreeable, saying that if he kept to this limit she would be “thrilled.” Although his selected goal was higher than I would have liked, I agreed in order to engage him further in treatment. I then gave him his first “homework” assignment—to initiate self-recording of his drinking (see Figure 13.3). The assignment of homework serves as a useful behavioral probe for level of motivation, and I was pleased when Bill returned to the next session with completed self-recording cards.  Suzanne was a 39-year-old computer programmer whom I treated in outpatient therapy as part of a treatment research project. Suzanne drank daily, typically consuming three glasses of wine per day. She had made a number of unsuccessful attempts to stop drinking and felt that she had completely lost control over her drinking even though the amount she drank was not remarkably high. She was concerned about her ability to be alert and available to her children in the evenings when she was drinking, particularly since her husband traveled frequently for his business. Suzanne sought treatment voluntarily and wanted to abstain from drinking completely. Despite her self-referral to treatment and her self-defined need for abstinence, Suzanne reacted to the same structured feedback quite differently than Bill did. She had provided information for the TLFB and completed the Rutgers Consequences of Use Questionnaire (RCU), but when I gave her feedback that she had been drinking an average of 21.5 drinks per week, she told me that this figure was too high and that our measure was not very accurate. She also indicated that she was participating in a research study, not in therapy, which was why she thought it important that we have accurate data. I did not argue with her perspective, agreeing that she was in a research study, but that I hoped that the study would helpful to her. She continued with treatment, and several weeks later commented spontaneously, “You know, I know that I’m in treatment, and I really need it. I think I was just protecting my ego at the beginning by focusing on the research part so much.”  Anne, a 32-year-old, married college graduate working as a cocktail waitress, was the mother of a 20-month-old daughter, Breanne. Her husband, Char   lie, was working full time and enrolled in a doctoral program in mechanical engineering. She entered treatment as part of our women’s treatment research program. She was a daily drinker with a varying pattern of consumption. During the evenings, when her husband was at school, she drank one or two bottles of wine. When he was home, her typical consumption was one glass of wine with dinner. She also drank at the end of her shift at work, consuming four to six beers on those evenings. When I gave her the feedback about her alcohol consumption, indicating that her level of consumption placed her in the 99th percentile of women, her eyes filled with tears and she looked visibly distraught, saying repeatedly, “I knew it was bad, but I never knew it was this bad.” As treatment progressed, Anne made few changes in her drinking. She canceled or changed appointments, and said on several occasions, “If I didn’t like you, I’d probably just quit the whole thing.” She continued:  anne: I really like to drink. When Charlie is at school, I make myself a nice dinner—a lamb chop, a salad— and have an excellent bottle of wine. No one bothers me, and I enjoy myself. But I know I should stop because of Breanne.  tHeraPist: [As part of the treatment protocol, we had completed a decisional matrix, and I suggest that we return to that form.] Anne, let’s look at your decisional matrix again. We did this a few weeks ago. When you look at it now, what strikes you?  anne: Everything on it is still true. I’m not being a good mother with all this drinking. I’m out of it at night, and I have no energy during the day. I just plop her in front of the television, and she watches Dora the Explorer. I keep thinking about when she gets older, “Do I want her to have a drunken mother?”  tHeraPist: It seems as though those feelings are very strong right now, but it’s hard for you to keep them in the front of your mind each day. I wonder if you could review this sheet every day at some point. Would that help?  anne: I think so. I can look at it while Breanne is eating her breakfast. My motivation would be sitting right in front of me then. I’ll try that.  Anne began reviewing her decisional matrix every day. The task seemed helpful for about a month, and she began to decrease her drinking, joined a gym, and   Alcohol Use Disorders  came to treatment regularly. However, these changes were short-lived, and she fairly quickly reverted to her pattern of erratic treatment attendance and heavy drinking.  Selection of Drinking Goals  The final major area to consider in treatment planning is the selection of drinking goals. Traditional approaches to alcoholism treatment view abstinence as the only appropriate drinking goal because these approaches view alcoholism as a progressive disease that can only be arrested with abstinence. Behavioral clinicians have examined alternatives to abstinence and have developed a number of strategies to teach clients how to drink moderately. Although better accepted as a goal for individuals who are hazardous drinkers or have a mild AUD, moderation training continues to be controversial, and the clinician who elects to provide such treatment may be vulnerable to criticism from the traditional, mainstream alcoholism treatment community. Earlier studies suggest that the long-term outcomes of alcoholism include reduced drinking (e.g., Helzer et al., 1985; Vaillant, 1983), but early data about the success of moderation training were more mixed. Two European studies found that giving clients the opportunity to select treatment goals increased compliance with treatment and might improve treatment outcome (Ojehegan & Berglund, 1989; Orford & Keddie, 1986). Two recent studies that have tested training in moderate drinking using a Web-based intervention (Hester, Delaney, Campbell, & Handmaker, 2009) or a women’s therapy group (Walitzer & Connors, 2007) both found positive outcomes for moderation training with low dependence drinkers, with the results for the women’s group sustained over 30 months of follow-up. In the past, I have argued in favor of abstinence as a preferred treatment goal (see, e.g., McCrady, 1992; Nathan & McCrady, 1987), and continue to view it as the preferred treatment goal for individuals with moderate to severe AUDs. Abstinence is clearly defined and is in accord with usual clinical practice in the United States. Also, agreeing readily to a goal of moderate drinking may reinforce a client’s view that alcohol is important and necessary to his/her daily functioning.  Under certain circumstances the use of a reduced drinking goal is appropriate. Moderation may be used as a provisional goal to engage a client in treatment, or it may be used when the client will not agree to abstinence but does want assistance to change (as with Bill).  A moderate drinking goal also is more appropriate if a client shows few signs of alcohol dependence or withdrawal, has a history of being able to drink in moderation, does not have medical or psychological problems that would be exacerbated by continued drinking, is younger, and does not have a family history of alcoholism (Rosenberg, 1993). If clinician and client select a moderation goal, a period of initial abstinence usually makes it easier for the client to drink moderately. In selecting a moderation goal, the clinician should be careful to help the client recognize the current and potential negative consequences of excessive drinking, and make an informed and thoughtful choice in selecting a treatment goal. The clinician should view any initial drinking goal (abstinence or moderation) as tentative, to be reevaluated as therapy progresses.  Initiating Abstinence  For the client with a goal of abstinence, the clinician has a variety of alternatives to help him/her initiate abstinence. With a client whose goal is moderation, the most conservative approach is to initiate a period of abstinence, then gradually reintroduce alcohol. As noted earlier, several detoxification alternative strategies are available, including inpatient detoxification, ambulatory detoxification, “cold turkey” detoxification (in which the client simply stops drinking abruptly), or a graduated program of reduction of drinking over a period of weeks, until the client reaches abstinence. A case example illustrates a graduated program of reduction of drinking.  Steve, a 48-year-old, homeless, unemployed man with a long history of heroin, cocaine, and alcohol dependence, entered treatment after heroin detoxification but was still drinking an average of eight drinks per day (usually a half-pint of hard liquor plus one to two beers). He was healthy and had no history of alcohol withdrawal symptoms. No inpatient detoxification facility was available to him given his homeless and economically destitute state. Initial treatment focused on helping him achieve a stable housing situation and obtaining temporary General Assistance (welfare). Following these social interventions, the therapist (one of our practicum students) began to focus on his drinking. Steve expressed a strong preference for a program of graduated reduction in drinking. He was evaluated by a physician at the local free clinic and cleared medically. We had him record his drinking for 1 week to establish a clear baseline. We then set a program to reduce his   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  drinking by 15% per week, or eight drinks per week. We discussed specific strategies to achieve this goal each week, and Steve continued to monitor his drinking. During the alcohol reduction period, Steve reestablished contact with a former long-term girlfriend who had terminated their relationship when he relapsed to alcohol and heroin use. She had heard that he was off heroin and expressed interest in being involved with him again. Her presence provided a strong incentive for him to follow the alcohol reduction program because she was unaware that he had been drinking. The program progressed smoothly, and he stopped drinking after 7 weeks.  Developing a Functional Analysis  As described earlier, completing a behavioral assessment of the factors associated with a client’s drinking includes both a structured and a qualitative dimension, and incorporates clinical interviewing, questionnaires, and self-recording of drinking and drinking urges. Suzanne, described briefly earlier, provides an excellent illustration of the complexity and results of the behavioral assessment process.  Suzanne came from a large Jewish family, many members of whom made demands on her. She had three daughters, ages 10, 8, and 4 years old. Her drinking had increased 5 years prior to treatment after a car accident that took the life of her fraternal twin brother. They had gone out to a Bruce Springsteen concert together, and her brother had had several drinks at the concert. An autopsy after the accident revealed that he had also been using cocaine, but Suzanne had been unaware of his drug use. She blamed herself for allowing him to drive and for not insisting that he stop when he began to drive in a reckless manner. She began to drink immediately after the accident and quickly established a pattern of daily consumption of a half-bottle of wine per day.  Although the amount was not that great, she reported that the alcohol was very important because it helped her avoid her overwhelming sadness about her brother’s death, especially at the end of the day. The results of the behavioral assessment revealed a more complex pattern of drinking antecedents. On the DPQ, Suzanne rated emotional antecedents as most important, endorsing feelings of sadness, hurt, and frustration. She also indicated that certain environments were triggers for drinking, such as specific restaurants, times of the day (evening), and activities (particularly watching televi   sion). Other major triggers emerged from Suzanne’s self-recording cards—her interactions with extended family members and with friends, and situations related to her children. Her parents were highly critical of how she was raising her children. Suzanne and her husband, Josh, were attending a conservative temple, kept kosher in their home, did not allow violent video games, and expected each daughter to participate in a fine arts activity (music, dance, or painting). Her parents believed that their grandchildren’s upbringing and Suzanne and Josh’s standards were too strict and conservative, and they were vocal in their criticisms. Other familial stressors included her interactions with a sister who was getting divorced and a cousin who was in economic straits. Each contacted Suzanne on a regular basis, demanding either her attention or her money. Suzanne’s functional analysis is provided in Figure 13.6.  Early Sobriety Strategies  Early sobriety strategies help the client maintain abstinence from alcohol. Cognitive-behavioral techniques vary with the individual but may include stimulus control strategies to avoid or rearrange high-risk situations, development of skills to deal with urges to drink, learning to think differently about drinking and not drinking, identification of behaviors alternative to drinking in high-risk situations, developing alternative ways to obtain the reinforcers previously obtained from alcohol, and learning to refuse drinks.  Stimulus Control  Stimulus control strategies are designed to alter environmental cues for drinking by avoiding the cue, rearranging it, or implementing different responses in the same environment. Stimulus control strategies are compatible with the AA suggestion to be attuned to “people, places, and things.” Work with Suzanne illustrates stimulus control strategies.  With Suzanne, stimulus control strategies served a major function early in treatment. She developed specific strategies to deal with a number of the environmental high-risk situations identified in her functional analysis. Her first approach was to avoid such situations whenever possible. She suggested to Josh that they eat only at restaurants without liquor licenses, and asked that they decline several social invitations to places where alcohol would be the main focus of the evening (e.g., cocktail parties). The one situation that she could   Alcohol Use Disorders   figUre 13.6. Suzanne’s functional analysis.   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  not avoid was the end of the day, after the children had gone to bed. Her usual routine had been to complete the dinner dishes while Josh helped the girls get ready for bed, then to sit down in the den with her wine and the television after reading the children a story. She decided that she needed to disrupt this pattern and thought that if she got ready for bed herself, then curled up on the couch with a book and a cup of herbal tea, she would experience less urge to drink. It took her 3 weeks to get to a bookstore to buy some light novels, but once she had the books, Suzanne was able to implement this plan with success, except when she was upset.  Dealing with Urges  As individuals decrease their drinking or initiate abstinence, they may experience urges or cravings for alcohol. It is helpful to provide the client with a framework for understanding that urges are learned responses to drinking situations, and that urges abate if unfulfilled. Marlatt and Gordon (1985) suggested the use of imagery to help clients cope with urges, and described either acceptance-oriented imagery (e.g., surfing with the urge) or action-oriented imagery (e.g., attacking the urge with a samurai sword).  Suzanne struggled with urges to drink, particularly when anything reminded her of her twin brother’s death. During therapy, we focused on a variety of aspects of her feelings about her brother’s death and also addressed the urges more directly. Suzanne initially reacted to the imagery techniques negatively, saying that she was not a person who imagined things much. She clearly needed some way to cope with these rather strong urges, so I pushed her a bit to try:  tHeraPist: I appreciate that you don’t think of yourself as imaginative, but maybe I can help you out. Just humor me for a minute, and let’s see if we can come up with an image that grabs you. It doesn’t matter what the image is—you could imagine climbing a mountain and coming down the other side, or spraying the urge with a fire extinguisher.  suzanne: (smiling) I know what I can imagine—I  could picture you jumping out of the bottle and shak   ing your head at me.  tHeraPist: OK. Should I look mean?  suzanne: No, just having you there would help me deal with it.  tHeraPist: All right, I can live with that.  suzanne: In fact, I could picture a row of wine  bottles—with you coming out of the first one, then  showing me all the disgusting things in the other one.  tHeraPist: So what would be disgusting? Ticks?  suzanne: Ticks would be good, and maybe cockroaches, too.  tHeraPist: Let’s try this out.  At that point, I had her practice using the imagery in an imagined urge situation. Remarkably, she used the imagery frequently and found it helpful.  A second technique for coping with urges is to enlist the assistance of a family member or friend. Persons involved with AA are told to call someone in the AA program when they feel the urge to drink, and they usually receive telephone numbers from several members. Clients not involved with AA can seek other sources of support. Suzanne, for example, asked her husband to help her when she had the urge to drink. She asked Josh to remind her of why she had stopped drinking and to say, “Of course, it has to be your decision.”  Addressing Cognitive Distortions about Alcohol  People who drink heavily hold stronger positive expectancies about the effects of alcohol than do people who drink more lightly (Pabst, Baumeister, & Kraus, 2010). Clients may believe that drinking facilitates social interactions, enhances sexual responsiveness, allows them to forget painful events or feelings, or makes them more capable. These beliefs often are deeply held and difficult to challenge, particularly if a client continues to drink. Several cognitive strategies may help. First, effecting a period of abstinence allows the client to experience many situations without alcohol—an experience that often leads to reevaluation, with little input from the therapist. At some point, many clients are impressed with the vacuous nature of drunken conversation; the undesirable physical appearance, behaviors, and odors that accompany high BALs; and the shallow nature of drinking relationships. The wise therapist watches carefully for these observations and underscores their importance and self-relevance. If a client does not have such experiences spontaneously, the therapist facilitates new views of drunken comportment by developing a relatively safe way for the client to observe intoxicated behavior—through either mov    Alcohol Use Disorders  ies or videotapes, or visits to a local bar (accompanied by someone who is aware of and supports the client’s abstinence).  A second strategy reported in the self-change literature (Ludwig, 1985) is the ability to think past anticipated positive benefits of drinking to the clear, though often delayed, negative consequences of drinking. The therapist and client can generate a list of negative consequences of drinking and use imaginal rehearsal in the session to help the client pair positive thoughts with the list of negatives. Continued rehearsal in the natural environment is then important. Third, some clients develop a set of erroneous beliefs about their drinking that set them up for drinking. Common beliefs include “I’ve been doing so well, I can just drink tonight,” or “I’ll have just one.” Although moderate drinking is possible for some clients, others have histories of drinking until they lose control, which is in direct opposition to a belief in control, and they need to learn to counter these beliefs.  Work with Steve provides a simple illustration of cognitive strategies to address positive expectations about drinking. Steve had a long history of loss-ofcontrol drinking. After a period of abstinence, he began to think, “I could have just one beer, and that would be fine.” His therapist questioned the accuracy of that belief. Steve readily acknowledged that he had never been able to control his drinking in the past, that if his girlfriend found out she’d be very upset and probably leave him, and that relapses to heavy drinking usually led him to use heroin. Steve and his therapist developed a simple cognitive formula to use when he thought about drinking: “1 = 32 = 10,” meaning that for him, one drink would lead to a quart of liquor (32 ounces), which would lead to heroin use (10 bags a day).  Alternative/Distracting Behaviors  Drinking is a time-occupying activity, and clients may see few alternatives to help them through times when they previously would drink. Discussion of specific behavioral alternatives to drinking that are both timeoccupying and mentally or physically absorbing is another helpful strategy early in treatment.  Steve’s experiences provide a particularly powerful example of the alternatives that highly motivated clients may find. After Steve found a room in a rooming house and had begun the detoxification process, he was faced with the daunting prospect of filling his completely un   structured days. Some of his time was occupied with the time-consuming work of being poor—getting back and forth to the soup kitchen, waiting at the free clinic for medical services, getting an appropriate identification card so that he was eligible for other charitable programs, such as clothing distribution. But even with these necessary activities, Steve had hours and hours of free time. Steve began to address this challenge by creating his own activities. He obtained a library card and scheduled times for himself at the library. Instead of reading randomly or recreationally, he decided to read about the Crusades, which sparked an interest for him in medieval Christianity. A lapsed Catholic, he decided to attend Mass again, and began to attend daily. His daily attendance led to involvement in a Bible study group, and he became a thoughtful and passionate participant. A creative man, Steve then began to write short stories with religious themes.  Identifying Alternative Ways to Obtain Reinforcers  Among the more compelling aspects of alcohol and drug use are the psychoactive properties of the substances. In the short term, large quantities of alcohol effectively deaden negative affect, decrease obsessional thoughts, and decrease muscle tension, although these effects do not endure over the long term. Alcoholic beverages also have distinctive and desirable tastes that are difficult to replace with other beverages. An important aspect of the functional analysis is articulating the client’s perception of positive consequences of drinking. The clinician can address the power of these perceived reinforcers in several ways: helping the client develop alternative means of obtaining the same types of positive experiences; challenging the client’s belief that the desirable consequences will occur (e.g., questioning whether the client is in fact more socially adept and appealing after consuming a quart of vodka); helping the client reevaluate the importance of these reinforcers; and/or helping the client identify other classes of reinforcers that might be valued more highly in the long run (e.g., valuing spirituality more highly than hedonism).  Drink Refusal Skills  Some drinkers find the interpersonal aspects of abstinence difficult. For them, identification of interpersonal situations as high risk for drinking, development of effective responses, and rehearsal of these responses all   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  form an important component of treatment. Early research (Chaney, O’Leary, & Marlatt, 1978) suggested that giving a quick response is strongly associated with successful change. More recent research has found that drink refusal training makes a unique positive contribution to treatment outcome (Witkiewitz, Donovan, & Hartzler, 2012). Suggested components of effective drinks refusal include indicating clearly that the one does not want an alcoholic beverage, requesting an alternative beverage, communicating confidence and comfort with the request, and being persistent in the face of social pressure (Foy, Miller, Eisler, & O’Toole, 1976). In addition, clients who face excessive social pressure may be advised to consider avoiding certain social situations or persons.  Although the guidelines for refusing drinks appear simple, client beliefs and expectations often make the drink refusal process difficult. Common cognitions include “Everyone will think I’m an alcoholic,” “My host will be offended if I don’t drink,” or “People will think I’m too good for them if I don’t drink.” As with other distorted beliefs, the clinician can provide alternative frameworks for thinking about drink refusal situations, suggesting that most people really are uninterested in others’ drinking, or that hosts are most concerned that guests are enjoying themselves. Many clients also experience ambivalence about not drinking and find that the most difficult part of the drink refusal process is internal rather than interpersonal. Another complicated aspect of drink refusal is how much personal information the client wishes to divulge. Most people share different levels of personal information, depending on the closeness of the relationship and their knowledge of the other person’s behavior and attitudes. For persons to whom a client does not want to disclose his/her drinking problem, we encourage use of a simple “No, thank you,” or, if pressed, a simple response that would discourage pushing without being revealing, such as “I’m watching my weight and can’t afford the calories,” “I’m on medication that doesn’t allow me to drink,” or “My stomach’s been acting up—I better pass.” None of these replies protects the client against future offers, but each is effective in the moment. For closer relationships, the client makes a decision about when, where, and how much to reveal. Two clinical examples illustrate these points.  Steve was living in a boarding house and had friendly, sociable neighbors who liked to drink on the front porch. These neighbors were from the Portuguese Azores and spoke virtually no English. After accepting  a beer from them one day, he insisted to his therapist that he could not refuse because he did not speak Portuguese. The therapist suggested that perhaps the word “No,” spoken with a smile and a hand gesture, might be understood even in Portuguese. Steve acknowledged that his difficulty with refusing the drink came from his desire to drink, and that a friendly “No” would certainly work.  Suzanne did not want anyone to know that she had a drinking problem, or that she was abstaining. This stance posed problems for an upcoming cocktail party. Strategizing, Suzanne decided ahead of time that she would drink seltzer water that evening, and that she would attempt to forestall offers of drinks by keeping a glass of seltzer in her hand at all times. If offered a drink, she decided to tell people that she had had some health problems that might be made worse by her drinking, so she was sticking to seltzer. Although she was concerned that one of her friends (a social worker) might surmise that she had an alcohol problem, the evening progressed uneventfully.  Coping Strategies  Clients face challenges beyond those directly related to their drinking. As do clients without drinking problems, clients with such problems face common life difficulties stemming from dysfunctional thoughts, negative affect, and interpersonal conflicts. As clients develop a greater ability to maintain abstinence or moderated drinking, the clinician may devote increasing attention to other problems clients are facing. Clinical techniques to deal with dysfunctional thoughts or social skills deficits can be used readily with clients with drinking problems.  Dealing with Negative Affect  There are multiple sources of negative affect in persons with alcohol abuse or dependence. As noted earlier in the chapter, comorbidity with other psychiatric disorders is high (e.g., mood and anxiety disorders are quite common). Rates of sexual and physical abuse are also elevated among those with AUDs (Cisler et al., 2011), and the sequelae of these problems often include a strongly negative affective component. In addition, persons who have used alcohol to cope with negative affect over an extended period of time may simply have limited experience, and limited skills, to cope with the pain that is a part of everyday life.   Alcohol Use Disorders  In focusing on negative affect, a careful assessment of the causes is essential. Intense negative affect associated with another disorder should be treated in accord with the appropriate approach for that disorder. Dealing with negative affect that is not necessarily disorderbased presents different challenges. Full behavioral mood management programs (e.g., Monti et al., 1990) have been developed, although a description of these is beyond the scope of the chapter. However, certain common principles are of value. When clients first reduce or stop drinking, they may experience all emotions as unfamiliar and intense. Cognitive reframing to help clients view these intense emotions as a natural part of the change process may be useful. For clients pursuing a moderation goal, avoidance of drinking at times of intense negative affect provides the opportunity to learn alternative coping strategies. Coping strategies may vary with the type of negative emotion, and may include relaxation, prayer or meditation; increasing the experience of pleasurable events to decrease depression; or use of anger management and assertiveness skills to cope with angry feelings.  Work with Suzanne illustrates several of these principles. Most difficult for Suzanne were any situations that reminded her of the death of her twin. Their birthday, the anniversary of his death, the celebration of Father’s and Mother’s Days, holiday celebrations, and special celebratory events for her children in which he would have been importantly involved with (e.g., a bat mitzvah) all elicited intense negative affect and a strong desire to drink. Given that Suzanne had begun drinking heavily right after her twin’s death, she had spent little time experiencing grief or even discussing his death and her feelings about it. My initial approach in therapy was to give her opportunities to be exposed to these negative feelings by simply talking about him in the therapy session. The second approach was to discuss and identify ways to approach events that reminded her of him. I saw her over a 6-month period, during which a number of these situations arose naturally. For example, in the week prior to the anniversary of his death, we discussed ways that she could focus on his death and memories. Suzanne took one of her children to his gravesite, and they cleaned it up and planted flowers together. On the Saturday of the anniversary of his death, she went to temple with her family, and then cooked what had been her twin’s favorite dinner. The day was sorrowful and Suzanne cried several times, but it was the first anniversary that she felt she had honored him rather than shaming his memory by getting drunk. We  also addressed her repetitive, self-blaming thoughts about his death by using cognitive restructuring techniques. She found it difficult not to blame herself for his death, and few cognitive strategies had much impact on the self-blame. Suzanne finally was able to begin to think, “I cannot torture myself forever with this blame. If I don’t let go of it, I won’t be a good mother. He’d be disappointed with me if I let my children down.”  Lifestyle Balance and Pleasurable Activities  Marlatt and Donovan (2005) suggest that long-term success is supported by lifestyle changes that enhance positive experiences and allow for a balance between responsibilities and pleasure. Although some studies of successful self-changers (e.g., Vaillant & Milofsky, 1982) have revealed that development of an “alternative dependency” (e.g., obsessive involvement with work or exercise) is associated with successful longterm abstinence, we typically work toward a more balanced approach. As they begin to change, some of our clients believe that they need to make up for their previous lack of responsibility with a very high level of responsibility to family, job, and home. Taking on major redecorating or remodeling projects, trying to spend every free moment with their children, or cleaning out 10 years’ worth of messy drawers and cabinets is not uncommon. This zeal for responsibility can be a double-edged sword for both client and family. Unrelenting attention to responsibilities may be simultaneously satisfying and exhausting and unrewarding, and may lead the client to question the value of not drinking. Family members may be thrilled that the client is taking on responsibility but leery of the stability of the change and unwilling to give up responsibilities they have assumed for him/her. They also may experience the client’s enthusiasm as an intrusion on their own independent lives and schedules. Clients should be prepared for such reactions, and the clinician can help reframe the family’s response as understandable. With most clients, it is important for the clinician to suggest the importance of leisure time, pleasurable activities, and self-reinforcement for positive changes made.  Helping Suzanne identify a half-hour per day during which she could relax, read, or exercise was a challenge. She believed that she should devote herself to her daughters—a belief that resulted in her being with them virtually all the time when they were home. When they were at school, she focused on housecleaning, cooking, errands, paying bills, and other chores.   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  She was exhausted and tense at the end of the day, and commented that alcohol had been a good way to “come down.” We finally agreed on a half-hour block before lunch, during which she would use her exercise bike, read a book of daily meditations, or take a walk. She was only partially successful in these efforts, often citing other responsibilities that took precedence.  Partner/Family Involvement and the Social Context of Treatment  The literature on the treatment of alcohol use disorders suggests that the involvement of some significant social system is associated with positive treatment results (reviewed in McCrady et al., 2013). Because of these findings, the clinician’s first inclination should be to involve the client’s spouse/partner or some significant other in the treatment. There are a number of ways to involve significant others: using them as sources of information, having them provide differential reinforcement for drinking and abstinence, helping them to provide emotional or practical support, involving them in relationship-focused treatment, providing treatment to them without the person who drinks, and/or helping them access new social systems.  Information  Folklore suggests that persons with alcoholism minimize or lie about their drinking and its consequences. The empirical literature suggests that such individuals provide relatively accurate data when sober, and when there are no strong negative consequences for telling the truth (e.g., Sobell & Sobell, 2003). Despite these results, a number of clinical considerations suggest that obtaining information from a family member may be useful in the assessment phase of treatment.  Clients who are referred to or coerced into treatment may be reluctant to provide full information about their drinking. Collecting data from the referring agent helps both client and clinician understand the reasons for the referral. Even with self-referred clients, significant others can provide information that may be unavailable to the clients because of problems with memory or recall. In addition, an intimate significant other usually has observed the drinker over a long period of time and in multiple environments, and may have valuable observations to contribute to the conceptualization of antecedents to drinking.  Responses to Drinking and Abstinence  A different type of social system involvement is the establishment of a network that provides differential reinforcement for abstinence and applies negative consequences for drinking. Such reinforcement may be relatively simple, such as positive comments and encouragement from friends and family, or it can involve the negotiation of detailed contracts that specify the consequences of drinking and abstinence. The “community reinforcement approach” (CRA; Meyers & Smith, 1995) helps clients access potential reinforcers (jobs, families, social clubs), teaches clients and partners behavioral coping skills, and may involve development of contingency contracts to make access to reinforcers contingent on sobriety. In addition, clients may be prescribed disulfiram or naltrexone, and compliance may be monitored by a significant other. Evaluations of the CRA approach suggest that clients are significantly more successful than controls in maintaining abstinence and employment, avoiding hospitalizations or jail, and maintaining a stable residence. In addition to formal treatments that focus on manipulation of environmental contingencies, the therapist also may teach spouses/partners and other family members how to allow the client to experience the naturally occurring negative consequences of drinking. Many spouses/ partners protect the drinker from these consequences by covering for him/her at work, doing his/her chores, or lying to friends and family about the drinking (e.g., Orford et al., 2005). Experience of these negative consequences may increase the client’s awareness of the extent and severity of his/her drinking problem, and provide further motivation for change.  Decreasing Cues for Drinking  Significant others also may engage in behaviors that cue further drinking. A wife who wants her husband to stop drinking may nag him repeatedly about the problems his drinking is causing, hoping that her concerns will motivate him to change. Or a husband may try to get his wife to stop drinking by limiting her access to alcohol or tightly controlling their money. Such behaviors may have an unintended and negative effect, eliciting anger or defensiveness from the person with the drinking problem, and leading to further drinking. Helping spouses/partners learn to identify such behaviors, recognize the results of these actions, and find al    Alcohol Use Disorders  ternative ways to discuss concerns about drinking may be helpful.  Support for Abstinence  Significant others can provide many kinds of support to clients. Support may involve helping a client to implement behavior change, discussing urges to drink, supporting a client’s plan to avoid high-risk situations for drinking, or (upon the request of the client) assisting in the implementation of other coping skills that support sobriety.  Relationship Change  For many clients, interactions with their spouses/partners, children, parents, or close friends cue drinking. Thus, treatment that focuses on changing these interpersonal relationships is another way that significant others may become involved. These interventions may include couple or family therapy, or parent skills training. Data (McCrady et al., 2009; McCrady, Stout, Noel, Abrams, & Nelson, 1991) suggest that a focus on changing the couple relationship during conjoint alcoholism treatment results in greater stability of drinking outcomes, fewer separations, and greater couple satisfaction.   Accessing New Social Systems  Some clients have either no social support system or one that strongly supports heavy drinking. For such clients, it is important to access new systems that either reinforce abstinence or are incompatible with heavy drinking. Self-help groups are one potential source of such support. Because many religious groups are against the use of alcohol, serious involvement in such a group also may support abstinence. Many group activities are incompatible with drinking: Running, hiking, or cycling groups are examples. Unfortunately, alcohol can be involved in almost any activity, and therapist and client need to look carefully at activity groups to determine whether the group norm includes drinking.  In summary, decisions about the social context of alcoholism treatment are complicated. The initial assessment should involve at least one significant other. The results of the assessment should reveal persons who are most available for treatment, and who might be sources of support and reinforcement. For some clients with no  readily accessible supports, new support systems need to be developed.  Long‑Term Maintenance  Relapse Prevention  Marlatt and Gordon’s (1985) RP model and Witkiewitz and Marlatt’s (2004) revised RP model are comprehensive treatment models; Epstein and McCrady’s (2009) cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) manual provides specific RP exercises in the last several treatment sessions. Many elements of the RP treatment model already have been described—identifying high-risk situations for drinking, developing alternative strategies to cope with high-risk situations, enhancing self-efficacy for coping, dealing with positive expectancies about the use of alcohol, and facilitating the development of a balanced lifestyle. An additional and important part of the RP model is addressing the possibility of relapse, and developing preventive and responsive strategies related to relapse.  Clients are told that use of alcohol after treatment is not uncommon, and treatment addresses this possibility. Two basic strategies are used. First, a client is helped to develop a list of signs of an impending relapse, including behavioral, cognitive, interpersonal, and affective signs. If a client’s spouse/partner is part of the treatment, he/she contributes to the list. After this list is developed, a set of possible responses, should these signs arise, is developed. Most important is for the client to recognize that these warning signs should trigger action rather than inaction and fatalistic cognitions about the inevitability of relapse. A second set of strategies involves response to drinking or heavy drinking. The clinician attempts to address the possibility of the AVE by calling attention to the possibility that a client may have catastrophic thoughts if he/she drinks and helping him/her rehearse alternative thoughts. Marlatt and Gordon (1985) also suggested a series of behavioral steps: Introduce a behavioral delay (1–2 hours) between an initial drink and any subsequent drinks; get out of the immediate drinking situation; conduct a functional analysis of the drinking situation during that time; review possible negative consequences of drinking; and call someone who might be helpful. Some research evidence supports the use of such RP approaches. For example, we found in our own research (McCrady, Epstein, & Hirsch, 1999) that including RP procedures as   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  part of conjoint alcoholism treatment was successful in reducing the length of relapse episodes compared to conjoint CBT without RP. O’Farrell, Choquette, and Cutter (1998), who incorporated RP techniques into their couple therapy treatment by providing additional therapy sessions over the 12 months after initial treatment, reported less frequent drinking among couples who received the additional therapy.  Maintaining Contact with Clients  Time-limited treatment is appropriate and effective for many clients, and there is good evidence of long-term, sustained improvement following a course of outpatient treatment (Project MATCH Research Group, 1998). However, periods of relapse are common. The clinical strategies I have described for RP are intended to minimize periods of problem use and to maximize positive outcomes. For some clients, however, alcohol dependence must be viewed as chronic, relapsing disorder (McLellan et al., 2000). As with other chronic health problems, such as diabetes or rheumatoid arthritis, acute care models that treat individuals and send them on their way may be inappropriate and ineffective. An alternative strategy provides longer-term, low-intensity contact over an extended time interval (McKay et al., 2011).  During the initial treatment of a client with a history of severe alcohol dependence, multiple treatment episodes, and difficulty maintaining successful change, the clinician may elect to set a different expectancy with that client—that some form of contact will be ongoing and long-term.  Lee, a 54-year-old married man, came to treatment with problems with alcohol dependence and agoraphobia. Treatment focused on both disorders, and he was successful in becoming abstinent from alcohol and in gradually increasing the distances that he could drive by himself. Lee’s home was an hour’s drive from my office, and treatment had gone on for almost 12 months before he could drive to my office without his wife accompanying him. By the end of the year, we were meeting every 2 to 3 weeks. Given that Lee had been abstinent for a year and was functioning well, we discussed the possibility of termination. His response was instructive:  lee: Doctor, I’ve been drinking a long, long time. One  year is just a drop in the bucket in comparison. I  think that I need to keep seeing you.  tHeraPist: Lee, I understand your concerns, but you’ve been doing well for quite a long time now. Maybe we should just cut down more on how often you come in. How about an appointment in a month, and making it a bit shorter—a half-hour instead of an hour?  lee: I think that’s a good idea. Let’s try it.  I gradually tapered the frequency and length of my sessions with Lee, and saw him twice per year, 15 minutes per session, for the last 3½ years of his 5-year course of treatment. He described the importance of the sessions: “I just know I’ll have to see you and tell you what I’ve been doing. It keeps me honest.”  Management of Complicating Conditions  As I described earlier in the chapter, clients with AUDs may present with myriad other complicating conditions. The clinician must assess and develop a treatment plan for the multiple needs of such clients. At a minimum, clinicians should consider possible problems related to housing, transportation, income, occupation/employment, the legal system, the family, child care, medical conditions, and comorbid psychological disorders. Knowledge of services and agencies in the local community and the development of working relationships with a range of agencies are essential to the treatment of complicated clients. Rose, Zweben, Ockert, and Baier (2013) provide a comprehensive framework for interfacing with other health and social systems.  The Role of Self‑Help Groups  Types of self-help groups were described in an earlier section of this chapter. Various therapeutic strategies may facilitate involvement in a self-help group, when appropriate. The clinician should first assess whether a client may be a good candidate for self-help group involvement. Clients with very high social anxiety or social phobia, clients who believe that a person should take care of problems alone, and those with a history of negative experiences with self-help groups may be poorer candidates. Conversely, affiliative clients, those who are used to solving problems with assistance from others, those who are particularly anxious and concerned about their drinking, those whose social support systems strongly support continued heavy drink    Alcohol Use Disorders  ing, and those with more severe alcohol dependence are particularly good candidates for AA. Persons who are interested in the social support aspects of self-help but explicitly reject some of the constructs associated with AA (e.g., powerlessness or spirituality) may be best served by referral to an alternative self-help group.  As with all aspects of the therapy, the clinician should use a client-centered approach to the introduction of AA or other self-help groups. Such an approach suggests a dialogue between client and therapist, acknowledgment and discussion of the client’s perceptions and concerns, and development of a mutually agreed-upon plan. Because many clients have misconceptions about AA and are unfamiliar with some of the alternative organizations, the clinician should be prepared to describe the organizations and answer questions. It also is helpful for the clinician to have some basic publications from each group available in the office. At times, I may encourage a reluctant client to try a few meetings to sample firsthand what actually occurs. We negotiate a very short-term agreement for a specified number of meetings in a specified length of time (e.g., six meetings in 3 weeks); we agree that if the client continues to be negative or reluctant after trying the groups, then we will abandon this idea; and we discuss the client’s experiences and perceptions of the self-help group meeting in each therapy session. I use behavioral sampling with other aspects of therapy as well: Clients often cannot visualize how a strategy might work without trying it— be it a relaxation technique, an AA meeting, or an assertive response—and I encourage clients to be open to new strategies. In AA, newcomers may be told, “Your best thinking got you here,” which suggests that their own coping strategies have been ineffective. Behavioral sampling is based on this same construct.  Therapist Variables  As with any form of therapy, the therapist’s relationship and the therapeutic stance he/she assumes with the client are important. Empathy, active listening, instillation of hope, flexible application of therapeutic principles and techniques, and establishment of a sense that therapist and client are working toward mutually agreed-upon goals are essential. Research suggests that in contrast to a confrontational style, an empathic, motivational style is associated with better treatment outcomes, and that confrontational behaviors by the therapist tend to elicit defensive and counteraggressive behaviors by the client (Miller, Benefield, & Tonigan,  1993; Miller & Rollnick, 2002). Such responses are hardly conducive to a constructive therapeutic alliance.  Working with a client with an AUD often is difficult because of both the client’s behavior during treatment and his/her history of drinking-related behaviors that the therapist may find repugnant or upsetting. The client may lie about or minimize drinking during treatment. If the spouse/partner is also involved in the treatment, the therapeutic relationship becomes even more complicated.  By treating a client with a drinking problem along with a spouse/partner who wants that client to stop or decrease drinking, the therapist is allied de facto with the spouse/partner. The partner may attempt to enhance his/her alliance with the therapist by echoing the therapist’s comments, expressing anger at the client’s behavior, being confrontational, or, alternatively, being submissive and allowing the client to be verbally aggressive or dominant.  Certain therapist attitudes and behaviors appear to be conducive to successful treatment. First is a sense of empathy with the client. The therapist must develop some understanding of the client’s subjective experience of entering therapy and the difficulty of admitting behaviors that are personally embarrassing and often not socially sanctioned. In addition, the therapist needs to have some appreciation of the incredible difficulties involved with long-term change in drinking behavior. He/she may develop this appreciation by attempting to change his/her own deeply ingrained behavior pattern by attending meetings of some self-help group (e.g., AA, SMART Recovery) and listening carefully to clients.   A second important therapist skill is the ability to distinguish between the person and the drinkingrelated behavior. The client needs to be able to describe drinking-related actions without feeling either that the therapist is repulsed or that the therapist condones or accepts such behaviors. This is a delicate balance to achieve, especially when a client describes drinking episodes in a joking manner that may hide embarrassment or disgust with the behavior. The client’s motivation to change may be enhanced by discussing negative, drinking-related behaviors and experiencing the negative affect associated with thinking about those actions. The therapist also should communicate a sense of hope to the client by anticipating positive changes that might be associated with changes in drinking, and by emphasizing that it is possible to change. Thus, the implied message to the client is as follows:   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  “You have done many things when drinking that are distressing to you and to the people around you. The fact that you are in treatment is a statement that you want to change. It is important to talk about things you have done when drinking because being aware of them will strengthen your desire to stop drinking and to stop doing these things. Making changes will take time and a lot of work on your part, but I believe that you will be successful if you stick with treatment.”  In other words, the therapist’s message is positive about change, but negative about drinking-related behavior.   A third important therapist quality is integrity. Both because of their discomfort and their reinforcement history, it is difficult for some clients to honestly report their drinking episodes, failed homework assignments, or their feelings and attitudes about being in treatment. The therapist can acknowledge how difficult it is to be honest given that lying was probably adaptive in the past, but he/she must make it clear that part of therapy involves learning how to be honest. The therapist also must provide a positive model of integrity. He/she should not ignore the smell of alcohol on a client’s breath, and he/she should review the homework assigned each week. Attending to the client’s behavior teaches the client the importance of following through on commitments and increases the chances that therapist and client will be able to identify problems and blocks to progress in treatment.  The therapist also must set clear expectations about both the client’s and his/her own responsibilities to the therapy, and must be able to set appropriate limits. The therapist should set clear expectations for the client: coming to scheduled sessions on time, calling if unable to attend, paying the bill for therapy, coming in sober, and completing assigned homework. The therapist also should make his/her own commitment to therapy clear, by being at sessions on time, being reasonably available by telephone, providing coverage when away, and providing treatments with demonstrated empirical support for their effectiveness. Being clear about expectations for the client’s behavior during therapy emphasizes the therapist’s commitment to therapy as a serious process.  Client Variables  Only a few client characteristics are consistent predictors of treatment outcome (Haaga, McCrady, & Lebow,  2006). Clients who have positive expectancies about the outcomes of treatment tend to have better outcomes. Additionally, clients with greater readiness to change have more positive outcomes. Finally, clients with more severe problems have poorer outcomes. Both treatment expectancies and readiness to change can be influenced by the therapist.  The clinician must be aware of and sensitive to a number of issues that persons with drinking problems bring to treatment. The client’s emotional experience, his/her beliefs, attitudes, and physical state (described in the section on treatment settings), and the social context of drinking (described in the section on the social context of drinking) are all important aspects of the therapeutic plan.  A person has a variety of reactions to the initial realization that his/her drinking is causing problems. Most commonly, as negative consequences accumulate, an individual begins to feel out of control and ashamed of the behavior. The person’s actions may be unacceptable to his/her self-definition. Thus, financial or work irresponsibility, neglecting family members, engaging in physical violence, or verbal abuse all may be actions about which the individual feels intense guilt and self-blame. The prospect of admitting these actions to a stranger is frightening and embarrassing, making it difficult for a client to discuss drinking-associated problems. Because many clients ascribe their problems to weakness or lack of willpower, and believe that if they were only “stronger” these events would not occur, they blame themselves. Thus, clients are unusually sensitive to implied criticisms from the therapist. The therapist can attenuate this difficulty by making empathic comments while asking questions, letting clients know that their actions are common among people who drink heavily, and listening to clients’ descriptions of drinking-related actions in an accepting manner. Clients also hold a number of beliefs and attitudes about alcohol and their ability to change that make change difficult. People with AUDs have positive expectancies about the effects of alcohol on feelings and behavior, and they hold these more strongly than do people without drinking problems. They may attribute their drinking to reasons external to themselves and believe that they are not personally responsible for either drinking or changing. They may have low self-efficacy beliefs about their ability to change their drinking or to handle alcohol-related situations without drinking, or they may have unrealistically high self-efficacy beliefs that are not grounded in actuality. Finally, if people stop   Alcohol Use Disorders  drinking and then consume alcohol again, cognitive dissonance may occur; they may experience the AVE (Marlatt & Gordon, 1985), characterized by an excessively negative reaction to initial alcohol consumption, and a self-perception that they have “blown” their abstinence and will inevitably relapse to the previous drinking pattern.  case stuDy  In the preceding sections, I have presented case examples to illustrate the application of parts of our treatment model. In this section, I present a complete outpatient therapy case to illustrate a number of the issues described earlier in the context of ongoing treatment. The couple was part of a research project evaluating different approaches to the maintenance of change following conjoint behavioral alcoholism treatment (Mc- Crady et al., 1999).  Couples in the study had to have been married or cohabitating for at least 6 months; neither partner could have a primary problem with the use of illicit drugs or show evidence of gross cognitive impairment or psychosis; and only the male partner could show evidence of alcohol abuse or dependence. All couples were seen by a therapist for 15–17 sessions of weekly outpatient treatment, and agreed to a baseline assessment and 18 months of posttreatment follow-up.  Carl and Maria were married, and both were 32 years old. They came to treatment because of Carl’s drinking. Maria was of average height, had long, black, wavy hair and was heavy. Carl was also of average height, had blond hair, and was slim but showed the beginnings of a “beer belly.” Both were neat and attractive. The couple had been married 5 years and had known each other for 12 years. They had two boys, ages 2 and 3. Both came from intact families, although Carl’s father had died a number of years previously. Carl’s family was primarily Polish; Maria’s was Italian.  At the time of treatment, Carl and Maria had been separated for 5 months. He was living with his mother in her home; Maria was renting a one-bedroom apartment in a poor community, where she lived with the two boys. Maria was a trained cosmetologist; Carl was an electrician who worked out of the union hall. Carl was not working at the time because he did not want to establish a pattern of support for Maria or the children in case she filed for divorce. In addition, if he did not work for a certain period of time, Carl would be able to  withdraw his money from the union’s pension plan, and he thought that would be an easy way to obtain money. Maria was not working because she had decided that Carl would have to babysit while she worked, and she did not think that he would be reliable about coming to her apartment to care for the children. She was supported by Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC); Carl worked odd jobs “under the table.” Both were high school graduates.  The couple came to treatment at Maria’s urging. She was very concerned about Carl’s drinking and cited it as the primary reason for their marital separation.  Behavioral Assessment and Case Conceptualization  Carl and Maria were assessed using several approaches. Their assessment was somewhat more extensive than is usual in clinical practice because of their involvement with the treatment research project. However, the main elements of the assessment are applicable to clinical practice as well.  Drinking Assessment  To assess his drinking, we used a clinical interview to ask Carl about his drinking history and perceptions of his current drinking. A handheld Breathalyzer was used at the beginning of each session to assess his current BAL. In addition, we used two structured interviews, the TLFB (Sobell & Sobell, 1995) and the Alcohol section of the Composite International Diagnostic Interview—Substance Abuse Module (CIDI-SAM; Robins et al., 1988), to obtain a more complete picture of his drinking. Maria was present for all interviews and contributed additional information.  The TLFB inquires about drinking behavior on each day in a set window of time before treatment. For this study, we asked about Carl’s drinking in the prior 6 months, cueing his recall of drinking by noting other salient events in his and Maria’s lives, such as social events, medical appointments, holidays, and other celebrations. The TLFB revealed that Carl had drunk alcohol virtually every day of the previous 6 months. His only abstinent day was when he and some friends were arrested for attempted breaking and entering. His preferred beverages were beer and vodka, and he reported that the most he drank on any single day was about 32 drinks. His usual consumption was in the range of 10–12 drinks daily. Carl met DSM-IV (the system in   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  effect at the time of assessment) and DSM-5 criteria for a diagnosis of severe alcohol dependence with physiological dependence. He had been drinking since high school and reported having his first problems as a result of alcohol at the age of 25. Carl had experienced a variety of problem consequences of his use: three arrests for DWI, one arrest for breaking and entering, warnings from job supervisors for intoxication on the job, problems in his relationship with his wife, and the feeling that he had neglected his responsibilities to his wife and sons. He had experienced numerous blackouts and reported many signs of physical dependence, including morning drinking, a sense of “panic” when he thought he would not be able to obtain a drink when he wanted one, and drinking throughout the day. However, Carl said that he had never experienced any of the physical symptoms of alcohol withdrawal. He also reported no health or emotional problems associated with his drinking. When asked about his goals for treatment, Carl indicated that his own preference was to cut down and to drink moderately, but that his wife insisted on abstinence, and he was willing to work toward that goal.  We used two assessment techniques to identify antecedents to Carl’s drinking, the DPQ (Menges et al., 2008) and self-recording cards. The DPQ was used to assess Carl’s and Maria’s perceptions of drinking antecedents. Carl completed the DPQ by checking off all antecedents that applied to his drinking in the previous 6 months, and Maria completed the measure as well, to indicate her views of his drinking. They also were asked to indicate what they thought were the most influential antecedents. Both perceived environmental influences as being most important to Carl’s drinking, citing as the most salient settings bars and his home, afternoons when he was not working, any celebratory occasions, and being around others who were drinking.  The second most important set of drinking cues pertained to their relationship, with Carl citing arguments, anger, feeling nagged, or having a good time together as antecedents. The third area of concern that both Carl and Maria cited was physiological antecedents, primarily restlessness and fatigue.  Carl used daily self-recording cards throughout the treatment to record drinks and drinking urges. Reviewing the information he recorded and discussing events associated with drinking or drinking urges made it clear that being with heavy-drinking friends was an important component of Carl’s drinking. The selfrecording cards also clarified factors associated with  his feelings of “restlessness.” When Carl and Maria were together and the children were being active, if he wanted to leave or go somewhere, then he would get restless and irritable, and want to drink to “take the edge off.” Finally, it was apparent that Carl felt like drinking whenever Maria reminded him of a commitment that he had made (even something simple, such as bringing a book to her apartment), when she tried to get him to commit to any responsible course of action, or when he felt “trapped.”  We used questionnaires and self-recording cards to assess how Maria coped with Carl’s drinking. She recorded her perceptions of his drinking each day on a Likert scale (None, Light, Moderate, or Heavy) and recorded her daily marital satisfaction as well. Her responses antecedent to and consequent to drinking episodes were discussed in the therapy sessions. In addition, both partners completed a modified version of the Coping Questionnaire (Orford et al., 2005).  Data from these assessment sources made it apparent that Maria often questioned Carl about his actions, threatened him, or pleaded with him not to drink. She had reacted to his drinking in a number of negative ways—by separating from him, calling the police, and refusing to have sex with him. At the same time, she had made serious efforts to support him and encourage his abstinence by doing positive things with Carl when he did not drink, doing nice things for him, or talking about positive things they could do together if he did not drink.  Marital Relationship  We assessed the couple’s relationship by administering the ACQ (Margolin et al., 1983) and the DAS (Spanier, 1976), and by viewing a videotape of the couple discussing a problem in their relationship. Maria had a number of major concerns about their relationship. In addition to Carl’s drinking, she was concerned about his apparent lack of responsibility, citing his unwillingness to work, to care for the children, or to be independent of his mother. In general, Maria felt that Carl could not be relied upon for concrete or emotional support. A second concern that she expressed was their role definitions. She felt that Carl dictated her role to her, and that she allowed him to do so. She often felt angry and resentful as a result. Finally, she cited Carl’s mother as a problem, describing her as an “enabler” who rescued Carl from his problems and made no demands upon him. She stated that when she and Carl first dated, they   Alcohol Use Disorders  liked to drink, stay out late, ride motorcycles, and have a good time, but she felt that it was now time to “move forward” with their lives and “get somewhere.”  Carl had fewer marital concerns. He disliked Maria’s “nagging” him or discussing his drinking, stating at one point, “If I had a different wife, I wouldn’t have a drinking problem.” He also disliked her “persistence” in wanting to discuss topics at length and her “attitude change” when he drank.  A videotape of their interactions revealed several communication problems. Carl and Maria interrupted each other frequently and did not listen to each other’s comments. Each made frequent sarcastic and biting comments about the other, usually stating these with a smile and a funny comment. Maria complained about her excessive responsibilities, and Carl criticized her for not fulfilling her responsibilities but refused to acknowledge any responsibilities of his own.  Despite these considerable marital problems, they enjoyed each other’s company, shared many activities and pleasures (e.g., fishing, going to parks with the children), and had a very positive sexual relationship. Maria said of their relationship, “We get along great when I don’t demand anything.”  Behavioral Formulation  Carl’s drinking appeared to have developed in a social context, with virtually all his drinking occurring within social groups with similar drinking patterns. The pattern was reinforced by these positive social interactions, both with friends and (early in their relationship) with Maria. He had developed significant tolerance for alcohol, so that he could consume increasingly large amounts, resulting in a pattern of daily drinking with some signs of physical dependence on alcohol. For Carl, alcohol provided a number of positive consequences: He enjoyed the tastes and sensations associated with drinking, the social context of drinking, and the feelings of relaxation that drinking engendered. Although he had accumulated a number of significant negative consequences of drinking, none had affected his internal perceptions of himself or of alcohol. From his perspective, negative consequences were imposed on him by others—the police, job supervisors, and his wife. In addition, Carl had been able to avoid responsibility for his actions in many areas of his life. When he did not work, he was able to live with his mother, who shielded him from the negative consequences of not working by providing shelter and food for him. When  Carl’s wife made demands that he experienced as aversive, he avoided or ignored her. To some degree, his problems with alcohol were accentuated by their different developmental stages: Maria was ready to move to a more adult stage of life, with increased responsibilities and long-term goals; Carl, in contrast, wanted to maintain the lifestyle and behavior patterns of his early 20s.  Despite Carl’s externalizing attributions for his problems and his tendency to avoid negative consequences and responsibility, his wife and children were important to him, and he did not want to lose them from his life. Therefore, he came to treatment to maintain these desired reinforcers, but not necessarily to make the behavior changes his wife saw as necessary for them to have a successful long-term marriage.  As treatment progressed (see below), Carl engaged in a variety of maneuvers to maintain the relationship but avoid behavior change, and his wife, and at times the therapist, reinforced these behaviors. Maria had a limited repertoire of effective ways to obtain positive reinforcers for herself. She appeared to expect most positive feelings to come from external sources, and nagging and criticizing were the only verbal behaviors she used to try to get what she wanted. She reinforced Carl’s drinking by continuing to have contact with him but engaged in aversive negative verbal behavior at the same time. She placed responsibility for her happiness with Carl, stating that she could not work (something she enjoyed a great deal) until he stopped drinking and was more responsible, and that she could not lose weight until he stopped drinking and she was less upset.  As a couple, Carl and Maria lacked the verbal skills to discuss these very major problems. Aversive control, avoidance of responsibility, and lack of empathic communication characterized their interactions.  Preparing the Client for Change  Carl and Maria were seen together for all phases of the evaluation. In the initial evaluation, both spouses were asked to describe their perceptions of Carl’s drinking, their relationship, and how each had attempted to cope with Carl’s drinking. By seeing the couple together, I communicated my view that the drinking was intimately connected to their relationship, and that each spouse would need to examine his/her own behavior to effect positive changes. At the end of the evaluation, I provided them with feedback about the main difficulties that I perceived (as summarized earlier), and oriented   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  them to the plan for treatment. In discussing the treatment plan, I covered the following:  “We have asked you to come to treatment as a couple. This is because drinking affects many areas of your life, including your marriage and your family. I know from what you have said, Maria, that you have tried many different ways to cope with Carl’s drinking, and that you have been angry and frustrated at times. It is clear that you have tried to help, but it seems, Carl, that you mostly have resented it when Maria has said anything about your drinking. During treatment we will look at your drinking, how you have tried to cope with it, and how the two of you are getting along as a couple. Right now the two of you are separated, and you have a lot of concerns about your relationship. As we go along in the therapy, I will help you improve your communication, and I will ask you to try new ways to spend time together and discuss problems. The therapy will focus on three main topics—your drinking, Carl, how you, Maria, have coped with it, and how to cope in ways that work better for both of you, and for your relationship with each other.”  In addition to this overall orientation, which both Carl and Maria felt captured their goals for the treatment, we discussed Carl’s drinking goals in more detail and made plans for how to achieve those goals. As indicated earlier, Carl’s preferred drinking goal was moderate drinking. However, Maria felt strongly that she wanted him to abstain, and he had agreed to that goal prior to coming to treatment. Since he had been drinking daily and showed evidence of tolerance to alcohol, I was concerned that he would not be able to stop drinking without assistance. I therefore discussed with him the possibility of being detoxified under medical supervision:  “I am concerned, Carl, that it will be difficult for you to stop drinking on your own. You drink every day and have been drinking a lot. On the questionnaires, you indicated that you ‘panic’ if you think that you will not be able to get any alcohol, and you typically drink throughout the day. All of these things suggest to me that you may be ‘hooked’ on alcohol, and that your body will have a strong reaction to going without any alcohol at all. The easiest way to get through the first few days without drinking is to check into  a hospital detoxification program, and I would like you to consider it.”  Carl had a very negative reaction to the thought of being hospitalized. He was afraid of being “locked up,” and said, “I know that I would go crazy. I can’t stand being confined. After 24 hours I would just have to leave. It’s not a good idea.” I was most interested in engaging Carl in treatment, so I thought it inappropriate to try to force Carl to enter a detoxification center. I was certain that if I made brief hospitalization a prerequisite to further treatment, he would leave treatment completely. Therefore, we developed a plan to achieve abstinence. The plan had two major components: (1) Carl was to come to therapy sessions sober, and his BAL would be verified by breath alcohol test reading; and  (2) Carl would set goals to reduce his drinking gradually, with a target date for abstinence 6 weeks hence. If he was not able to achieve either goal, then we would reevaluate the need for supervised detoxification. He was amenable to this agreement, as was Maria. Process of Treatment  The course of treatment is described sequentially to provide the reader with the clearest picture of the progress and pitfalls of a fairly typical therapy case. The treatment covered several major areas: (1) helping Carl to reduce, then stop his drinking; (2) teaching Carl skills to maintain abstinence; (3) enhancing Carl’s perception of his drinking as problematic; (4) teaching Maria more constructive coping strategies; (5) teaching the couple how to engage in positive interactions; and (6) teaching the couple mutual problem-solving techniques. In addition, as treatment progressed, we focused on some other areas of individual behavioral change for Maria.  Intake and Sessions 1–2  At the initial intake session, Carl had a BAL of greater than 400 mg%. Although he did not show gross signs of intoxication, he was belligerent, and the clinician doing the intake did not feel that he could conduct a reasonable intake interview. He suggested that Carl receive medical attention because his BAL was so high, but Carl refused, and the clinician rescheduled the intake. At the rescheduled appointment, Carl was sober and able to provide information, to give informed consent   Alcohol Use Disorders  for the research aspects of the program, and to schedule the baseline data collection session.  At the first treatment session, however, Carl again had an elevated BAL (120 mg%). He acknowledged only having had “a couple of beers” and insisted that he was fine. We briefly discussed Carl’s and Maria’s concerns and goals, but I suggested that we would not be able to have a very productive session with Carl’s BAL so high. (My general policy is to reschedule a treatment session if the client’s BAL is greater than 50 mg%.) Carl agreed to come to the next session sober and to have no more than four drinks per day. I gave Carl and Maria self-recording cards, on which I asked them to record drinks, drinking urges, and marital satisfaction on a daily basis. Carl was given one card for each day and was asked to record each drink he actually consumed, to note urges to drink not followed by drinking, and to note on the back of the card the situations in which he drank or had urges to drink (see Figure 13.3).  Maria received one card to use for the entire week. I asked her to write on the card a daily estimate of Carl’s drinking (None, Light, Moderate, or Heavy) and also to record her estimate of the strength of his urges to drink that day. She also made a daily rating of her marital satisfaction (see Figure 13.4).  When Carl and Maria came to the second session, his BAL was again elevated, at 60 mg%. He reported drinking about four beers during the day. We continued the discussion of detoxification, and Carl said that he felt he was addicted to alcohol. He said that he would consider detoxification, and we scheduled a phone conversation to discuss detoxification further. After we spoke twice by phone, Carl again decided that he did not want to be hospitalized. He did not use the selfrecording cards during these first 2 weeks, although Maria completed his cards for him while they drove to the treatment session. I did not feel that I had a clear picture of Carl’s drinking, but it was clear that he was continuing to drink daily.  Sessions 3–5  Carl came to the third session with a BAL of 0 mg%. He again reiterated his desire to stop drinking without hospitalization, and we worked out a plan for him to reduce his number of drinks gradually to zero over a 6-week time period. In addition to setting drinking goals, we began to discuss a behavioral-analytic view  of drinking. To introduce the couple to a behavioral way of thinking about their drinking, I said:  “Together we are going to observe carefully and analyze all the factors that seem to be part of your drinking. I think that we can look at your drinking and figure out what kinds of situations lead you to feel like drinking. If we can figure this out, then we can work together to come up with alternatives for these situations. We will be using these sheets, called ‘triggers’ sheets, to analyze your drinking. Let’s go through one of these together.”  I then asked Carl to identify a recent drinking situation. He indicated that he liked to drink when he went fishing. As we spoke, I completed the boxes on the “triggers” sheet, illustrated in Figure 13.7. Carl had a fairly nonpsychological view of his drinking. He described his thoughts as “I want to get some beer” and his feelings as “happy.” He viewed drinking when fishing as having positive consequences—“I have a blast.” He felt that the only negative consequences came from Maria, who would be angry when he came home.  Carl and Maria grasped the behavioral analysis quickly and found it a comfortable way to conceptualize his drinking. As homework, I then asked both of them to complete the DPQ and bring it to the next treatment session. I gave them additional self-recording cards to use for the week.  Carl also came to the fourth session sober but reported heavy drinking over the weekend. The graph of his weekly alcohol consumption during treatment is reproduced in Figure 13.8. Carl’s and Maria’s average weekly marital satisfaction ratings are reproduced in Figure 13.9. Carl expressed no concern about his continued heavy drinking, and showed no evidence that he was trying to cut down.  “I am glad that you have come to the last two sessions sober—I know that’s not easy for you, and it does show that you want treatment to succeed. However, I am concerned that you have not cut down at all between sessions. If anything, your drinking seems a bit heavier. It’s not clear to me whether you don’t really want to cut down, or whether you just don’t know how.”  Carl said that it was hard to cut down, but that he was committed to stop drinking because he wanted to have   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers   figUre 13.7. “Triggers” sheet.   figUre 13.8. Carl’s weekly alcohol consumption. Areas marked “a” represent missing self-recording data.   Alcohol Use Disorders   figUre 13.9. Carl and Maria’s weekly marital satisfaction. Areas marked “a” represent missing self-recording data.  Maria and the boys back again. We then discussed a number of potential strategies to help him avoid drinking, such as sleeping (his suggestion) or having alternative beverages available in the house (my suggestion), or going back to work (Maria’s suggestion). He was reluctant to commit to any plans, and Maria challenged whether he was really willing to stop drinking.  To respond to Carl’s ambivalence, I suggested that we examine consequences of his drinking other than Maria’s disapproval and the couple’s arguments about his drinking. Carl was unable to think of any other adverse consequences. I asked him about his legal problems from the DWIs and the arrest for breaking and entering, but Carl said that he did not believe alcohol had anything to do with the latter charge, and that DWI laws were “ridiculous.” He also indicated that he was still driving, even though he did not have a driver’s license, and that he would continue to drive even if his license was revoked for 10 years (a real possibility, given that he had had three DWIs in less than 10 years, with two in the same month). Carl expressed a similar lack of concern about any other aspects of his drinking but again said that he was willing to stop because of his commitment to the marriage and his children. I made a list of the negative consequences that he or Maria had reported at various times and asked him to review the list at least twice daily, and to think about which of these consequences were of concern to him.  Carl reported looking at the list “once or twice” between sessions, but he was relatively indifferent to the content.  Despite my concern about Carl’s relative lack of motivation to change, I decided to proceed with a behavioral analysis of his drinking. I thought that if we could identify a discrete set of antecedents to drinking, and if Carl could successfully avoid drinking in some of these situations some of the time, his motivation to change might increase as his self-efficacy increased. We discussed two other drinking situations in the session and, as homework, I had him complete two behavioral chains at home. A complete summary of the behavioral analysis of his drinking is provided in Figure 13.10.  Carl came to the next treatment session with a BAL of 118 mg% and reported drinking heavily for the last several days prior to the treatment session. After a lengthy discussion, he agreed to go for detoxification. Carl said he was afraid of the hospitalization and concerned that he would not be able to be abstinent after detoxification. I tried to emphasize that the detoxification was only the first step in treatment, and that we would be working together to help him learn ways of coping without drinking.  He also expressed his belief that life would not be fun if he did not drink. Maria oscillated between encouraging Carl to get detoxified and saying to me that he was only agreeing to the detoxification to get out   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers   figUre 13.10. Sample behavioral analysis of Carl’s drinking.   Alcohol Use Disorders  of my office. Because he was so concerned, I had him call the detoxification center from my office to ask any questions he had. He did so, and scheduled himself for admission the next day.  Sessions 6–8  Carl did not admit himself for detoxification and stated again that he could not face being “locked up.” He was still drinking daily, making minimal efforts to decrease his drinking. I suggested outpatient detoxification and gave him the phone number of a physician colleague who supervised outpatient detoxification, but I had little expectation that he would follow through with that referral either. Carl continued to express willingness to be in treatment and to change his drinking, and I decided to continue despite my doubts about whether he had sufficient incentives to change. We completed the behavioral analysis of his drinking during the sixth session and identified several of Maria’s actions that were antecedents to his drinking, including reminding him about responsibilities, her slow pace when they had an appointment and there was a lot to do to get themselves and their children ready to go out, and her comments about his drinking.  At one point during Session 6, Carl said, “You know, Maria has a real temper. You should ask her what she did to me at the beach.” Maria responded immediately by saying, “Show Barbara your arms.” Carl rolled up his sleeves, revealing a number of scratches and bruises covering his lower forearms. Maria then explained that she had been intensely frustrated with Carl because of his drinking, and often grabbed him, scratched him, or tried to hit him in the chest or abdomen when she was angry. The behavior had started in the last 4 months, and she found it very upsetting. She also indicated her concern that she might become abusive toward her children and admitted that she sometimes used physical punishment when she was angry at them. Although Maria’s anger and frustration were not surprising and are common reactions of partners of people with alcoholism, the physical aggression, particularly in the absence of any physical abuse from Carl, was less usual. We discussed her behavior toward the children in great detail because I was concerned about whether there was any evidence of child abuse. She reported, and Carl confirmed, that she had never bruised, cut, or injured the children in any way, and that they had never had to take either of the children to a physician or emergency room because of her discipline. Both re   ported the belief that physical punishment, in the form of “swats on the bum” or physically removing the child from a dangerous situation, was an appropriate form of discipline. However, Maria felt that she did not always discipline the children rationally, and that she would occasionally hit them on the arm, or pull too hard when removing them from a situation. From the couple’s reports, I did not believe that Maria was abusing the children, but I thought it was important to address her concerns in the therapy. I instructed Maria to use the self-recording cards to write down any times in the next 2 weeks when she felt that she was reacting too strongly to the children or when she was physically aggressive toward Carl.  Over the next two sessions, Carl began to decrease his drinking substantially and was abstinent for each treatment session. Carl and Maria had begun to spend more time together, and they reported that their time together was more positive. They had a family barbecue and went fishing at the beach with the children.  Maria had been faithful in recording her reactions to her children, noting two times each week when she either slapped one of the children on the arm or felt that she grabbed him too hard. We discussed the antecedents to these incidents and identified several salient aspects: Maria was tired, the child was tired, and she attempted to tell him to do something when she could not enforce it (she was across the room or had her hands full). In each situation, she repeated her verbal instructions to the boy several times to no avail, then felt angry and stomped across the room and grabbed him. We discussed alternative strategies, and I emphasized the importance of being able to follow through on a verbal instruction immediately rather than allowing herself to get frustrated. She quickly picked up on my suggestions and also expressed relief at being able to discuss her concerns. After the 2-week period, Maria reported no further instances of excessive physical reaction to the boys, and reported feeling more in control of herself as a parent again. Carl’s observations confirmed her reports.  At the same time that we discussed Maria’s problems with disciplining the children, we began to implement some self-management planning techniques for Carl. I suggested to Carl that it would be easier not to drink if he had ideas about how to handle certain triggers without alcohol. He could avoid situations or rearrange them to minimize the importance of alcohol in the situation. We used a self-management planning sheet to assist in the process (see Figure 13.11).   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  Trigger Plan Pluses Minuses How Hard 1. 2.   figUre 13.11. Sample self-management planning sheet.  We selected fishing as a topic for self-management planning because it was a high frequency, high-drinking activity for him. Carl had a number of ideas about how to fish without alcohol. These included taking his older son, taking his wife, or inviting an older friend who was an excellent fisherman and did not drink at all. In addition, Carl thought that if he bought soft drinks the night before he went fishing and filled his cooler with the sodas before he left the house, he would be less tempted to stop by the liquor store at the end of his block. For homework, I asked Carl to implement this plan, and to develop another self-management plan for getting together with a friend without drinking.  Carl implemented the fishing plan successfully and also planned to ask his friend Scott to play tennis, then go to a fast-food restaurant to eat because alcohol would not be available there. Although Carl saw no obstacles to implementing this plan, he never used it, and could provide no reasons for not following it up. He did, however, tell Scott that he was trying not to drink, and his friend reacted positively and supportively.  The other major topic of these several sessions was reinforcement for changes in Carl’s drinking. Because Carl was so ambivalent about changing his drinking, I thought it particularly important that he experience some positive consequences for decreased drinking and for abstinence. I also wanted to give Maria some positive rather than coercive ways to interact with Carl about his drinking. In introducing this topic, I suggested that they both should think about ways to make abstinence and reduced drinking more positive. I first suggested that Maria might give Carl positive feedback when he was not drinking, but he reacted quite nega   tively to this suggestion, saying, “I would just think it was another one of her sneaky ways to try to pressure me to stop. I don’t want her to say anything.” In continuing with this discussion, I asked whether there was anything that Maria could do that would make abstinence worthwhile to him, and Carl suggested that she could refrain from talking about alcohol and spend time with him without being “picky.” They decided on several mutually enjoyable activities to share when he was not drinking, such as sharing a shrimp dinner, and on having Maria tell Carl when she was enjoying their time together. They were able to implement these plans successfully, and although Carl drank while they were together, the amount was substantially less on these occasions.   Sessions 9–11  By this point in the treatment, Carl had reduced his drinking to approximately three to six drinks per day, but he had not abstained from drinking at all. His reports of urges to drink had also begun to decrease. Maria reported high marital satisfaction almost every day (a rating of 7 on a 1- to 7-point scale), and they were spending most of their free time either at her apartment or at the home of Carl’s mother. However, in the therapy sessions they began to argue more frequently, with their conflict revolving around two major topics—Maria’s desire to move to North Carolina and her feeling that Carl was not emotionally supportive of her. I began to implement some structured communication training with them, teaching them skills that included allowing the other to finish before speaking, reflective listening,   Alcohol Use Disorders  and making specific positive requests. These sessions were supplemented with handouts about communication. After reading the first handout, which covered basic topics, such as the value of being polite and respectful of one’s spouse, and some of the sources of bad communication, they came into the session absolutely surprised at the notion that calling each other names (e.g., “idiot,” “asshole,” or “shithead”) could have any negative impact on their relationship. They had begun to use positive rather than negative communication at home and were pleased with the impact it had on their conversations.  Although we were making progress in the treatment, I was concerned that Carl was still drinking every day, and I relayed this concern to him. Carl stated that he believed he could now stop, and he agreed to be abstinent for 2 days in the following week. The first week that he agreed to this contract, Carl did not want to discuss strategies for abstinence, and he was unsuccessful. The second week we discussed very specific plans for how he would abstain. He planned to be with Maria and the children for part of each day, and he decided not to buy more beer to have in his mother’s house those days. In addition, he would stock up on soft drinks and plan to go to bed early. I also suggested that he might use Maria as a support in his attempts to abstain. I often encourage a client to find someone with whom to discuss urges, and the partner can be a good source of support. He again was resistant to involving Maria, saying, “I wouldn’t tell her that I wanted to drink—all I’d get is a lecture.” I suggested that he usually disliked her comments because they were unsolicited, but in this situation, he would be in charge because he would be the person concerned about his drinking. He responded positively to this reframing. I then asked him whether there was anything Maria could say that would be helpful to him, and he suggested that she tell him it was his choice. Maria indicated that it would be difficult not to lecture, but she agreed to a role play. They imagined that they were driving to the beach, and Carl said, “I want to stop to pick up a six-pack on the way down.” Maria answered, “It’s your choice if you want to, but we could stop to get some sodas instead, if you want.” Carl was amazed at how much he liked her response, and although Maria acknowledged that it was very difficult to be that neutral, she liked feeling that it was not her responsibility to prevent him from drinking. They agreed to try out such a discussion once during the coming week.  Carl was not successful in maintaining any abstinent days, although he did implement most of the rest of the  plans and drank only one beer on each of the 2 target days. However, he did not tell Maria about any of his urges to drink. He again expressed little concern about not meeting his goals. During the session, Carl and Maria announced that they were going to North Carolina for a 2-week trip. Carl knew a contractor who had offered him work there, and Maria was intrigued with the possibility of moving to an area with a lower cost of living and more rural environment in which to raise the children. She stated that she would not move while Carl was still drinking, but they both decided that a trip to explore the possibilities was appealing.  Sessions 12–15  Carl and Maria returned from their 2-week trip very enthusiastic about North Carolina. They believed that work was available, the cost of living was clearly lower, and both of them liked the area they had visited. Maria said again that she would not move unless Carl had been abstinent for a considerable length of time because she did not want to leave her family if she could not depend on Carl. He again said that he would stop drinking. I had taken advantage of the break in the therapy to review all of my progress notes and to think about the couple with a bit more detachment. It was clear to me that although Carl had agreed to abstinence because of Maria’s pressure, he wanted instead to reduce his drinking. However, he had dealt with this conflict by providing verbal reassurances that his behavior would change, without accompanying behavior changes. He had implemented only a few of the behavioral plans that we had developed, and I did not think that the lack of implementation reflected a skills deficit. I had decided to point out Carl’s behavioral inconsistencies at this treatment session.  To initiate this discussion, I told Carl and Maria that I wanted to discuss their progress so far. I emphasized the positive changes that they had made so far: Carl had decreased his drinking substantially; he had developed some skills to assist him in drinking less; their communication had begun to improve; they were spending time together that was mutually enjoyable; and they had begun to consider possible long-term plans together. I noted, however, that Carl had made a series of promises about his drinking on which he had not followed through. I read them several passages from my progress notes, noting Carl’s initial target date for abstinence, and his broken agreements about detoxification and abstinent days. I suggested two alternative explana    CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  tions to them: Either Carl did not want to stop drinking completely but felt that he had to agree to abstinence to keep Maria happy or he really could not stop drinking and needed further assistance to do so. By framing my explanations this way, I tried to avoid labeling Carl as dishonest or unmotivated to change. I also suggested that Maria had helped Carl to keep drinking by reporting high marital satisfaction even though he was still drinking, and that perhaps reduced drinking really was acceptable to her as well. Both reacted quite strongly to my feedback. Carl said, “At first I didn’t want to stop, but now it doesn’t seem that bad. I’m not drinking enough now for it to mean anything, so I’ll just quit. It’s no big deal, and I don’t want to disappoint you.” Maria said, “I always feel like Carl is just saying whatever he has to say to get me or you off his back. But I have been so much happier since he cut down that I kind of lost sight of that fact that he’s still drinking. I am afraid to move anywhere with him while he’s still drinking at all. It was so bad before, I don’t want to go back to that.”  After this conversation, Carl denied that he preferred moderate drinking and announced that he was going to “quit for good.” Over the next 2 weeks, Carl had one drinking day each week—one beer the first week and two beers the second week. Although we discussed a variety of behavioral coping strategies, such as developing behavioral alternatives for drinking situations, rehearsing strategies for refusing drinks, and using various strategies for coping with urges, Carl deemphasized their importance. Instead, he focused on cognitive coping strategies: When he had urges to drink, he would think about reasons not to drink (“It’s not worth it—Maria and the kids are more important”). Or he would use delay tactics (“I won’t have anything right now—if I still feel like drinking at 5:00 [or some other, later time during the day], then I’ll have a beer”). Or he would deemphasize the positive aspects of alcohol (“One or two beers won’t do anything for me, and I don’t want to get blasted”).  Carl and Maria also began to discuss their long-term goals. I asked them to write down how they would like their lives to be in 5 years. Carl wrote down the following3:   Comfortable place to live for Maria and this kids. Good schools, backyard. Get finances in order; save money, consolidate bills, improve credit. Maintain stable income ie. steady construction work or other. Obtain a loving relationship with Maria. Self improvement: manage money better, listen to Maria more objectivly,  secure steadier employment. Maria: better self discipline, controll temper, improve self confidence, weight loss, less pestimistic in dialy matters. ie. scared of bugs, traffic, mishaps, etc.  Maria wrote down remarkably similar 5-year goals:  Five years from now—37 years old; Jonathan 8 years, Marc 7 years. We are living in North Carolina in a rented house. I’m working, Carls working the boys are in school. We have two cars. Carl is 5 yrs sober. I’m 4 years thin. We are two yrs away from getting credit back from filing bankruptcy. Some nights we will be together as a family to relax or to go to a baseball or soccer game of Jonathan’s or Marc’s. Other nights I will be out to socialize or run errands. Other nights Carl will do the same. We will be somewhat financialy comfortable. Three things I want out of life:  Maria: Carl: calmness, thinness, motivation, sobriety, to feel secure, a car, responsability, money, independence, contentedness control over my life  Because Carl and Maria’s goals were so similar, I asked them if I could read them aloud. Both were amenable to this suggestion, and I did so. They reacted quite positively and felt encouraged; because their longterm goals were so similar, they could work together to achieve these goals. I began to teach them skills related to assertiveness and problem solving, discussing ways to implement these skills both in their relationship and in other interpersonal situations.  Sessions 16–18  Carl abstained from drinking from Session 15 to the end of the treatment. He reported a few urges to drink, but these soon decreased. However, he discussed very strong reactions to not drinking. He felt sad, saying that he missed drinking and felt that he had lost something important to him. He also said that it was frustrating because he always had been able to drink when he felt bad, but now he could not do so. I tried to reframe his feelings for him, noting that his ability to recognize that he missed alcohol was an important step toward being able to reorganize his life without it, and that his reaction suggested that he was serious about his intentions not to drink. Carl seemed to find the reframing helpful, but he continued to find abstinence uncomfortable.   Alcohol Use Disorders  As Carl remained abstinent, his marital satisfaction ratings decreased. Previously Carl had reported fairly high marital satisfaction, but as he stopped drinking he became increasingly unhappy. When I asked him about his ratings, he said that he felt they were “going nowhere” in terms of reconciling. We had begun assertion and problem-solving training, and I suggested that Carl could use these skills to express his feelings to Maria more directly. They had a positive discussion during the session about his feelings and about wanting to reconcile, and her concerns about how difficult that would be, with each using some of the positive skills on which we had worked. Both agreed that they now wanted to live together again, but it would be difficult to develop a plan to do so. We used structured problemsolving techniques over two treatment sessions to develop a plan. The major impediment to reconciliation was financial. Maria was receiving welfare, but if either she or Carl began to work, they would receive less public assistance. However, to be able to live together, they would have to save sufficient money for a security deposit and first month’s rent. They finally decided that Maria would begin to work a few hours a week as a hairdresser, working “under the table,” and that Carl would care for the children while she worked. If that worked well, then Carl would begin to look for work again; once both were working, they would move in with his mother for a limited period of time to save money for the deposits and rent, then either obtain an apartment together in New Jersey or find a trailer to rent in North Carolina and move. They also used problemsolving techniques to develop a plan to deal with their other debts.  Termination  Because Carl and Maria were part of a clinical research study, we had to terminate treatment after 18 sessions (including the sessions when he was intoxicated). They had made significant progress during treatment: Carl had been abstinent for more than a month; Maria had learned more effective ways to discipline the children and no longer reported concerns about being overly punitive to them; the couple’s relationship was significantly improved; and they had a constructive plan for reconciliation. I was concerned that Carl was still uncomfortable with abstinence, and I thought that he had acquired only a few effective coping strategies to deal with triggers for drinking. We had not worked directly on Carl’s style of avoiding responsibility except by fol   lowing through on his commitment to abstinence and long-term goal setting. Whether Carl would implement his part of these agreements was relatively untested. The couple was fairly comfortable with termination but asked about possible follow-up treatment, inquiring specifically about AA or other support groups that focused on couples or on behavioral approaches to change. I referred them to SMART, and to a couples’ AA group. The constraints of the clinical research protocol precluded any longer-term treatment with me, even though I thought continued treatment would be beneficial.  Comment  Carl and Maria were a fairly typical couple. Carl’s ambivalence about change, his entry into treatment solely because of an external agent, and his resistance to many behavioral interventions are fairly representative. I believe that he began to engage in treatment when he stopped feeling that he was the sole focus of the treatment, after Maria began to discuss her aggressive behavior and feelings. The second critical point in treatment was addressing his continued drinking. I was willing to allow them to renegotiate for a goal of moderate drinking, but I did not think it therapeutic for Carl to feel that he could verbally agree to abstinence but then avoid the agreement. Addressing Carl’s behavior directly forced him either to be assertive and renegotiate treatment goals or to follow through on his commitment.   The role of behavioral skills training in facilitating abstinence was less important with Carl than with some clients. He tried various skills introduced during the treatment but relied primarily on cognitive coping strategies. The role of reinforcement was probably more important in understanding his changed drinking behavior. Carl’s marital relationship was important to him at the beginning of treatment, and focusing in the therapy on ways to improve that relationship increased its reinforcement value to him. Maria’s consistency in saying that they could reconcile only if he were abstinent, in discussing long-term goals for the relationship, and in seeing the possible positive life they could live in North Carolina all contributed.  Finally, my relationship with the couple probably contributed to the positive changes they made. I found them a likable, appealing couple despite their difficulties. At times, I would tease or cajole Carl into compliance, and he commented at the end of the treatment,   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  “At first I didn’t know if I liked you or not, but then I decided you were kind of cute, and then I realized that you weren’t going to let up on me, so I decided that I’d give it a try.” I tried to reinforce Maria’s ability to take care of herself, and I suspect that she saw me as a female role model in some ways. She often asked me personal questions (whether I was married, how old my son was), and gave me a desk calendar as a thank-you gift at termination. Our research suggests that our more experienced therapists are more successful at keeping clients in treatment (Epstein, McCrady, Miller, & Steinberg, 1994; Raytek, McCrady, Epstein, & Hirsch, 1999), and I suspect that being able to deal with these complex relationships is one skill that our more experienced therapists have acquired more fully.  Typical Problems  The problems presented in this case are fairly typical— coming to treatment sessions intoxicated, continued drinking during treatment, ambivalence about change, noncompliance with assignments, and discovering new and major problems as the therapy progresses. Lying and failing to come to scheduled treatment sessions are other typical obstacles that clients with drinking problems sometimes present. By working with Carl and Maria together, I was able to minimize these particular difficulties because Maria was highly motivated for treatment and very responsible about keeping scheduled appointments. Also, by having them both record Carl’s drinking and drinking urges, I had a clearer picture of his drinking and was able to maintain a clear idea of our progress (or lack thereof).  cliNical PreDictors of success or failure  A number of factors predict the success or failure of therapy. However, before I address these factors, it is important to discuss definitions of “success.” In any treatment, a minority of clients maintain long-term, uninterrupted successful change (abstinence or nonproblem drinking). The proportion varies with the demographic characteristics of the population, and persons who are married, have stable employment, a stable residence, and no comorbid psychopathology have the best treatment outcomes. In addition, a person’s posttreatment environment plays an important role (Moos, Finney, & Cronkite, 1990) in determining long-term outcomes.  Observations of the long-term instability of drinking outcomes have led many to consider alcoholism as a chronic, relapsing disorder, and to reconceptualize “success” as a process rather than a static outcome; that is, the client who learns not only effective skills to avoid drinking or heavy drinking but also ways to cope with relapses by minimizing their length and severity should be considered “successful” as well. In treatment outcome studies, investigators look at percentage of abstinent or moderate drinking days and length of periods of abstinence compared to periods of heavy drinking as ways to assess relative rather than absolute “success.” From the individual clinician’s perspective, certain client characteristics and behaviors bode well for the course of treatment. The client who has important incentives to change (either internal or external) and some recognition of a relationship between his/her drinking and life problems is easier to treat. Complying with early homework assignments, coming to sessions sober, and being honest about behavior outside of the treatment are also positive indicators. However, clinician behavior is another important predictor of success. Various studies have pointed to different aspects of clinician behavior —empathy, specific goal setting and treatment planning, developing drinking goals with the client rather than imposing goals, and providing the client with options for treatment—as all being associated with better compliance with treatment.  coNclusioN  Providing treatment to persons with drinking problems is a complex and continuously fascinating process. The clinician is faced with decisions about matching each client to the appropriate level of care, the setting for treatment, and treatment modalities and techniques. Diagnostic skills to identify concomitant medical, psychological, psychiatric, and cognitive problems are challenged by these clients. Therapy requires knowledge of a range of treatment techniques, an ability to be able to form a positive therapeutic relationship with sometimes frustrating and difficult clients, and the ability to “think on your feet.”  From the briefest, one-session treatments to motivate heavy drinkers to reduce their drinking to the complex and longer treatment provided to individuals with severe alcohol dependence, treatment is never dull or routine. The clinician has a large body of empirical literature to guide the selection of treatments and a   Alcohol Use Disorders  significant clinical literature as well to illustrate clini   cal techniques and problems. And although many per   sons with drinking problems change successfully on  their own or with minimal assistance, treatment also  can provide an effective means for persons to change a  major life problem. So this chapter concludes as it began—as a “sales  pitch” for clinicians to be knowledgeable about and re   ceptive to providing thoughtful, informed treatment to  persons with drinking problems.  notes  1. A standard drink is equal to one 12-ounce beer, one 5-ounce glass of wine, or a 1.5-ounce shot of 86-proof liquor. 2. All dialogue in this chapter is paraphrasing of actual therapist or client comments. 3. These verbatim transcripts include the clients’ spelling of all words. referenCes  American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.). Arlington, VA: Author.  American Society of Addiction Medicine (ASAM). (2001). ASAM patient placement criteria for the treatment of psychoactive substance use disorders (2nd ed., rev.). Chevy Chase, MD: Author.  Annis, H. M., Graham, J. M., & Davis, C. S. (1987). Inventory of Drinking Situations (IDS): User’s guide. Toronto: Centre for Addiction and Mental Health.  Chaney, E. F., O’Leary, M. R., & Marlatt, G. A. (1978). Skills training with alcoholics. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 46, 1092–1104.  Cisler, J. M., Amstadter, A. B., Begle, A. M., Resnick, H. S., Danielson, C. K., Saunders, B. E., et al. (2011). PTSD symptoms, potentially traumatic event exposure, and binge drinking: A prospective study with a national sample of adolescents. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 25, 978–987.  Cohn, A. M., Graff, F. S., Epstein, E. E., McCrady, B. S., Cook, S., Schneider, M., et al. (2010, June). Alcohol use outcomes following “cold turkey” or graduated reduction among women with an alcohol use disorder enrolled in treatment. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Research Society on Alcoholism, San Antonio, TX.  Cox, G. B., Walker, R. D., Freng, S. A., Short, B. A., Meijer, L., & Gilchrist, L. (1998). Outcome of a controlled trial of the effectiveness of intensive case management for chronic public inebriates. Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 59, 523–532.  Cunningham, J. A., Sobell, L. C., Sobell, M. B., & Gaskin,  J. (1994). Alcohol and drug abusers’ reasons for seeking treatment. Addictive Behaviors, 19, 691–696. Donovan, D. (2013). Evidence-based assessment: Strategies and measures in addictive behaviors. In B. S. McCrady &  E. E. Epstein (Eds.), Addictions: A comprehensive guidebook (2nd ed., pp. 311–352). New York: Oxford University Press. Epstein, E. E., & McCrady, B. S. (2009). A cognitivebehavioral treatment program for overcoming alcohol use problems: Therapist guide. New York: Oxford University Press.  Epstein, E. E., McCrady, B. S., Miller, K. J., & Steinberg, M.  L. (1994). Attrition from conjoint alcoholism treatment: Do dropouts differ from completers? Journal of Substance Abuse, 6, 249–265. Filstead, W. (1991). Two-year treatment outcome: An evaluation of substance abuse services for adults and youths. Park Ridge, IL: Parkside Medical Services.  Fink, E. B., Longabaugh, R., McCrady, B. S., Stout, R. L., Beattie, M., Ruggieri-Authelet, A., et al. (1985). Effectiveness of alcoholism treatment in partial versus inpatient settings: Twenty-four month outcomes. Addictive Behaviors, 10, 235–248.  Finney, J. W., Moos, R. H., & Timko, C. (2013). The course of treated and untreated substance use disorders: Remission and resolution, relapse and mortality. In B. S. McCrady &  E. E. Epstein (Eds.), Addictions: A comprehensive guidebook (2nd ed., pp. 108–131). New York: Oxford University Press. Foy, D. W., Miller, P. M., Eisler, R. M., & O’Toole, D. H. (1976). Social skills training to teach alcoholics to refuse drinks effectively. Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 37, 1340–1345.  Frankenstein, W., Hay, W. M., & Nathan, P. E. (1985). Effects of intoxication on alcoholics’ marital communication and problem solving. Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 46, 1–6.  Green, K., Worden, B., Menges, D., & McCrady, B. S., (2008). Assessment of alcohol use disorders. In J. Hunsley & E. Mash (Eds.), A guide to assessments that work (pp. 339–369). New York: Oxford University Press.  Haaga, D. A. F., McCrady, B., & Lebow, J. (2006). Integrative principles for treating substance use disorders. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 62, 675–684.  Hallgren, K. A., Greenfield, B. L., Ladd, B., Glynn, L. H., & McCrady, B. S. (2012). Evidence-based practices for the treatment of adults with alcohol use disorders. In P. Sturmey & M. Hersen (Eds.), Handbook of evidence-based practice in clinical psychology: Vol. II. Adult disorders (pp. 133–166). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.  Helzer, J. E., Robins, L. N., Taylor, J. R., Carey, K., Miller, R. H., Combs-Orme, T., et al. (1985). The extent of long-term moderate drinking among alcoholics discharged from medical and psychiatric treatment facilities. New England Journal of Medicine, 312, 1678–1682.   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  Hesse, M. (2006). The Readiness Ruler as a measure of readiness to change polydrug use in drug abusers. Harm Reduction Journal, 3. Published online at www.harmreductionjournal. com/content/3/1/3.  Hester, R. K., Delaney, H. D., Campbell, W., & Handmaker,  N. (2009). A web application for moderation training: Initial results of a randomized clinical trial. Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment, 37, 266–276. Institute of Medicine. (1990). Broadening the base of treatment for alcohol problems. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.  Kosanke, N., Magura, S., Staines, G., Foote, J., & DeLuca,  A. (2002). Feasibility of matching alcohol patients to ASAM levels of care. American Journal on Addictions, 11, 124–134. Leite, de C., Seminotti, J. C., Freitas, N. F., & Drachler, M.  P. de L. (2011). The Psychosocial Treatment Expectations Questionnaire (PTEQ) for alcohol problems: Development and early validation. European Journal of Psychological Assessment, 27, 228–236. Liepman, M. R. (1993). Using family influence to motivate alcoholics to enter treatment: The Johnson Institute Intervention approach. In T. J. O’Farrell (Ed.), Treating alcohol problems: Marital and family interventions (pp. 54–77). New York: Guilford Press.  Longabaugh, R., McCrady, B., Fink, E., Stout, R., McAuley, T., & McNeill, D. (1983). Cost-effectiveness of alcoholism treatment in inpatient versus partial hospital settings: Six- month outcomes. Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 44, 1049–1071.  Longabaugh, R., Wirtz, P. W., Zweben, A., & Stout, R. L. (1998). Network support for drinking, Alcoholics Anonymous and long-term matching effects. Addiction, 93, 1313–1333.  Longabaugh, R., Wirtz, P. W., Zywiak, W. H., & O’Malley,  S. S. (2010). Network support as a prognostic indicator of drinking outcomes: The COMBINE study. Journal of Studies on Alcohol and Drugs, 71, 837–846. Ludwig, A. M. (1985). Cognitive processes associated with “spontaneous” recovery from alcoholism. Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 46, 53–58.  Magura, S., Staines, G., Kosanke, N., Rosenblum, A., Foote, J., DeLuca, A., et al. (2003). Predictive validity of the ASAM Patient Placement Criteria for naturalistically matched vs. mismatched alcoholism patients. American Journal on Addictions, 12, 386–397.  Margolin, G., Talovic, S., & Weinstein, C. D. (1983). Areas of Change Questionnaire: A practical approach to marital assessment. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 51, 921–931.  Marlatt, G. A., & Donovan, D. M. (Eds.). (2005). Relapse prevention: Second edition: Maintenance strategies in the treatment of addictive behavior. New York: Guilford Press.  Marlatt, G. A., & Gordon, J. R. (Eds.). (1985). Relapse pre   vention: Maintenance strategies in the treatment of addictive behaviors. New York: Guilford Press.  Mayfield, D., McLeod, G., & Hall, P. (1974). The CAGE questionnaire: Validation of a new alcoholism instrument. American Journal of Psychiatry, 131, 1121–1123.  McConnaughy, E. A., Prochaska, J. O., & Velicer, W. F. (1983). Stages of change in psychotherapy: Measurement and sample profiles. Psychotherapy: Theory, Research, and Practice, 20, 243–250.  McCrady, B. S. (1992). A reply to Peele: Is this how you treat your friends? Addictive Behaviors, 17, 67–72.  McCrady, B. S., & Epstein, E. E. (2009). Overcoming alcohol problems: A couples-focused program. New York: Oxford University Press.  McCrady, B. S., Epstein, E. E., Cook, S., Jensen, N. K., & Hildebrandt, T. (2009). A randomized trial of individual and couple behavioral alcohol treatment for women. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 77, 243–256.  McCrady, B. S., Epstein, E. E., & Hirsch, L. (1999). Maintaining change after conjoint behavioral alcohol treatment for men: Outcomes at six months. Addiction, 94, 1381– 1396.  McCrady, B. S., Horvath, A. T., & Delaney, S. I. (2003). Selfhelp groups. In R. K. Hester & W. R. Miller (Eds.), Handbook of alcoholism treatment approaches: Effective alternatives (3rd ed., pp. 165–187). Boston: Allyn & Bacon.  McCrady, B. S., Longabaugh, R. L., Fink, E., Stout, R., Beattie, M., Ruggieri-Authelet, A., et al. (1986). Cost effectiveness of alcoholism treatment in partial hospital versus inpatient settings after brief inpatient treatment: Twelve month outcomes. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 54, 708–713.  McCrady, B. S., Owens, M., & Brovko, J. (2013). Couples and family treatment methods. In B. S. McCrady & E. E. Epstein (Eds.), Addictions: A comprehensive guidebook (2nd ed., pp. 454–481). New York: Oxford University Press.  McCrady, B. S., Stout, R., Noel, N., Abrams, D., & Nelson, H.  F. (1991). Effectiveness of three types of spouse-involved behavioral alcoholism treatment. British Journal of Addiction, 86, 1415–1424. McCrady, B. S., & Tonigan, J. S. (in press). Recent research into twelve step programs. In: R. Ries, D. Fiellin, S. Miller, & R. Saitz (Eds.), Principles of addiction medicine (5th ed.). Baltimore: Lippincott/Williams & Wilkins.  McKay, J. R., Van Horn, D., Oslin, D. W., Ivey, M., Drapkin,  M. L., Coviello, D. M., et al. (2011). Extended telephonebased continuing care for alcohol dependence: 24-month outcomes and subgroup analyses. Addiction, 106, 1760– 1769. McLellan, A. T., Grissom, G. R., Zanis, D., Randall, M., Brill, P., & O’Brien, C. P. (1997). Problem–service “matching” in addiction treatment: A prospective study in four programs. Archives of General Psychiatry, 54, 730–735.  McLellan, A. T., Kushner, H., Metzger, D., Peters, R., Smith, I., Grissom, G., et al. (1992). The fifth edition of the Ad   