Core Strategies  Validation  Validation and problem-solving strategies, together with dialectical strategies, make up the core of DBT and form the heart of the treatment. Validation strategies are the most obvious acceptance strategies, whereas problem-solving strategies are the most obvious change strategies. Both strategies are used in every interaction with the client, although the relative frequency of each depends on the particular client, the current situation, and the vulnerabilities of that client. However, through   out an entire session, there should be an overall balance between the acceptance and change strategies. We discuss validation strategies in this section and problemsolving strategies in the next.  Clients with BPD present themselves clinically as people in extreme emotional pain. They plead, and at times demand, that their therapists do something to change this state of affairs. It is very tempting to focus the energy of therapy on changing the client by modifying irrational thoughts, assumptions, or schemas; critiquing interpersonal behaviors or motives contributing to interpersonal problems; giving medication to change abnormal biology; and reducing emotional overreactivity and intensity; and so on. In many respects, this focus recapitulates the invalidating environment by confirming the client’s worst fears: The client is the problem and indeed cannot trust his/her own reactions to events. Mistrust and invalidation of how one responds to events, however, are extremely aversive and can elicit intense fear, anger, and shame, or a combination of all three. Thus, the entire focus of change-based therapy can be aversive because the focus by necessity contributes to and elicits self-invalidation. However, an entire focus of acceptance-based therapy can also be invalidating when it appears to the client that the therapist does not take his/her problems seriously. Therefore, once again, a dialectical stance focuses on a balance between the two poles.  Validation (according to the Oxford English Dictionary; Simpson & Weiner, 1989) refers to identifying the validity of an object or making something valid. It also encompasses activities such as corroborating, substantiating, verifying, and authenticating. The act of validating includes providing support from an authoritative source about the truth or validity of something (Merriam-Webster, 2006). Communicating that something is valid implies that objective evidence and reputable authority support or justify the response given (Simpson & Weiner, 1989). These are precisely the meanings associated with the term when used in the context of psychotherapy in DBT.  The essence of validation is this: The therapist communicates to the client that her [sic] responses make sense and are understandable within her [sic] current life context or situation. The therapist actively accepts the client and communicates this acceptance to the client. The therapist takes the client’s responses seriously and does not discount or trivialize them. Validation strategies require the therapist to search for, recognize, and reflect   Borderline Personality Disorder  to the client the validity inherent in her [sic] response to events. With unruly children, parents have to catch them while they’re good in order to reinforce their behavior; similarly, the therapist has to uncover the validity within the client’s response, sometimes amplify it, and then reinforce it. (Linehan, 1993b, pp. 222–223, original emphasis)  Two things are important to note here. First, “validation” means the acknowledgment of that which is valid. It does not mean “making” valid. Nor does it mean validating that which is invalid. The therapist observes, experiences, and affirms, but he/she does not create validity. Second, “valid” and “scientific” are not synonyms. Science may be one way to determine what is valid, logical, sound in principle, and/or generally accepted as authority or normative knowledge. However, an authentic experience or apprehension of private events (at least, when similar to the same experiences of others or when in accord with other, more observable events) is also a basis for claiming validity. Validation can be considered at any one of six levels. Each level is correspondingly more complete than the previous one, and each depends on the previous levels. They are definitional of DBT and are required in every interaction with the client. These levels are described most fully in Linehan (1997), and the following definitions are taken from her discussion.  lisTening AnD oBserVing (V1)  Level 1 validation requires listening to and observing what the client is saying, feeling, and doing, as well as a corresponding active effort to understand what is being said and observed. The essence of this step is that the therapist is staying awake and interested in the client, paying attention to what the client says and does in the current moment. The therapist notices the nuances of response in the interaction. Validation at Level 1 communicates that the client per se, as well as the client’s presence, words, and responses in the session have “such force as to compel serious attention and [usually] acceptance” (see earlier definitions of validation; pp. 360–361)  ACCUrATe refleCTion (V2)  The second level of validation is the accurate reflection back to the client of his/her own feelings, thoughts, assumptions, and behaviors. The therapist conveys an understanding of the client by hearing what the client  has said and seeing what the client does, and how he/ she responds. Validation at Level 2 sanctions, empowers, or authenticates that the individual is who he/she actually is (p. 362).  ArTiCUlATing THe UnVerBAlizeD (V3)  In Level 3 of validation, the therapist communicates understanding of aspects of the client’s experience and response to events that have not been communicated directly by the client. The therapist “mind-reads” the reason for the client’s behavior and figures out how the client feels and what he/she is wishing for, thinking, or doing just by knowing what has happened to the client. The therapist can make the link between precipitating event and behavior without being given any information about the behavior itself. The therapist can also articulate emotions and meanings the client has not expressed (p. 364).  VAliDATing in TerMs of PAsT leArning or BiologiCAl DysfUnCTion (V4)  At Level 4, behavior is validated in terms of its causes. Validation here is based on the notion that all behavior is caused by events occurring in time; thus, in principle, it is understandable. The therapist justifies the client’s behavior by showing that it is caused by past events. Even though information may not be available to determine all the relevant causes, the client’s feelings, thoughts, and actions make perfect sense in the context of the client’s current experience, physiology, and life to date. At a minimum, what “is” can always be justified in terms of sufficient causes; that is, what is “should be,” in that whatever was necessary for it to occur had to have happened (p. 367).  VAliDATion in TerMs of PresenT ConTexT or norMATiVe fUnCTioning (V5)  At Level 5, the therapist communicates that behavior is justifiable, reasonable, well grounded, meaningful, and/or efficacious in terms of current events, normative biological functioning, and/or the client’s ultimate life goals. The therapist looks for and reflects the wisdom or validity of the client’s response and communicates that the response is understandable. The therapist finds the relevant facts in the current environment that support the client’s behavior. The therapist is not blinded by the dysfunctionality of some of the client’s response   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  patterns to those aspects of a response pattern that may be either reasonable or appropriate to the context. Thus, the therapist searches the client’s responses for their inherent reasonableness (as well as commenting on the inherent dysfunctionality of much of the response, if necessary) (pp. 370–371).  rADiCAl genUineness (V6)  In Level 6, the task is to recognize the client as he/ she is, seeing and responding to his/her strengths and capacities, while keeping a firm empathic understanding of his/her actual difficulties and incapacities. The therapist believes in the client and his/her capacity to change and move toward ultimate life goals just as the therapist may believe in a friend or family member. The client is responded to as a person of equal status, due equal respect. Validation at the highest level is the validation of the individual as “is.” The therapist sees more than the role, more than a “client” or “disorder.” Level 6 validation is the opposite of treating the client in a condescending manner or as overly fragile. It is responding to the individual as capable of effective and reasonable behavior rather than assuming that he/she is an invalid. Whereas Levels 1–5 represent sequential steps in validation of a kind, Level 6 represents change in both level and kind (p. 377).  Cheerleading strategies constitute another form of validation and are the principal strategies for combating the active passivity and tendencies toward hopelessness in clients with BPD. In cheerleading, therapists communicate the belief that clients are doing their best and validate clients’ ability to eventually overcome their difficulties (a type of validation that, if not handled carefully, can simultaneously invalidate clients’ perceptions of their helplessness). In addition, therapists express a belief in the therapy relationship, offer reassurance, and highlight any evidence of improvement. Within DBT, cheerleading is used in every therapeutic interaction. Although active cheerleading should be reduced as clients learn to trust and to validate themselves, cheerleading strategies always remain an essential ingredient of a strong therapeutic alliance.  Finally, functional validation, another form of validation used regularly in DBT, is a form of nonverbal or behavioral validation that at times may be more effective than verbal validation. For example, a therapist drops a 50-pound block on the client’s foot. It would be considered invalidating for the therapist simply to  respond verbally, saying, “Wow, I can see that really hurts! You must be in a lot of pain.” Functional validation would entail the therapist removing the block from the client’s foot.  Problem Solving  We have previously discussed how clients with BPD typically experience therapies with a primary focus on change as invalidating. However, therapies that focus exclusively on validation can prove equally problematic. Exhortations to accept one’s current situation offer little solace to an individual who experiences life as painfully unendurable. Within DBT, problem-solving strategies are the core change strategies, designed to foster an active problem-solving style. For clients with BPD, however, the application of these strategies is fraught with difficulties. The therapist must keep in mind that in clients with BPD the process will be more difficult than that with many other client populations. In work with clients who have BPD, the need for sympathetic understanding and interventions aimed at enhancing current positive mood can be extremely important. The validation strategies just described, as well as the irreverent communication strategy described later, can be tremendously useful here. Within DBT, problem solving is a two-stage process that concentrates first on understanding and accepting a selected problem, then generating alternative solutions. The first stage involves  (1) behavioral analysis, (2) insight into recurrent behavioral context patterns, and (3) giving the client didactic information about principles of behaviors, norms, and so on. The second stage specifically targets change through (4) analysis of possible solutions to problems, (5) orienting the client to therapeutic procedures likely to bring about desired changes, and (6) strategies designed to elicit and strengthen commitment to these procedures. The following sections describe in more detail some of these procedures. Behavioral Analysis  Behavioral analysis is one of the most important strategies in DBT. It is also the most difficult. The purpose of a behavioral analysis is first to select a problem, then to determine empirically what is causing it, what is preventing its resolution, and what aids are available for solving it. Behavioral analysis addresses four primary questions:   Borderline Personality Disorder  1. Are ineffective behaviors being reinforced, are effective behaviors followed by aversive outcomes, or are rewarding outcomes delayed? 2. Does the client have the requisite behavioral skills to regulate his/her emotions, respond skillfully to conflict, and manage his/her own behavior? 3. Are there patterns of avoidance, or are effective behaviors inhibited by unwarranted fears or guilt? 4. Is the client unaware of the contingencies operating in his/her environment, or are effective behaviors inhibited by faulty beliefs or assumptions? Answers to these questions guide the therapist in the selection of appropriate treatment procedures, such as contingency management, behavioral skills training, exposure, or cognitive modification. Thus, the value of an analysis lies in helping the therapist assess and understand a problem fully enough to guide effective therapeutic response. The first step in conducting a behavioral analysis is to help the client identify the problem to be analyzed and describe it in behavioral terms. Identifying the problem can be the most difficult task for the therapist, and if not done accurately and specifically, can lead therapist and client astray. Problem definition usually evolves from a discussion of the previous week’s events, often in the context of reviewing diary cards. The assumption of facts not in evidence is perhaps the most common mistake at this point. An identified problem is further assessed with a chain analysis— an exhaustive, blow-by-blow description of the chain of events leading up to and following the behavior. In a chain analysis, the therapist constructs a general road map of how the client arrives at dysfunctional responses, including where the road actually starts (highlights vulnerability factors and prompting events), and notes possible alternative adaptive pathways or junctions along the way. Additional goals are to identify events that automatically elicit maladaptive behavior, behavioral deficits that are instrumental in maintaining problematic responses, and environmental and behavioral events that may be interfering with more appropriate behaviors. The overall goal is to determine the function of the behavior (i.e., the problem the behavior was instrumental in solving).  Chain analysis always begins with a specific environmental event. Pinpointing such an event may be dif   ficult because clients are frequently unable to identify anything in the environment that set off the problematic response. Nevertheless, it is important to obtain a description of the events co-occurring with the onset of the problem. The therapist then attempts to identify both environmental and behavioral events for each subsequent link in the chain. Here the therapist must play the part of a very keen observer, thinking in terms of very small chunks of behavior, and repeatedly identifying what the client was thinking, feeling, and doing, and what was occurring in the environment from moment to moment. The therapist asks the client, “What happened next?” or “How did you get from there to there?” Although, from the client’s point of view, such links may be self-evident, the therapist must be careful not to make assumptions. For example, a client who had attempted suicide once stated that she decided to kill herself because her life was too painful for her to live any longer. From the client’s point of view, this was an adequate explanation for her suicide attempt. For the therapist, however, taking one’s life because life is too painful was only one solution. One could decide life is too painful, then decide to change one’s life. Or one could believe that death might be even more painful and decide to tolerate life despite its pain. In this instance, careful questioning revealed that the client actually assumed she would be happier dead than alive. Challenging this assumption, then, became a key to ending her persistent suicide attempts. It is equally important to pinpoint exactly what consequences are maintaining the problematic response. Similarly, the therapist should also search for consequences that serve to weaken the problem behavior. As with antecedent events, the therapist probes for both environmental and behavioral consequences, obtaining detailed descriptions of the client’s emotions, somatic sensations, actions, thoughts, and assumptions. A rudimentary knowledge of the rules of learning and principles of reinforcement is crucial.  The final step in behavioral analysis is to construct and test hypotheses about events that are relevant to generating and maintaining the problem behavior. The biosocial theory of BPD suggests several factors of primary importance. For example, DBT focuses most closely on intense or aversive emotional states; the amelioration of negative affect is always suspected as being among the primary motivational variables for dysfunctional behavior in BPD. The theory also suggests that typical behavioral patterns, such as deficits   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  in dialectical thinking or behavioral skills, are likely to be instrumental in producing and maintaining problematic responses.  Solution Analysis  Once the problem has been identified and analyzed, problem solving proceeds with an active attempt at finding and identifying alternative solutions. DBT posits that there are five responses to any one problem: (1) Solve the problem; (2) change the emotional reaction to the problem; (3) tolerate the problem; (4) stay miserable, or (5) make things worse. These five options are presented as needed prior to problem solving to ensure that therapist and client are consistently working toward the same goal.  At times, solutions are discussed throughout the behavioral analysis, and pointing to these alternative solutions may be all that is required, rather than waiting until the behavioral analysis is completed. The therapist may ask, “What do you think you could have done differently here?” Throughout this process, the therapist is actively modeling effective problem solving and solution generation, with a heavier emphasis on modeling and guiding the client early on in treatment. At other times, a more complete solution analysis is necessary. Here the task is to “brainstorm” or generate as many alternative solutions as possible. Solutions should then be evaluated in terms of the various outcomes expected. The final step in solution analysis is to choose a solution that will somehow be effective. Throughout the evaluation, the therapist guides the client in choosing a particular behavioral solution. Here, it is preferable that the therapist pay particular attention to long-term over short-term gain, and that chosen solutions render maximum benefit to the client rather than benefit to others.  Problem‑Solving Procedures  DBT employs four problem-solving procedures taken directly from the cognitive and behavioral treatment literature. These four—skills training, contingency procedures, exposure, and cognitive modification—are viewed as primary vehicles of change throughout DBT, since they influence the direction that client changes take from session to session. Although they are discussed as distinct procedures by Linehan (1993b), it is not clear that they can in fact be differentiated in every case in clinical practice. The same therapeutic sequence may be effective because it teaches the client  new skills (skills training), provides a consequence that influences the probability of preceding client behaviors occurring again (contingency procedures), provides nonreinforced exposure to cues associated previously but not currently with threat (exposure procedures), or changes the client’s dysfunctional assumptions or schematic processing of events (cognitive modification). In contrast to many cognitive and behavioral treatment programs in the literature, these procedures (with some exceptions noted below) are employed in an unstructured manner, interwoven throughout all therapeutic dialogue. Thus, the therapist must be well aware of the principles governing the effectiveness of each procedure in order to use it strategically. The exceptions are in skills training, where skills training procedures predominate.   Skills Training  An emphasis on skills building is pervasive throughout DBT. In both individual and group therapy, the therapist insists at every opportunity that the client actively engage in the acquisition and practice of behavioral skills. The term “skills” is used synonymously with “ability” and includes, in its broadest sense, cognitive, emotional, and overt behavioral skills, as well as their integration, which is necessary for effective performance. Skills training is called for when a solution requires skills not currently in the individual’s behavioral repertoire, or when the individual has the component behaviors but cannot integrate and use them effectively. Skills training in DBT incorporates three types of procedures: (1) skills acquisition (modeling, instructing, advising); (2) skills strengthening (encouraging in vivo and within-session practice, role playing, feedback); and (3) skills generalization (phone calls to work on applying skills; taping therapy sessions to listen to between sessions; homework assignments).  Contingency Procedures  Every response within an interpersonal interaction is potentially a reinforcement, a punishment, or a withholding or removal of reinforcement. Contingency management requires therapists to organize their behavior strategically, so client behaviors that represent progress are reinforced, while unskillful or maladaptive behaviors are extinguished. or punished. Natural over arbitrary consequences are preferred. An important contingency in DBT is the therapist’s interpersonal   Borderline Personality Disorder  behavior with the client, which is contingent on alliance.   Effective contingency management requires that the therapist orient the client to the principles of learning. The therapist must attend to the client’s behaviors and use the principles of shaping to reinforce those behaviors that represent progress toward DBT targets. Equally important is that the therapist take care not to reinforce behaviors targeted for extinction. In theory, this may seem obvious, but in practice, it can be quite difficult. The problematic behaviors of clients with BPD are often quite effective in obtaining reinforcing outcomes or in stopping painful events. Indeed, the very behaviors targeted for extinction have been intermittently reinforced by mental health professionals, family members, and friends. Contingency management at times requires the use of aversive consequences, similar to “setting limits” in other treatment modalities. Three guidelines are important when using aversive consequences. First, punishment should “fit the crime,” and a client should have some way of terminating its application. For example, in DBT, a detailed behavioral analysis follows a suicidal or NSSI act; such an analysis is an aversive procedure for most clients. Once it has been completed, however, a client’s ability to pursue other topics is restored. Second, it is crucial that therapists use punishment with great care, in low doses, and very briefly, and that a positive interpersonal atmosphere be restored following any client improvement. Third, punishment should be just strong enough to work. Although the ultimate punishment is termination of therapy, a preferable fallback strategy is putting clients on “vacations from therapy.” This approach is considered when all other contingencies have failed, or when a situation is so serious that a therapist’s therapeutic or personal limits have been crossed. When utilizing this strategy, the therapist clearly identifies what behaviors must be changed and clarifies that once the conditions have been met, the client can return. The therapist maintains intermittent contact by phone or letter, and provides a referral or backup while the client is on vacation. (In colloquial terms, the therapist kicks the client out, then pines for his/her return.)  Observing limits constitutes a special case of contingency management involving the application of problem-solving strategies to client behaviors that threaten or cross a therapist’s personal limits. Such behaviors interfere with the therapist’s ability or willingness to conduct the therapy. Therapists must take responsibility for monitoring their own personal limits  and for clearly communicating them to clients. Therapists who do not do this eventually burn out, terminate therapy, or otherwise harm their clients. DBT favors natural over arbitrary limits. Thus, limits vary among therapists, over time and over circumstances. Limits should also be presented as for the good of the therapist, not for the good of the client. What the client argues is in his/her best interests may not ultimately be good for the therapists.  Cognitive Modification  The fundamental message given to clients in DBT is that cognitive distortions are just as likely to be caused by emotional arousal as to be the cause of the arousal in the first place. The overall message is that, for the most part, the source of a client’s distress is extremely stressful life events rather than a distortion of benign events. Cognitive restructuring procedures, such as those advocated by Beck, Brown, Berchick, Stewart, and Steer (1990) and Ellis (1973), are used and taught in DBT, although they do not hold a dominant place. In contrast, contingency clarification strategies described earlier are used relentlessly, highlighting contingent relationships operating in the here and now.  Exposure  All of the change procedures in DBT can be reconceptualized as exposure strategies. The principles of exposure used in DBT have been developed for anxiety disorders (see Foa & Kozak, 1986) and expanded in DBT to address all problematic emotions. These strategies work by reconditioning dysfunctional associations that develop between stimuli (e.g., an aversive stimulus, hospitalization, may become associated with a positive stimulus, being nurtured; a client may later work to be hospitalized) or between a response and a stimulus (e.g., an adaptive response, expression of emotions, is met with an aversive consequence, rejection by a loved one; a client may work to suppress emotions). As noted earlier, the DBT therapist conducts a chain analysis of the eliciting cue, the problem behavior (including emotions), and the consequences of the behavior. Working within a behavior therapy framework, the therapist operates according to three guidelines for exposure in DBT: (1) Exposure to the cue that precedes the problem behavior must be nonreinforced (e.g., if a client is fearful that discussing suicidal behavior will lead to his/her being rejected, the therapist must not reinforce the cli    CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  ent’s shame by ostracizing him/her); (2) dysfunctional responses are blocked in the order of the primary and secondary targets of treatment (e.g., suicidal or NSSI behavior related to shame is blocked by getting the client’s cooperation in throwing away hoarded medications); and (3) actions opposite to the dysfunctional behavior are reinforced (e.g., the therapist reinforces the client for talking about painful, shame-related suicidal behavior).  Formal and informal exposure procedures involve first orienting the client to the techniques and to the fact that exposure to cues is often experienced as painful or frightening. Thus, the therapist does not remove the cue to emotional arousal, and at the same time he/ she blocks both the action tendencies (including escape responses) and the expressive tendencies associated with the problem emotion. In addition, a crucial step of exposure procedures is teaching the client some means of titrating or ending exposure when emotions become unendurable. The therapist and client collaborate in developing positive, adaptive ways for the client to end exposure voluntarily, preferably after some reduction in the problem emotion has occurred.  Stylistic Strategies  DBT balances two quite different styles of communication that refer to how the therapist executes other treatment strategies. The first, reciprocal communication, is similar to the communication style advocated in CCT. The second, irreverent communication, is quite similar to the style advocated by Whitaker (1975) in his writings on strategic therapy. Reciprocal communication strategies are designed to reduce a perceived power differential by making the therapist more vulnerable to the client. In addition, they serve as a model for appropriate but equal interactions within an important interpersonal relationship. Irreverent communication is usually riskier than reciprocity. However, it can facilitate problem solving or produce a breakthrough after long periods when progress has seemed thwarted. To be used effectively, irreverent communication must balance reciprocal communication, and the two must be woven into a single stylistic fabric. Without such balancing, neither strategy represents DBT.  Reciprocal Communication  Responsiveness, self-disclosure, warm engagement, and genuineness are the basic guidelines of reciprocal  communication. Responsiveness requires attending to the client in a mindful (attentive) manner and taking the client’s agenda and wishes seriously. However, this does not mean that the therapist gives priority to the client’s agenda over the treatment hierarchy. It refers to the therapist validating the importance of the client’s agenda openly. It is a friendly, affectionate style reflecting warmth and engagement in the therapeutic interaction. Self-involving self-disclosure is the therapist’s immediate, personal reactions to the client and his/her behavior. This strategy is used frequently throughout DBT. For example, a therapist whose client complained about his coolness said, “When you demand warmth from me, it pushes me away and makes it harder to be warm.” Similarly, when a client repeatedly failed to fill out diary cards but nevertheless pleaded with her therapist to help her, the therapist responded, “You keep asking me for help, but you won’t do the things I believe are necessary to help you. I feel frustrated because I want to help you, but I feel that you won’t let me.” Such statements serve both to validate and to challenge. They constitute both an instance of contingency management because therapist statements about the client are typically experienced as either reinforcing or punishing, and an instance of contingency clarification because the client’s attention is directed to the consequences of his/her interpersonal behavior.  Self-disclosure of professional or personal information is used to validate and model coping and normative responses. The key point here is that a therapist should only use personal examples in which he/she has successfully mastered the problem at hand. This may seem like an obvious point, but it is very easy to fall into this pit by trying actively to validate the client’s dilemma. For example, when working with a client whose goal is to wake up early each morning to exercise, but who is having difficulty getting out of bed, the therapist may attempt to validate the behavior as normative by stating, “Yeah, I struggle with getting up every morning, too, even though I tell myself every night that I am going to exercise in the morning.” However, this self-disclosure is only useful to the client if the therapist continues by stating what skillful behavior he/she uses to get up each morning and exercise successfully.  Irreverent Communication  Irreverent communication is used to push the client “off balance,” get the client’s attention, present an alternative viewpoint, or shift affective response. It is a   Borderline Personality Disorder  highly useful strategy when the client is immovable, or when therapist and client are “stuck.” It has an “offbeat” flavor and uses logic to weave a web the client cannot escape. Although it is responsive to the client, irreverent communication is almost never the response the client expects. For irreverence to be effective it must be both genuine (vs. sarcastic or judgmental) and come from a place of compassion and warmth toward the client. Otherwise, the client may become even more rigid. When using irreverence the therapist highlights some unintended aspect of the client’s communication or “reframes” it in an unorthodox manner. For example, if the client says, “I am going to kill myself,” the therapist might say, “I thought you agreed not to drop out of therapy.” Irreverent communication has a matter-of-fact, almost deadpan style that is in sharp contrast to the warm responsiveness of reciprocal communication. Humor, a certain naiveté, and guilelessness are also characteristic of the style. A confrontational tone is also irreverent, communicating “bullshit” to responses other than the targeted adaptive response. For example, the therapist might say, “Are you out of your mind?” or “You weren’t for a minute actually believing I would think that was a good idea, were you?” The irreverent therapist also calls the client’s bluff. For the client who says, “I’m quitting therapy,” the therapist might respond, “Would you like a referral?” The trick here is to time the bluff carefully, with the simultaneous provision of a safety net; it is important to leave the client a way out.  case stuDy  Background  At the initial meeting, “Cindy,” a 30-year-old, white, married woman with no children, was living in a middle-class suburban area with her husband. She had a college education and had successfully completed almost 2 years of medical school. Cindy was referred to one of us (M. M. L.) by her psychiatrist of 1½ years, who was no longer willing to provide more than pharmacotherapy following a recent hospitalization for a near-lethal suicide attempt. In the 2 years prior to referral, Cindy had been hospitalized at least 10 times (once for 6 months) for psychiatric treatment of suicidal ideation; had engaged in numerous instances of both NSSI behavior and suicide attempts, including at least 10 instances of drinking Clorox bleach, multiple deep cuts, and burns; and had had three medically severe or near   ly lethal suicide attempts, including cutting an artery in her neck. At the time of referral, Cindy met DSM-III-R (American Psychiatric Association, 1987) and Gunderson’s (1984) criteria for BPD. She was also taking a variety of psychotropic drugs. Until age 27, Cindy was able to function well in work and school settings, and the marriage was reasonably satisfactory to both partners, although her husband complained about Cindy’s excessive anger. When Cindy was in the second year of medical school, a classmate she knew only slightly committed suicide. Cindy stated that when she heard about the suicide, she immediately decided to kill herself also, but had very little insight into what about the situation actually elicited her inclination to kill herself. Within weeks she left medical school and became severely depressed and actively suicidal. Although Cindy self-presented as a person with few psychological problems before the classmate’s suicide, further questioning revealed a history of severe anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa, and alcohol and prescription medication abuse, originating at the age of 14 years. Indeed, she had met her husband at an Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) meeting while attending college. Nevertheless, until the student’s suicide in medical school, Cindy had been successful at maintaining an overall appearance of relative competence.  Treatment  At the initial meeting, Cindy was accompanied by her husband, who stated that he and Cindy’s family considered his wife too lethally suicidal to be out of a hospital setting. Consequently, he and Cindy’s family were seriously contemplating the viability of finding long-term outpatient care. However, Cindy stated a strong preference for inpatient treatment, although no therapist in the local area other than M. M. L. appeared willing to take her into outpatient treatment. The therapist agreed to accept Cindy into therapy, contingent on the client’s stated commitment to work toward behavioral change and to stay in treatment for at least 1 year. (It was later pointed out repeatedly that this also meant the client had agreed not to commit suicide.) Thus, the therapist began the crucial first step of establishing a strong therapeutic alliance by agreeing to accept the client despite the fact that no one else was willing to do so. She pointed out, however, that acceptance into therapy did not come without a cost. In this manner, the therapist communicated acceptance of the client exactly as she was in the current moment, while concomitantly mak    CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  ing clear that Cindy’s commitment toward change was the foundation of the therapeutic alliance. At the fourth therapy session, Cindy reported that she felt she could no longer keep herself alive. When reminded of her previous commitment to stay alive for 1 year of therapy, Cindy replied that things had changed and she could not help herself. Subsequent to this session, almost every individual session for the next 6 months revolved around the topic of whether (and how) to stay alive versus committing suicide. Cindy began coming to sessions wearing mirrored sunglasses and would slump in her chair or ask to sit on the floor. Questions from the therapist were often met with a minimal comment or long silences. In response to the therapist’s attempts to discuss prior self-injurious behavior, Cindy would become angry and withdraw (slowing down the pace of therapy considerably). The client also presented with marked dissociative reactions, which would often occur during therapy sessions. During these reactions, Cindy would appear unable to concentrate or hear much of what was being said. When queried by the therapist, Cindy would describe her experience as feeling “spacey” and distant. The client stated that she felt she could no longer engage in many activities, such as driving, working, or attending school. Overall, the client viewed herself as incompetent in all areas.  The use of diary cards, which Cindy filled out weekly (or at the beginning of the session, if she forgot), assisted the therapist in carefully monitoring Cindy’s daily experiences of suicidal ideation, misery, and urges to harm herself, as well as actual suicide attempts and NSSI behaviors. Behavioral analyses that attempted to identify the sequence of events leading up to and following Cindy’s suicidal behavior soon became an important focus of therapy. At every point the therapist conceptualized self-injurious behavior as to be expected, given the strength of the urge (but considered it ultimately beatable), and pointed out repeatedly that if the client committed suicide, therapy would be over, so they had better work really hard now, while Cindy was alive.  Over the course of several months, the behavioral analyses began to identify a frequently recurring behavioral pattern that preceded suicidal behaviors. For Cindy, the chain of events would often begin with an interpersonal encounter (almost always with her husband), which culminated in her feeling threatened, criticized, or unloved. These feelings were often followed by urges either to self-mutilate or to kill herself, depending somewhat on the covarying levels of hope   lessness, anger, and sadness. Decisions to self-mutilate and/or to attempt suicide were often accompanied by the thought, “I’ll show you.” At other times, hopelessness and a desire to end the pain permanently seemed predominant. Both are examples of emotional vulnerability. Following the conscious decision to self-mutilate or to attempt suicide, Cindy would then immediately dissociate and at some later point cut or burn herself, usually while in a state of “automatic pilot.” Consequently, Cindy often had difficulty remembering specifics of the actual acts. At one point, Cindy burned her leg so badly (and then injected it with dirt to convince the doctor that he should give her more attention) that reconstructive surgery was required. Behavioral analyses also revealed that dissociation during sessions usually occurred following Cindy’s perception of the therapist’s disapproval or invalidation, especially when the therapist appeared to suggest that change was possible. The therapist targeted in-session dissociation by immediately addressing it as it occurred.  By several months into therapy, an apparently longstanding pattern of suicidal behaviors leading to inpatient admission was apparent. Cindy would report intense suicidal ideation, express doubts that she could resist the urge to kill herself, and request admission to her preferred hospital; or, without warning, she would cut or burn herself severely and require hospitalization for medical treatment. Attempts to induce Cindy to stay out of the hospital or to leave the hospital before she was ready typically resulted in an escalation of suicidality, followed by her pharmacotherapist’s (a psychiatrist) insistence on her admission or the hospital’s agreement to extend her stay. Observation of this behavioral pattern led the therapist to hypothesize that the hospitalization itself was reinforcing suicidal behavior; consequently, she attempted to change the contingencies for suicidal behaviors. Using didactic and contingency clarification strategies, the therapist attempted to help Cindy understand how hospitalization might be strengthening the very behavior they were working to eliminate. This issue became a focal point of disagreement within the therapy, with Cindy viewing the therapist’s position as unsympathetic and lacking understanding of her phenomenal experience. In Cindy’s opinion, the intensity of her emotional pain rendered the probability of suicide so high that hospitalization was necessary to guarantee her safety. She would buttress her position by citing frequently her difficulties with dissociative reactions, which she reported as extremely aversive and which, in her opinion, made her   Borderline Personality Disorder  unable to function much of the time. From the therapist’s perspective, the deleterious long-term risk of suicide created by repeated hospitalization in response to suicidal behavior was greater than the short-term risk of suicide if hospitalization stays were reduced. These differences in opinion led to frequent disagreements within sessions. It gradually became clear that Cindy viewed any explanations of her behavior as influenced by reinforcement as a direct attack; she implied that if hospitalization was reinforcing her suicidal behavior, then the therapist must believe that the purpose of her suicidality was for admission into the hospital. This was obviously not the case (at least some of the time), but all attempts to explain reinforcement theory in any other terms failed. The therapist compensated somewhat for insisting on the possibility that she (the therapist) was correct by doing three things. First, she repeatedly validated the client’s experience of almost unendurable pain. Second, she made certain to address the client’s dissociative behavior repeatedly, explaining it as an automatic reaction to intensely painful affect (or the threat of it). Third, she frequently addressed the quality of the relationship between Cindy and herself to strengthen the relationship and maintain Cindy in therapy, even though to do so was a source of even more emotional pain. By the fifth month, the therapist became concerned that the current treatment regimen was going to have the unintended consequence of killing the client (via suicide). At this point, the therapist’s limits for effective treatment were crossed; therefore, she decided to employ the consultation-to-the-client strategy to address Cindy’s hospitalizations. The firstchoice strategy would have been to get Cindy to negotiate a new treatment plan with her preferred hospital and admitting psychiatrist. Cindy refused to go along, however, because she disagreed with the wisdom of changing her current unlimited access to the inpatient unit. The therapist was able to get Cindy to agree to a consultation meeting with all of her treatment providers, and, with some tenacity, the therapist actually got Cindy to make all the calls to set up the meeting (including inviting her insurance monitor, who was coordinating payment for treatment).  At the case conference, the therapist presented her hypothesis that contingent hospitalization was reinforcing Cindy’s suicidal behavior. She also assisted Cindy in making the case that she (the therapist) was wrong. Using reciprocal communication and contingency management, the therapist stated that she simply could not conduct a therapy she thought might kill the client  (and she had to go along with what she thought was best even if she were wrong—“to do otherwise would be unethical”), and she requested that a new system of contingencies be agreed upon to disrupt the functional relationship between Cindy’s suicidal behavior and hospitalization. Therefore, a plan was developed wherein the client was not required to be suicidal to gain hospital admittance. Under this new set of contingencies, Cindy could elect, at will, to enter the hospital for a stay of up to 3 days, at the end of which time she would always be discharged. If she convinced people that she was too suicidal for discharge, she would be transferred to her least-preferred hospital for safety. Suicidal and NSSI behaviors would no longer be grounds for admission except to a medical unit, when required. Although there was some disagreement as to the functional relationship between suicidal behavior and hospitalization, this system was agreed upon. Following this meeting, Cindy’s husband announced that he was no longer able to live with or tolerate his wife’s suicidal behavior, and that the constant threat of finding her dead had led to his decision to file for divorce. The focus of therapy then shifted to helping Cindy grieve over this event and find a suitable living arrangement. Cindy alternated between fury that her husband would desert her in her hour of need (or “illness,” as she put it) and despair that she could ever cope alone. She decided that “getting her feelings out” was the only useful therapy. This led to many tearful sessions, with the therapist simultaneously validating the pain; focusing on Cindy’s experiencing the affect in the moment, without escalating or blocking it; and cheerleading Cindy’s ability to manage without going back into the hospital. Due to Cindy’s high level of dysfunctionality, she and her therapist decided that she would enter a residential treatment facility for a 3-month period. The facility had a coping skills orientation and provided group but not individual therapy. Cindy saw her therapist once a week and talked to her several times a week during this period. With some coaching, Cindy looked for and found a roommate to live with and returned to her own home at the end of 3 months (the ninth month of therapy). Over the course of treatment, the therapist used a number of strategies to treat Cindy’s suicidal, NSSI, and therapy-interfering behaviors. In-depth behavioral chain and solution analysis helped the therapist (and sometimes the client) gain insight into the factors influencing current suicidal behavior. For Cindy, as for most clients, performing these analyses was quite difficult because the process usually generated intense feelings of shame, guilt, or   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  anger. Thus, behavioral analysis also functioned as an exposure strategy, encouraging the client to observe and experience painful affect. It additionally served as a cognitive strategy in helping to change Cindy’s expectancies concerning the advantages and disadvantages of suicidal behavior, especially as the therapist repeatedly made statements such as “How do you think you would feel if I got angry at you and then threatened suicide if you didn’t change?” Finally, behavioral analysis served as contingency management, in that the client’s ability to pursue topics of interest in therapy sessions was made contingent on the successful completion of chain and solution analysis.  Cindy presented early in therapy with exceedingly strong perceptions as to her needs and desires, and with a concomitant willingness to engage in extremely lethal suicidal behavior. As previously mentioned, several of these acts were serious attempts to end her life, whereas others functioned as attempts to gain attention and care from significant others. This client also presented with an extreme sensitivity to any attempts at obvious change procedures, which she typically interpreted as communicating a message about her incompetence and unworthiness. Although Cindy initially committed herself to attending weekly group skills training for the first year of therapy, her attendance at group meetings was quite erratic, and she generally tended either to miss entire sessions (but never more than three in a row) or to leave during the break. Cindy answered the therapist’s attempts to address this issue by stating that she could not drive at night due to night blindness. Although considered a therapy-interfering behavior and frequently addressed over the course of therapy, missing skills training was not a major focus of treatment due to the continuing presence of higher-priority suicidal behavior. The therapist’s efforts to engage the client in active skills acquisition during individual therapy sessions were also somewhat limited and were always preceded by obtaining Cindy’s verbal commitment to problem solving. The stylistic strategy of irreverent communication was of value to the therapeutic process. The therapist’s irreverence often served to “shake up” the client, resulting in a loosening of dichotomous thinking and maladaptive cognitions. The result of this was Cindy’s increased willingness to explore new and adaptive behavioral solutions. Finally, relationship strategies were heavily employed as tools to strengthen the therapeutic alliance and to keep it noncontingent on suicidal and/ or dissociative behaviors. Included here were betweensession therapist-initiated telephone calls to check in,  the therapist routinely giving out phone numbers when she was traveling, and sending the client postcards when she was out of town.  By the 12th month of therapy, Cindy’s suicidal and self-injurious behavior, as well as urges to engage in such behavior, receded. In addition, her hospital stays were reduced markedly, with none occurring after the eighth month. While living at home with a roommate, Cindy was readmitted to medical school. Part of the reason for returning to school was to turn her life around, so that she could try to regain her husband’s love and attention, or at least his friendship. As the therapy continued to focus on changing the contingencies of suicidal behavior, reducing both emotional pain and inhibition, and tolerating distress, a further focus on maintaining sobriety and reasonable food intake was added. During the first months of living in her home without her husband, Cindy had several alcoholic binges, and her food intake dropped precipitously. These behaviors became immediate targets. The therapist’s strong attention to these behaviors also communicated to Cindy that the therapist would take her problems seriously even if she were not suicidal. Therapy focused as well on expanding her social network. As with suicidal behaviors, attention to these targets served as a pathway to treating associated problems. As crisis situations decreased in frequency, greater attention was paid to analyzing family patterns, including experiences of neglect and invalidation, that might have led to Cindy’s problems in later life. Cindy did not report a history of sexual or physical abuse. Thus, the explicit goal of Stage 2 was to understand Cindy’s history and its relationship to her current problems.  In other cases, especially when there has been sexual and/or physical abuse in childhood, movement to Stage 2 before Stage 1 targets have been mastered is likely to result in retrogression to previously problematic behaviors. For example, Terry, another client treated by the same therapist (M. M. L.), had been quite seriously abused physically by her mother throughout childhood and sexually abused by her father, beginning at age 5. The sexual advances were nonviolent at first but became physically abusive at approximately age 12. Prior to this therapy, Terry had not disclosed the incidents of abuse to anyone.  After successful negotiation of Stage 1 targets, the therapist proceeded to expose Terry to trauma-related cues by simply having her begin to disclose details of the abuse. These exposure sessions were intertwined with work on current problems in Terry’s life. Follow    Borderline Personality Disorder  ing one exposure session focused on the sexual abuse, Terry reverted to some of her previously problematic behaviors, evidenced by withdrawal and silence in sessions, suicidal ideation, and medication noncompliance. The appearance of such behavior marked the necessity of stopping Stage 2 discussions of previous sexual abuse to address Stage 1 targets recursively. Three sessions were devoted to a behavioral analysis of Terry’s current suicidal, therapy-interfering, and quality-of-life–interfering behaviors; these were eventually linked both to fears about how the therapist would view her childhood emotional responses to her father, and to holiday visits with her father that precipitated conflicts over how Terry should be feeling about him in the present. This two-steps-forward, one-step-back approach is common to therapy for clients with BPD, and in particular may mark the transition between Stage 1 and Stage 2.  As previously mentioned, Stage 3 targets the client’s self-respect, regardless of the opinions of others. Betty, who was also in treatment with the same therapist (M.  M. L.), had successfully negotiated Stages 1 and 2, and had become a highly competent nurse with training and supervisory responsibilities. Therapy with Betty was then focused on maintaining her self-esteem in the face of very powerful significant others (e.g., her supervisor) who constantly invalidated her. Components of the treatment included the therapist’s noting and highlighting Betty’s tendency to modify her self-opinion in accordance with that of others, persistent attempts to extract from Betty self-validation and self-soothing, and imagery exercises wherein Betty imagined and verbalized herself standing up to powerful others. Much of the therapy focus was on Betty’s interpersonal behavior within the therapy session, with attention to relating this behavior to her interactions with other important people. Thus, treatment at that point was very similar to the functional-analytic psychotherapy regimen developed by Kohlenberg and Tsai (1991). Overall, this third stage of therapy involved the movement to a more egalitarian relationship between the client and the therapist, in which emphasis was placed on the client’s standing up for her own opinions and defending her own actions. This approach required that the therapist both reinforce the client’s assertions, and step back and refrain from validating and nurturing the client in the manner characteristic of Stages 1 and 2. In addition, therapy sessions were reduced to every other week, and issues surrounding eventual termination were periodically discussed. Stage 4 of DBT targets the sense of incompleteness that can preclude the experience of joy and freedom. Sally started Stage 1 treatment with the same therapist  (M. M. L.) 15 years ago. Stage 1 lasted 2 years; this was followed by a break of 1 year, after which treatment resumed for several years of bimonthly sessions leading to monthly sessions, and currently comprising four or five sessions a year. Sally has been married for 30 years to an irregularly employed husband who, though devoted and loyal, is quite invalidating of her. Although apparently brilliant, he is usually dismissed from jobs for his interpersonal insensitivity. She has been employed full-time at the same place for years, working with children. The son Sally felt closest to died in a plane accident 2 years ago; her mother died last year, and her father is very ill. Despite having a stable marriage, working in a stable and quite fulfilling job, having raised two well-adjusted sons, and still being athletic, life feels meaningless to Sally. In the past she was very active in spiritual activities; following meditation retreats or extended periods of daily meditation, she would report contentment and some sense of joy. Since her son died, Sally has let go of most of her spiritual activities. Following a 2-year focus on grieving, she is now ready for Stage 4. Treatment planning is focused on actively practicing and keeping track of progress in radical acceptance (or “letting go of ego,” in Zen terminology), either alone or with group support. traNscriPts  The following (composite) transcripts represent actual examples of the process of therapy occurring over several sessions with different clients. These particular dialogues between therapist and client have been chosen to provide the reader with comprehensive examples of the application of a wide range of DBT treatment strategies. The session targets in the following transcript were orienting and commitment. The strategies used were validation, problem solving (insight, orienting, and commitment), dialectical (devil’s advocate), and integrated (relationship enhancement).  Obtaining the client’s commitment is a crucial first step in beginning therapy with clients who have BPD. As illustrated in the following transcript, the dialectical technique of devil’s advocate can be highly effective when used as a commitment strategy. In this first therapy session, the therapist’s ultimate goal was to obtain the client’s commitment to therapy, as well as a com    CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  mitment to eliminate suicidal behavior. She began by orienting the client to the purpose of this initial session.  tHeraPist: So are you a little nervous about me? client: Yeah, I guess I am. tHeraPist: Well, that’s understandable. For the next  50 minutes or so, we have this opportunity to get to know each other and see if we want to work together. So what I’d like to do is talk a little bit about the program and how you got here. So tell me, what do you want out of therapy with me, and what are you doing here?  client: I want to get better.  tHeraPist: Well, what’s wrong with you?  client: I’m a mess. (Laughs.)  tHeraPist: How so?  client: Umm, I don’t know. I just can’t even cope with  everyday life right now. And I can’t even .. . I’m just a mess. I don’t know how to deal with anything.  tHeraPist: So what does that mean exactly?  client: Umm, well, everything I try these days just seems overwhelming. I couldn’t keep up on my job, and now I’m on medical leave. Plus everyone’s sick of me being in the hospital so much. And I think my psychiatrist wants to send me away because of all my self-harming.  tHeraPist: How often do you self-harm?  client: Maybe once or twice a month. I use my lighter  or cigarettes, sometimes a razor blade.  tHeraPist: Do you have scars all over?  client: (Nods yes.)  tHeraPist: Your psychiatrist tells me you’ve also  drunk Clorox. Why didn’t you mention that?  client: I guess it didn’t enter my mind.  tHeraPist: Do things just not enter your mind very  often?  client: I don’t really know. Maybe.  tHeraPist: So maybe with you I’m going to have to be  a very good guesser.  client: Hmm.  tHeraPist: Unfortunately, though, I’m not the greatest guesser. So we’ll have to teach you how to have things come to mind. So what is it exactly that you want out of therapy with me? To quit harming yourself, quit trying to kill yourself, or both?  client: Both. I’m sick of it.  tHeraPist: And is there anything else you want help with?  client: Um, well, I don’t know how to handle money, and I don’t know how to handle relationships. I don’t have friends; they don’t connect with me very often. I’m a former alcoholic and a recovering anorexic/bulimic. I still have a tendency toward that.  tHeraPist: Do you think maybe some of what is going on with you is that you’ve replaced your alcoholic and anorexic behaviors with self-harm behaviors?  client: I don’t know. I haven’t thought about it that way. I just feel that I don’t know how to handle myself, and—you know, and I guess work through stuff, and that is obviously getting to me because if it wasn’t, I wouldn’t be trying to kill myself.  tHeraPist: So from your perspective, one problem is that you don’t know how to do things. A lot of things.  client: Yeah, and a lot of it is, I do know how, but for some reason I don’t do it anyway.  tHeraPist: Um hmm.  client: You know, I mean I know I need to save money, and I know that I need to budget myself, and I do every single month, but every single month I get in debt. But, um, you know, it’s really hard for me. You know, it’s like sometimes I know it, or I know I shouldn’t eat something and I do it anyway.  tHeraPist: So it sounds like part of the problem is you actually know how to do things; you just don’t know how to get yourself to do the things you know how to do.  client: Exactly.  tHeraPist: Does it seem like maybe your emotions are in control—that you are a person who does things when you’re in the mood?  client: Yes. Everything’s done by the mood.  tHeraPist: So you’re a moody person.  client: Yes. I won’t clean the house for 2 months, and then I’ll get in the mood to clean. Then I’ll clean it immaculately and keep it that way for 3 weeks—I mean, just immaculate—and then when I’m in the mood I go back to being a mess again.  tHeraPist: So one of the tasks for you and me would be to figure out a way to get your behavior and what you do less hooked up with how you feel?  client: Right.   Borderline Personality Disorder  The therapist used insight to highlight for the client the observed interrelationship between the client’s emotions and her behavior. She then began the process of shaping a commitment through the dialectical strategy of devil’s advocate.  tHeraPist: That, of course, is going to be hell to do, don’t you think? Why would you want to do that? It sounds so painful.  client: Well, I want to do it because it’s so inconsistent. It’s worse, you know, because when I’m .. . I know that, like with budgeting money or whatever, I know I need to do it, and then when I don’t do it, it makes me even more upset.  tHeraPist: Why would you ever want to do something you’re not in the mood for?  client: Because I’ve got to. Because I can’t survive that way if I don’t.  tHeraPist: Sounds like a pretty easy life to me.  client: Yeah, but I can’t afford to live if I just spend my money on fun and stupid, frivolous things that  I ... tHeraPist: Well, I guess maybe you should have some limits and not be too off the wall, but in general, I mean, why clean the house if you’re not in the mood?  client: Because it pisses me off when it’s a mess. And I can’t find things, like I’ve lost bills before and then I end up not paying them. And now I’ve got collection agencies on my back. I can’t deal with all this, and I end up self-harming and going into the hospital. And then I just want to end it all. But it still doesn’t seem to matter because if I’m not in the mood to clean it, I won’t.  tHeraPist: So the fact that it makes horrible things happen in your life so far hasn’t been enough of a motivation to get you to do things against your mood, right?  client: Well, obviously not (laughs) because it’s not happening.  tHeraPist: Doesn’t that tell you, though? This is going to be a big problem, don’t you think? This isn’t going to be something simple. It’s not like you’re going to walk in here and I’m going to say, “OK, magic wand,” and then all of a sudden you’re going to want to do things that you’re not in the mood for.  client: Yeah.  tHeraPist: Yeah, so it seems to me that if you’re not  in the mood for things, if you’re kind of mooddependent, that’s a very tough thing to crack. As a matter of fact, I think it’s one of the hardest problems there is to deal with.  client: Yeah, great.  tHeraPist: I think we could deal with it, but I think it’s going to be hell. The real question is whether you’re willing to go through hell to get where you want to get or not. Now I figure that’s the question.  client: Well, if it’s going to make me happier, yeah.  tHeraPist: Are you sure?  client: Yeah, I’ve been going through this since I was 11 years old. I’m sick of this shit. I mean, excuse my language, but I really am, and I’m backed up against the wall. Either I need to do this or I need to die. Those are my two choices.  tHeraPist: Well, why not die?  client: Well, if it comes down to it, I will.  tHeraPist: Um hmm, but why not now?  client: Because, this is my last hope. Because if I’ve got one last hope left, why not take it?  tHeraPist: So, in other words, all things being equal, you’d rather live than die, if you can pull this off.  client: If I can pull it off, yeah.  tHeraPist: OK, that’s good; that’s going to be your strength. We’re going to play to that. You’re going to have to remember that when it gets tough. But now I want to tell you about this program and how I feel about you harming yourself, and then we’ll see if you still want to do this.  As illustrated by the foregoing segment, the therapist’s relentless use of the devil’s advocate strategy successfully “got a foot in the door” and achieved an initial client commitment. The therapist then “upped the ante” with a brief explanation of the program and its goals.  tHeraPist: Now the most important thing to understand is that we are not a suicide prevention program; that’s not our job. But we are a life enhancement program. The way we look at it, living a miserable life is no achievement. If we decide to work together, I’m going to help you try to improve your life, so that it’s so good that you don’t want to die or hurt yourself. You should also know that I look at suicidal behavior, including drinking Clorox, as problem-solving behavior. I think of alcoholism the same way. The only   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  difference is that cutting, burning, unfortunately—it works. If it didn’t work, nobody would do it more than once. But it only works in the short term, not the long term. So to quit cutting, trying to hurt yourself, is going to be exactly like quitting alcohol. Do you think this is going to be hard?  client: Stopping drinking wasn’t all that hard.  tHeraPist: Well, in my experience, giving up selfharm behavior is usually very hard. It will require both of us working, but you will have to work harder. And like I told you when we talked briefly, if you commit to this, it’s for 1 year—individual therapy with me once a week, and group skills training once a week. So the question is, are you willing to commit for 1 year?  client: I said I’m sick of this stuff. That’s why I’m here.  tHeraPist: So you’ve agreed to not drop out of therapy for a year, right?  client: Right.  tHeraPist: And do you realize that if you don’t drop out for a year, that really does, if you think about it, rule out suicide for a year?  client: Logically, yeah.  tHeraPist: So we need to be absolutely clear about this because this therapy won’t work if you knock yourself off. The most fundamental mood-related goal we have to work on is that, no matter what your mood is, you won’t kill yourself or try to.  client: All right.  tHeraPist: So that’s what I see as number one priority—not our only one but number one—that we will work on that. And getting you to agree— meaningfully, of course—and actually follow through on staying alive and not harming yourself and not attempting suicide, no matter what your mood is. Now the question is whether you agree to that.  client: Yes, I agree to that.  The therapist, having successfully obtained the client’s commitment to work on suicidal behavior again employed the strategy of devil’s advocate to reinforce the strength of the commitment.  tHeraPist: Why would you agree to that?  client: I don’t know. (Laughs.)  tHeraPist: I mean, wouldn’t you rather be in a therapy where, if you wanted to kill yourself, you could? client: I don’t know. I mean, I never really thought about it that way.  tHeraPist: Hmm.  client: I don’t want to .. . I want to be able to get to the point where I could feel like I’m not being forced into living.  tHeraPist: So are you agreeing with me because you’re feeling forced into agreeing? client: You keep asking me all these questions.  tHeraPist: What do you think?  client: I don’t know what I think right now, honestly.  A necessary and important skill for the DBT therapist is the ability to sense when a client has been pushed to his/her limits, as well as the concomitant skill of being willing and able to step back and at least temporarily refrain from further pressuring the client. In these instances, continued pressure from the therapist is likely to boomerang and have the opposite effect of what the therapist intends. Here the therapist noticed the client’s confusion and sensed that further pushing was likely to result in the client’s reducing the strength of her commitment. Consequently, the therapist stepped back and moved in with validation.  tHeraPist: So you’re feeling pushed up against the wall a little bit, by me? client: No, not really. (Starts to cry.)  tHeraPist: What just happened just now?  client: (pause) I don’t know. I mean, I don’t think I really want to kill myself. I think I just feel like I have to. I don’t think it’s really even a mood thing. I just think it’s when I feel like there’s no other choice. I just say, “Well, you know there’s no other choice, so do it.” You know. And so right now, I don’t see any ray of hope. I’m going to therapy, which I guess is good. I mean, I know it’s good, but I don’t see anything any better than it was the day I tried to kill myself.  tHeraPist: Well, that’s probably true. Maybe it isn’t any better. I mean, trying to kill yourself doesn’t usually solve problems. Although it actually did do one thing for you.  client: It got me in therapy.  tHeraPist: Yeah. So my asking you all these questions   Borderline Personality Disorder  makes you start to cry. You look like you must be feeling pretty bad. client: Just overwhelmed, I guess the word is.  tHeraPist: That’s part of the reason we’re having this conversation, to try to structure our relationship so that it’s very clear for both of us. And that way, at least, we’ll cut down on how much you get overwhelmed by not knowing what’s going on with me. OK?  client: Um hmm.  tHeraPist: And so I just want to be clear on what our number one goal is, and how hard this is because if you want to back out, now’s the time. Because I’m going to take you seriously if you say, “Yes, I want to do it.”  client: I don’t want to back out.  tHeraPist: OK. Good. Now I just want to say that this seems like a good idea right now. You’re in kind of an energized mood today, getting started on a new program. But in 5 hours, it might not seem like such a good idea. It’s kind of like it’s easy to commit to a diet after a big meal, but it’s much harder when you’re hungry. But we’re going to work on how to make it keep sounding like a good idea. It’ll be hell, but I have confidence. I think we can be successful working together.  Note how the therapist ended the session by preparing the client for the difficulties she was likely to experience in keeping her commitment and working in therapy. Cheerleading and relationship enhancement laid the foundation for a strong therapeutic alliance. The following session occurred approximately 4 months into therapy. The session target was suicidal behavior. The therapist used validation, problem solving (contingency clarification, didactic information, behavioral analysis, and solution analysis), stylistic (irreverent communication), dialectical (metaphor, making lemonade out of lemons), and skills training (distress tolerance) strategies.  The therapist reviewed the client’s diary card and noted a recent, intentional self-injury, in which the client opened up a previously self-inflicted wound following her physician’s refusal to provide pain medication. The therapist began by proceeding with a behavioral analysis.  tHeraPist: OK. Now you were in here last week telling me you were never going to hurt yourself again  because this was so ridiculous, you couldn’t stand it, you couldn’t hurt yourself any more. So let’s figure out how that broke down on Sunday, so we can learn something from it. OK. So when did you start having urges to hurt yourself?  client: My foot began to hurt on Wednesday. I started to have a lot of pain.  tHeraPist: It hadn’t hurt before that?  client: No.  tHeraPist: So the nerves were dead before that or something, huh? So you started having a lot of pain. Now when did you start having the pain, and when did the urge to harm yourself come?  client: At the same time.  tHeraPist: They just come at the identical moment?  client: Just about.  The specification of an initial prompting environmental event is always the first step in conducting a behavioral chain analysis. Here the therapist began by directly inquiring when the urges toward suicide and NSSI began. Note also the therapist’s use of irreverent communication early in the session.  tHeraPist: So how is it that feeling pain sets off an urge to self-harm? Do you know how that goes? How you get from one to the other?  client: I don’t know. Maybe it wasn’t until Thursday, but I asked my nurse. I go, “Look, I’m in a lot of pain, you know. I’m throwing up my food because the pain is so bad.” And the nurse tried. She called the doctor and told him I was in a lot of pain, and asked if he’d give me some painkillers. But no! So I kept asking, and the answer kept being no, and I got madder and madder and madder. So I felt like I had to show somebody that it hurt because they didn’t believe me.  tHeraPist: So let’s figure this out. So is it that you’re assuming that if someone believed it hurt as bad as you said it does, they would actually give you the painkillers?  client: Yes.  tHeraPist: OK. That’s where the faulty thinking is. That’s the problem. You see, it’s entirely possible that people know how bad the pain is but still aren’t giving you medication.  client: I believe firmly, and I even wrote it in my   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  journal, that if I’d gotten pain medication when I really needed it, I wouldn’t have even thought of selfharming.   The therapist proceeded by obtaining a description of the events co-occurring with the onset of the problem. It was not completely clear what about not getting pain medication set off self-harm. In the following segment, the therapist used the dialectical strategy of metaphor to analyze what factors might have been important. Notice that the example is presented as an experiment in which different scenarios are given and responses elicited.  tHeraPist: Now let me ask you something—you’ve got to imagine this, OK? Let’s imagine that you and I are on a raft together out in the middle of the ocean. Our boat has sunk and we’re on the raft. And when the boat sank, your leg got cut really badly. And together we’ve wrapped it up as well as we can. But we don’t have any pain medicine. And we’re on this raft together and your leg really hurts, and you ask me for pain medicine, and I say no. Do you think you would then have an urge to hurt yourself and make it worse?  client: No, it would be a different situation.  tHeraPist: OK, but if I did have the pain medication and I said no because we had to save it, what do you think?  client: If that were logical to me, I’d go along with it and wouldn’t want to hurt myself. tHeraPist: What if I said no because I didn’t want you to be a drug addict?  client: I’d want to hurt myself.  tHeraPist: OK. So we’ve got this clear. The pain is not what’s setting off the desire to self-harm. It’s someone not giving you something to help, when you feel they could if they wanted to.  client: Yes.  The therapist used contingency clarification to point out the effects of others’ responses on the client’s own behavior. In the following segment, the therapist again employed contingency clarification in a continued effort to highlight for the client the communication function of NSSI.  tHeraPist: So, in other words, hurting yourself is communication behavior, OK? So what we have to  do is figure out a way for the communication behavior to quit working.  client: Why?  tHeraPist: Because you’re not going to stop doing it until it quits working. It’s like trying to talk to someone; if there’s no one in the room, you eventually quit trying to talk to them. It’s like when a phone goes dead, you quit talking.  client: I tried three nights in a row in a perfectly assertive way and just clearly stated I was in a lot of pain.  tHeraPist: You know, I think I’ll switch chairs with you. You’re not hearing what I’m saying.  client: And they kept saying, “No,” and then some little light came on in my head.  tHeraPist: I’m considering switching chairs with you.  client: And it was like, “Here, now can you tell that it hurts a lot?”  tHeraPist: I’m thinking of switching chairs with you.  client: Why?  tHeraPist: Because if you were sitting over here, I think you would see that no matter how bad the pain is, hurting yourself to get pain medication is not a reasonable response. The hospital staff may not have been reasonable either. It may be that they should have given you pain medicine. But we don’t have to say they were wrong in order to say that hurting yourself was not the appropriate response.  client: No, I don’t think it was the appropriate response.   tHeraPist: Good. So what we’ve got to do is figure out a way to get it so that the response doesn’t come in, even if you don’t get pain medicine. So far, it has worked very effectively as communication. And the only way to stop it is to get it to not work anymore. Of course, it would be good to get other things to work. What you’re arguing is “Well, OK, if I’m not going to get it this way, then I should get it another way.”  client: I tried this time!  tHeraPist: Yes, I know you did, I know you did.  client: A lady down the hallway from me was getting treatment for her diabetes, and it got real bad, and they gave her pain medication.  tHeraPist: Now we’re not on the same wavelength in this conversation.   Borderline Personality Disorder  client: Yes, we are. What wavelength are you on?  tHeraPist: I’m on the wavelength that it may have been reasonable for you to get pain medicine, and I certainly understand your wanting it. But I’m also saying that no matter what’s going on, hurting yourself is something we don’t want to happen. You’re functioning like if I agreed with you that you should get pain medication, I would think this was OK.  client: Hmm?  tHeraPist: You’re talking about whether they should have given you pain medication or not. I’m not talking about that. Even if they should have, we’ve got to figure out how you could have gotten through without hurting yourself.  As illustrated by the foregoing exchange, a client with BPD often wants to remain focused on the crisis at hand. This poses a formidable challenge for the therapist, who must necessarily engage in a back-and-forth dance between validating the client’s pain and pushing for behavioral change. This segment also illustrates how validation does not necessarily imply agreement. Although the therapist validated the client’s perception that the nurse’s refusal to provide pain medication may have been unreasonable, she remained steadfast in maintaining the inappropriateness of the client’s response.   client: I tried some of those distress tolerance things and they didn’t work.  tHeraPist: OK. Don’t worry, we’ll figure out a way. I want to know everything you tried. But first I want to be sure I have the picture clear. Did the urges start building after Wednesday and get worse over time?  client: Yeah. They started growing with the pain.  tHeraPist: With the pain. OK. But also they started growing with their continued refusal to give you pain medicine. So you were thinking that if you hurt yourself, they would somehow give you pain medicine?  client: Yeah. ’Cause if they wouldn’t listen to me, then I could show them.  tHeraPist: OK, so you were thinking, “If they won’t listen to me, I’ll show them.” And when did that idea first hit? Was that on Wednesday?  client: Yeah.  tHeraPist: OK. Well, we’ve got to figure out a way for you to tolerate bad things without harming your   self. So let’s figure out all the things you tried, and then we have to figure out some other things because those didn’t work. So what was the first thing you tried?  At this juncture the behavioral analysis remained incomplete, and it would normally have been premature to move to the stage of solution analysis. However, in the therapist’s judgment, it was more critical at this point to reinforce the client’s attempts at distress tolerance by responding to the client’s communication that she had attempted behavioral skills.  client: I thought that if I just continued to be assertive about it that the appropriate measures would be taken.  tHeraPist: OK, but that didn’t work. So why didn’t you harm yourself right then? client: I didn’t want to.  tHeraPist: Why didn’t you want to?  client: I didn’t want to make it worse.  tHeraPist: So you were thinking about pros and cons—that if I make it worse, I’ll feel worse?  client: Yeah.  One aspect of DBT skills training stresses the usefulness of evaluating the pros and cons of tolerating distress as a crisis survival strategy. Here the therapist employed the dialectical strategy of turning lemons into lemonade by highlighting for the client how she did, in fact, use behavioral skills. Note in the following response how the therapist immediately reinforced the client’s efforts with praise.  tHeraPist: That’s good thinking. That’s when you’re thinking about the advantages and disadvantages of doing it. OK, so at that point the advantages of making it worse were outweighed by the disadvantages. OK. So you keep up the good fight here. Now what else did you try?  client: I tried talking about it with other clients.  tHeraPist: And what did they have to say?  client: They said I should get pain medication.  tHeraPist: Right. But did they say you should cut yourself or hurt yourself if you didn’t get it?  client: No. And I tried to get my mind off my pain by playing music and using mindfulness. I tried to read and do crossword puzzles.   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  tHeraPist: Um hmm. Did you ever try radical acceptance?   client: What’s that?  tHeraPist: It’s where you sort of let go and accept the fact that you’re not going to get the pain medication. And you just give yourself up to that situation. You just accept that it ain’t going to happen, that you’re going to have to cope in some other way.  client: Which I did yesterday. I needed a little Ativan to get me there, but I got there.  tHeraPist: Yesterday?  client: Yeah. I took a nap. When I woke up I basically said, “Hey, they’re not going to change, so you’ve just got to deal with this the best that you can.”  tHeraPist: And did that acceptance help some?  client: I’m still quite angry about what I believe is discrimination against borderline personalities. I’m still very angry about that.  tHeraPist: OK. That’s fine. Did it help, though, to ac   cept?  client: Um hmm.  tHeraPist: That’s good. That’s great. That’s a great skill, a great thing to practice. When push comes to shove, when you’re really at the limit, when it’s the worst it can be, radical acceptance is the skill to practice.  client: That’s AA.  During a solution analysis, it is often necessary that the therapist facilitate the process by helping the client “brainstorm,” or by making direct suggestions for handling future crises. Here the therapist suggested a solution that is also taught in the DBT skills training module on distress tolerance. The notion of radical acceptance stresses the idea that acceptance of one’s pain is a necessary prerequisite for ending emotional suffering.   tHeraPist: OK. Now let’s go back to how you gave in to the urge. Because you really managed to battle all the way till then, right? OK. Usually, with you, we can assume that something else happened. So let’s figure out Sunday and see if there wasn’t an interpersonal situation that day that made you feel criticized, unloved, or unacceptable.  client: Well, on Saturday I was so pissed off and I  went to an AA meeting. And it got on my brain how alcohol would steal away my pain. I went looking all around the neighborhood for an open store. I was going to go get drunk. That’s how much my pain was influencing me. But I couldn’t find a store that was open, so I went back to the hospital.  tHeraPist: So you got the idea of getting alcohol to cure it, and you couldn’t find any, so you went back to the hospital. You were in a lot of pain, and then what happened?  client: I told the nurse, “I’ve been sober almost 10 years and this is the first urge I’ve had to drink; that’s how bad my pain is.” And that wasn’t listened to.  tHeraPist: So you figured that should have done it?  client: Yeah.  tHeraPist: Yeah. ’Cause that’s a high-level communication, that’s like a suicide threat. Very good, though. I want you to know, that’s better than a suicide threat because that means you had reduced the severity of your threats.  The response above was very irreverent, in that most clients would not expect their therapists to view making a threat as a sign of therapeutic progress. The therapeutic utility of irreverence often lies in its “shock” value, which may temporarily loosen a client’s maladaptive beliefs and assumptions, and open the client up to the possibility of other response solutions.  client: And I just told her how I was feeling about it, and I thought that would do it. And the doctor still wouldn’t budge.  tHeraPist: So what did she do? Did she say she would call?  client: She called.  tHeraPist: OK. And then what happened?  client: She came back. She was really sweet, and she just said, “I’m really sorry, but the doctor said no.”  tHeraPist: Then did you feel anger?  client: I don’t know if I was really angry, but I was hurt.  tHeraPist: Oh, really? Oh, that’s pretty interesting. OK. So you were hurt .. .  client: Because I ended up hugging my teddy bear and just crying for a while.   Borderline Personality Disorder  tHeraPist: Before or after you decided to hurt yourself?   client: Before.  tHeraPist: OK. So you didn’t decide right away to hurt yourself. You were thinking about it. But when did you decide to do it?  client: Later on Saturday.  tHeraPist: When?  client: After I got sick of crying.  tHeraPist: So you laid in bed and cried, feeling uncared about and hurt, abandoned probably, and unlovable, like you weren’t worth helping?  client: Yes.  tHeraPist: That’s a really adaptive response. That’s what I’m going to try to teach you. Except that you’ve already done it without my teaching it to you. So how did you get from crying, feeling unloved and not cared about, and you cry and sob—how did you get from there to deciding to hurt yourself, instead of like going to sleep?  client: Because then I got angry. And I said, “Fuck this shit, I’ll show him.”  tHeraPist: Now did you quit crying before you got angry, or did getting angry make you stop crying? client: I think getting angry made me stop crying.  tHeraPist: So you kind of got more energized. So you must have been ruminating while you were lying there, thinking. What were you thinking about?  client: For a long time I was just wanting somebody to come care about me.  tHeraPist: Um hmm. Perfectly reasonable feelings. Makes complete sense. Now maybe there you could have done something different. What would have happened if you had asked the nurse to come in and talk to you, hold your hand?  An overall goal of behavioral analysis is the construction of a general road map of how the client arrives at dysfunctional responses, with notation of possible alternative pathways. Here the therapist was searching for junctures in the map where possible alternative responses were available to the client.  client: They don’t have time to do that.  tHeraPist: They don’t? Do you think that would have helped?  client: I don’t know. She couldn’t help me.  tHeraPist: She could have made you feel cared about. That would have been a caring thing to do.  client: Yeah, but I don’t think it would have helped.  tHeraPist: What would have helped?  client: Getting pain medication.  tHeraPist: I thought you’d say that. You have a onetrack mind. Now listen, we’ve got to figure out something else to help you because it can’t be that nothing else can help. That can’t be the way the world works for you. There’s got to be more than one way to get everywhere because we all run into boulders on the path. Life is like walking on a path, you know, and we all run into boulders. It’s got to be that there are other paths to places. And for you, it really isn’t the pain in your ankle that’s the problem; it’s the feeling of not being cared about. And probably a feeling that has something to do with anger, or a feeling that other people don’t respect you—a feeling of being invalidated.  client: Yes.  tHeraPist: So I think it’s not actually the pain in your ankle that’s the problem. Because if you were out on that raft with me, you would have been able to handle the pain if I hadn’t had any medicine, right? So it’s really not the pain; it’s the sense of being invalidated and the sense of not being cared about. That’s my guess. Do you think that’s correct?  client: Yes.  tHeraPist: See, the question is, is there any other way for you to feel validated and cared about, other than them giving it to you?  client: No.  tHeraPist: Now is this a definite, like “I’m not going to let there be any other way,” or is it more open, like “I can’t think of another way, but I’m open to the possibility?”  client: I don’t think there’s another way.  tHeraPist: Does that mean you’re not even open to learning another way?  client: Like what?  tHeraPist: I don’t know. We have to figure it out. See, what I think is happening is that when you’re in a lot of pain and you feel either not cared about or not taken seriously, invalidated, that’s what sets you up to hurt yourself, and also to want to die. The problem   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  that we have to solve is how to be in a situation that you feel is unjust without having to harm yourself to solve it. Are you open to that?  client: Yeah.  As illustrated here, behavioral analysis is often an excruciating and laborious process for client and therapist alike. The therapist often feels demoralized and is tempted to abandon the effort, which may be likened to trying to find a pair of footprints hidden beneath layers of fallen leaves; the footprints are there, but it may take much raking and gathering of leaves before they are uncovered. With repeated analyses, however, the client learns that the therapist will not “back down.” Such persistence on the part of the therapist eventually extinguishes a client’s refusal to attempt new and adaptive problem-solving behaviors. As clients increasingly acquire new behavioral skills, more adaptive attempts at problem resolution eventually become discernible.  In the following session (approximately 10 months into therapy), the client arrived wearing mirrored sunglasses (again) and was angry because collection agencies were persistent in pressuring her for payment on delinquent accounts. In addition, her therapist had been out of town for a week. The session targets were emotion regulation and interpersonal effectiveness. Dialectical (metaphor), validation (cheerleading), problem solving (contingency clarification, contingency management), stylistic (reciprocal communication, irreverent communication), and integrated (relationship enhancement) strategies were used. In this first segment, the therapist used cheerleading, contingency clarification, and the contingency management strategy of shaping to get the client to remove her sunglasses and work on expressing her anger.  tHeraPist: It’s not a catastrophe that the collector did this to you, and it’s not a catastrophe to be mad at the collector. It’s made your life a lot harder, but you can handle this. You can cope with this. This is not more than you can cope with. You’re a really strong woman; you’ve got it inside you. But you’ve got to do it. You’ve got to use it. I’m willing to help you, but I can’t do it alone. You have to work with me.  client: How?  tHeraPist: Well, by taking off your sunglasses, for starters.  The therapist began the exchange by attempting to normalize the issue (“It’s not a catastrophe”), validat   ing the client (“It’s made your life a lot harder”), and cheerleading (“You can handle this. You can cope.. ..You’re a really strong woman”). The therapist then moved to contingency clarification by pointing out that provision of the therapist’s assistance was contingent on the client’s willingness to work. She immediately followed this by requesting a response well within the client’s behavioral repertoire.  client: I knew you’d say that.  tHeraPist: And I knew you knew I’d say that.  client: Sunglasses are your biggest bitch, I think.  tHeraPist: Well, how would you like to look at yourself talking to someone else? (long pause) They make it difficult for me. And I figure they make it harder for you. I think you do better when you’re not wearing those sunglasses. It’s like a step; you always do better when you go forward. And when you do, you feel better. I’ve noticed that. (long pause) So that’s what you should do; you should take off your sunglasses, and then we should problem-solve on how to cope when you can’t get angry. There’s nothing freakish about that. Something has happened in your life that has made it so that you’re afraid to be angry, and we just have to deal with that, you and me. It’s just a problem to be solved. It’s not a catastrophe; it’s not the worst thing anyone ever did. It’s just a problem that you have, and that’s what you and I do. We solve problems; we’re a problem-solving team. (pause)  client: (Removes sunglasses.) All right.  tHeraPist: Thank you. That’s a big step, I know, for you.  The therapist’s use of reciprocal communication informed the client of her feelings regarding the sunglasses. Note the matter-of-fact attitude taken by the therapist and her continued attempt to normalize the issue (i.e., “There’s nothing freakish about that .. . it’s not the worst thing anyone ever did”). Also note the framing of the issue as a problem to be solved, as well as the therapist’s use of the relationship strategy to enhance the therapeutic alliance. The therapist also made a point of validating the client by letting her know that she realized this was difficult.  tHeraPist: Now, c’mon, I want you to find it inside yourself. I know you’ve got it; I know you can do it. You can’t give up. You can’t let your feet slip. Keep   Borderline Personality Disorder  going. Just express directly to me how you feel. That you’re angry at yourself, that you’re angry at the collection agency, and that you’re damn angry with me. (long pause)  client: (barely audible) I’m angry at you, at myself, and the collection agency.  The therapist continued to rely on cheerleading and  praise as she continued the shaping process in an at   tempt to get the client to express her anger directly.  tHeraPist: Good, did that kill you? (long pause) That’s great. Is that hard? (long pause) It was, wasn’t it? Now say it with a little vigor. Can’t you say it with a little energy?  client: (Shakes her head no.)  tHeraPist: Yes, you can. I know you’ve got it in you. I have a good feel for what your strengths are. I don’t know how I’ve got this good feel, but I do. And I know you can do it and you need to do it, and you need to say it with some energy. Express how angry you are. You don’t have to yell and scream or throw things. Just say it aloud—“I’m angry!” (long pause) You can scream, of course, if you want; you can say, “I’m angry!”  client: That’s it. That’s all I can do.  tHeraPist: Listen, you have to take the risk. You’re not going to get past this or through this. You have to take the risk. You are like a person mountain climbing and we’ve come to this crevasse and it’s very deep, but we can’t go back because there’s an avalanche, and the only way to go forward is for you to jump over this crevasse. You’ve got to do it. Tell me how mad you are, in a way that I can understand how you really feel.  client: (long pause) I can’t do any of it.  tHeraPist: That is bullshit.  client: You want me to get angry at you, don’t you?  tHeraPist: I don’t care who you get angry at. I think you already are angry. I just want you to express it. I’m not going to ask you to do anything more today, by the way. I figure the only thing today you have to do is say “I’m angry,” in a voice that sounds angry, and I figure you’re capable of that. And I might be angry if you don’t do it. I don’t think I will be, but I might. That’s OK. I can be angry, you can be angry, we can be angry sometimes, and it isn’t going to kill either one of us.  Cheerleading and metaphor were unsuccessful in moving the client to express her anger more forcefully. Consequently, the therapist switched to irreverent communication in an attempt to get the client to “jump track.” Also note how the therapist communicated to the client the potential negative consequences of her continued refusal to express her anger (i.e., “.. . I might be angry .. .”). In this manner, the therapist used the relationship as a contingency in order to promote change in the client.  tHeraPist: OK, so how angry are you? On a scale of 1 to 100, how angry would you say you are? At 100, you’re ready to kill. You’re so enraged, you’d go to war if you could.  client: (barely audible) Maybe 100.  tHeraPist: Really?  client: They know my situation.  tHeraPist: Um hmm.  client: They’re persistent.  tHeraPist: Um hmm. (pause) Who’s the safest to be angry at? Yourself, me, or the collection agency?  client: Collection agency.  tHeraPist: OK, then, tell me how angry you are. You  don’t have to make it sound like 100. Try to make it  sound like 50.  client: They really pissed me off! (said in a loud, angry voice)  tHeraPist: Well, damn right. They piss me off, too.  As illustrated by the foregoing exchange, a primary difficulty in working with clients who have BPD is their not uncommon tendency to refuse to engage in behavioral work. Thus, it is absolutely necessary that the therapist maintain persistence and not give up in the face of a client’s “I can’t” statements. In situations like these, the use of irreverent communication often succeeds in producing a breakthrough and gaining client compliance.  PostveNtioN By liNehaN  After completing the writing of Cindy’s case history for publication in this Handbook, 14 months into therapy, Cindy died of a prescription drug overdose plus alcohol. I (M. M. L.) considered dropping the case history and replacing it with a more successful case. However,   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  in Cindy’s honor, and because I think much can be learned from both failed and successful therapy, I decided to leave the case in. The immediate precipitant for Cindy’s overdose was a call to her estranged husband, during which she discovered that another woman was living with him. As Cindy told me during a phone call the next morning, her unverbalized hope that they might someday get back together, or at least be close friends, had been shattered. She phoned again that evening in tears, stating that she had just drunk half a fifth of liquor. Such drinking incidents had occurred several times before, and the phone call was spent “remoralizing” Cindy, offering hope, problem-solving how she could indeed live without her husband, and using crisis intervention techniques to get her through the evening, until her appointment the following day. Cindy’s roommate was home and agreed to talk with her, watch a TV movie together, and go to bed (plans on which the roommate did follow through). Cindy stated that although she felt suicidal, she would stop drinking and would not do anything self-destructive before her appointment. She was instructed to call me back later that evening if she wanted to talk again. The next day, when Cindy did not arrive for her appointment, I called her home, just as her roommate discovered Cindy dead, still in bed from the night before. At this point, I was faced with a number of tasks. I called to inform other therapists who had been treating the client, and spoke with a legal consultant to review the limits of confidentiality when a client has died. Once the family (Cindy’s parents and estranged husband) were alerted, I called each to offer my condolences. The next day, as the senior therapist and supervisor on the treatment team, I called a meeting of the treatment team to discuss and process the suicide. It was especially important to notify the individual therapists of the remaining members of Cindy’s skills training group. Group members were notified of the suicide by their individual psychotherapists. Within minutes of the beginning of the next group session, however, two members became seriously suicidal, and one of them had to be briefly hospitalized. (By the third week following the suicide, however, both had regained their forward momentum.) A third group member took this occasion to quit DBT and switch to another therapy, saying that this proved the treatment did not work. In the days and weeks following the suicide, I attended the funeral and met with Cindy’s roommate and with her parents.  What can we learn from this suicide? First, it is important to note that even when a treatment protocol is  followed almost to the letter, it may not save a client. Even an effective treatment can fail in the end. In this case, DBT failed. This does not mean that the progress made was unimportant or not real. Had this “slippery spot over the abyss” been negotiated safely, perhaps the client would have been able to develop, finally, a life of quality. Risk is not eliminated, however, just because an individual makes substantial progress. In this case, I did not believe during the last phone call that the client was at higher than ordinary risk for imminent suicide. In contrast to many previous phone calls and therapy sessions in which the client had cried that she might not be able to hold on, during the last call the client made plans for the evening, agreed to stop drinking and not to do anything suicidal or self-destructive, and seemed to me (and to the roommate) to be in better spirits following the phone call. Her roommate was home and available. Thus, I did not take extraordinary measures that evening to prevent suicide. Indeed, the problem behavior focused on during the call was the drinking. I brought up the topic of suicide while conducting a risk assessment.  Second, could I have known? Only (perhaps) if I had paid more attention to the precipitant and less to the affect expressed at the end of the phone call. In reviewing notes about the client, I saw that each previous nonlethal self-injury was a result of intense anger at her husband. Each previous near-lethal attempt was a result of the client’s belief that the relationship with her husband had irrevocably ended. Although the client could tolerate losing her husband, she could not tolerate losing all hope for a reconciliation at some point, even many years hence. Had I linked these two ideas (complete loss of hope and suicide attempt), I might have been able to work out a better plan for a reemergence of the crisis later in the evening. I definitely would have handled the situation differently. “Oh that woman’s obviously a floozy, we will figure out a way to get him back! I’m sure of it,” I would have said. The value of both conducting thorough behavioral assessments and organizing them into a coherent pattern is highlighted in this case. In this sense, I provided DBT almost to the letter but not all the way.  Third, when all is said and done, an individual with BPD must ultimately be able and willing to tolerate the almost unimaginable pain of his/her life until the therapy has a chance to make a permanent difference. Ultimately, the therapist cannot save the client; only the client can do that. Even if mistakes are made, the client must nonetheless persevere. In this case, the DBT   Borderline Personality Disorder  protocol of “no lethal drugs for lethal people” was violated, even though the client had a past history of nearlethal overdoses. Why was the protocol not enforced? There were two primary reasons. First, the client came into therapy with a strong belief that the medication regimen she was on was essential to her survival. Any attempt on my part to manage her medications would have been met by very strong resistance. Although the drugs were dispensed in small doses, the only safe alternative would have been to have the person living with her (her husband at first, then her roommate) manage her medications, which the client also resisted. In addition, some professionals disagree with the “no lethal drugs” protocol of DBT because they believe that psychotropic medications are a treatment of choice for suicidal clients. In the face of professional and client resistance I relented. The second reason was that behavioral analyses indicated that her preferred lethal behavior was cutting; thus, I allowed myself a false sense of safety in thinking that her use of drugs to commit suicide was not likely.  Fourth, a group member’s suicide is extraordinarily stressful for clients with BPD who are in group therapy. Although it is easy to believe that alliances are not strong in a psychoeducational behavioral skills group, this has universally not been our experience. The suicide of one member is a catastrophic event and can lead to contagious suicide and NSSI behavior, and therapy dropouts. Thus, extreme care is needed in the conduct of group meetings for some time following a suicide. Similar care is needed with the treatment team, where the thread of hope that maintains therapists in the face of a daunting task is also strained. It is important that the personal reactions of therapists, as well as a period of mourning and grieving, be shared and accepted. Fears of legal responsibility, never far from the surface, must be confronted directly; legal counsel should be sought as necessary; and, in time, a careful review of the case and the therapy must be conducted, if only to improve treatment in the future.  aCknowledgMents  The writing of this chapter was supported by National Institute of Mental Health Grant No. MH34486 to Marsha  M. Linehan. Parts of this chapter are drawn from Linehan (1993b), Linehan and Koerner (1992), Koerner and Linehan (1992), and Linehan (1997). The quotations from Linehan (1997) in the section on validation are reprinted with the permission of the American Psychological Association. Finally, this chapter is a revision of the same chapter in the previous edition of this book, with contributions made by previous authors Bryan M. Cochran, Constance A. Kehrer, and Liz Dexter Mazza.  referenCes  Adler, G. (1981). The borderline–narcissistic personality disorder continuum. American Journal of Psychiatry, 138, 46–50.  Adler, G. (1993). The psychotherapy of core borderline psychopathology. American Journal of Psychotherapy, 47, 194–206.  Adler, G., & Buie, D. H. (1979). Aloneness and borderline psychopathology: The possible relevance of child development issues. International Journal of Psychoanalytic Psychotherapy, 60, 83–96.  American Psychiatric Association. (1987). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (3rd ed., text rev.).Washington, DC: Author.  American Psychiatric Association. (2000). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (4th ed., text rev.). Washington, DC: Author.  American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.). Arlington, VA: Author.  Aviram, R. B., Brodsky, B. S., & Stanley, B. (2006). Borderline personality disorder, stigma, and treatment implications. Harvard Review of Psychiatry, 14, 249–256.  Barlow, D. H. (1988). Anxiety and its disorders: The nature and treatment of anxiety and panic. New York: Guilford Press.  Barlow, D. H., Allen, L. B., & Choate, M. L. (2004). Toward a unified treatment for emotional disorders. Behavior Therapy, 35, 205–230.  Barnoski, R. (2002). Preliminary findings for the Juvenile Rehabilitation Administration’s Dialectic Behavior Therapy Program (Document No. 02-07-1203). Olympia: Washington State Institute for Public Policy.  Bateman, A., & Fonagy, P. (1999). Effectiveness of partial hospitalization in the treatment of borderline personality disorder: A randomized controlled trial. American Journal of Psychiatry, 156, 1563–1569.  Bateman, A., & Fonagy, P. (2001). Treatment of borderline personality disorder with psychoanalytically oriented partial hospitalization: An 18-month follow-up. American Journal of Psychiatry, 158, 36–42.  Bateman, A. W., & Fonagy, P. (2004). Mentalization-based treatment of BPD. Journal of Personality Disorders, 18, 36–51.  Bateman, A., & Fonagy, P. (2008). Eight-year follow-up of patients treated for borderline personality disorder: Mentalization-based treatment versus treatment as usual. American Journal of Psychiatry, 165(5), 631–638.   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  Bateman, A., & Fonagy, P (2009). Randomized controlled trial of outpatient mentalization-based treatment versus structured clinical management for borderline personality disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 166(12), 1355–1364.  Beck, A. T., Brown, G., Berchick, R. J., Stewart, B. L., & Steer, R. A. (1990). Relationship between hopelessness and ultimate suicide: A replication with psychiatric outpatients. American Journal of Psychiatry, 147, 190–195.  Beck, A. T., & Freeman, A. (1990). Cognitive therapy of personality disorders. New York: Guilford Press.  Bedics, J. D., Atkins, D. C., Comtois, K. A., & Linehan, M.  M. (2012). Treatment differences in the therapeutic relationship and introject during a 2-year randomized controlled trial of dialectical behavior therapy versus nonbehavioral psychotherapy experts for borderline personality disorder. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 80(1), 66–77. Benjamin, L. S. (1996). Interpersonal diagnosis and treatment of personality disorders (2nd ed.). New York: Guilford Press.  Blum, N., Pfohl, B., St. John, D., Monahan, P., & Black, D. W. (2002). STEPPS: A cognitive-behavioral systems-based group treatment for outpatients with borderline personality disorder—a preliminary report. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 43, 301–310.  Blum, N., John, D. S., Pfohl, B., Stuart, S., McCormick, B., Allen, J., et al. (2008). Systems Training for Emotional Predictability and Problem Solving (STEPPS) for outpatients with borderline personality disorder: A randomized controlled trial and 1-year follow-up. American Journal of Psychiatry, 165(4), 468–478.  Bohus, M., Haaf, B., Simms, T., Limberger, M. F., Schmahl, C., Unckel, C., et al. (2004). Effectiveness of inpatient dialectical behavioral therapy for borderline personality disorder: a controlled trial. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 42, 487–499.  Bohus, M., Limberger, M. F., Chapman, A. L., Kuhler, T., Stieglitz, R., & Frank, U. (2007). Psychometric properties of the Borderline Symptom List (BSL). Psychopathology, 40, 126–132.  Bohus, M., Limberger, M. F., Frank, U., Sender, I., Gratwohl, T., & Stieglitz, R. D. (2001). Development of the borderline symptom list. Psychotherapies, Psychosomatik, Medizinische Psychologie, 51, 201–211.  Bohus, M., Dyer, A. S., Priebe, K., Krüger, A., Kleindienst, N., Schmahl, C., et al. (2013). Dialectical behaviour therapy for post-traumatic stress disorder after childhood sexual abuse in patients with and without borderline personality disorder: a randomised controlled trial. Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics, 82(4), 221–233.  Bos, E. H., van Wel, E. B., Appelo, M. T., & Verbraak, M. J. (2010). A randomized controlled trial of a Dutch version of systems training for emotional predictability and prob   lem solving for borderline personality disorder. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disorders, 198(4), 299–304.  Bos, E. H., van Wel, E. B., Appelo, M. T., & Verbraak, M.  J. (2011). Effectiveness of Systems Training for Emotional Predictability and Problem Solving (STEPPS) for borderline personality problems in a “real-world” sample: Moderation by diagnosis or severity? Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics, 80, 173–181. Bradley, R. G., & Follingstad, D. (2003).Group therapy for incarcerated women who experienced interpersonal violence: A pilot study. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 16(4), 337–340.  Bradley, R., Zittel, C. C., & Westen, D. (2005). The borderline personality diagnosis in adolescents: Gender differences and subtypes. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 46, 1006–1019.  Brent, D. A., Johnson, B. A., Perper, J., Connolly, J., Bridge, J., Bartle, S., et al. (1994). Personality disorder, personality traits, impulsive violence, and completed suicide in adolescents. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 33, 1080–1086.  Brown, G. K., Newman, C. F., Charlesworth, S. E., Crits- Christoph, P., & Beck, A. T. (2004). An open clinical trial of cognitive therapy for borderline personality disorder. Journal of Personality Disorders, 18, 257–271.  Buie, D. H., & Adler, G. (1982). Definitive treatment of the borderline personality. International Journal of Psychoanalytic Psychotherapy, 9, 51–87.  Carter, G. L., Willcox, C. H., Lewin, T. J., Conrad, A. M., & Bendit, N. (2010). Hunter DBT project: A randomized controlled trial of dialectical behaviour therapy in women with borderline personality disorder. Australian and New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry, 44, 162–173.  Cavanaugh, M. M., Solomon, P. L., & Gelles, R. J. (2011). The dialectical psychoeducational workshop (DPEW) for males at risk for intimate partner violence: A pilot randomized controlled trial. Journal of Experimental Criminology, 7(3), 275–291.  Chesin, M. S., Jeglic, E. L., & Stanley, B. (2010). Pathways to high-lethality suicide attempts in individuals with borderline personality disorder. Archives of Suicide Research, 14, 342–362.  Cisler, J. M., Olatunji, B. O., Feldner, M. T., & Forsyth, J. P. (2010). Emotion regulation and the anxiety disorders: An integrative review. Journal of Psychopathology and Behavioral Assessment, 32, 68–82.  Clarkin, J. F., Levy, K. N., Lenzenweger, M. F., & Kernberg,  O. F. (2007). Evaluating three treatments for borderline personality disorder: A multiwave study. American Journal of Psychiatry, 164, 922–928. Conklin, C. Z., & Westen, D. (2005). Borderline personality disorder in clinical practice. American Journal of Psychiatry, 162(5), 867–875.  Cottraux, J., Note, I. D., Milliery, M., Genouihlac, V., Yao, S.   Borderline Personality Disorder  N., Note, B., et al. (2009). Cognitive therapy versus Rogerian supportive therapy in borderline personality disorder. Psychotheray and Psychosomatics, 78, 307–316.  Courbasson, C., Nishikawa, Y., & Dixon, L. (2012). Outcome of dialectical behaviour therapy for concurrent eating and substance use disorders. Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy, 19(5), 434–449.  Crowell, S. E., Beauchaine, T. P., & Linehan, M. M. (2009). A biosocial developmental model of borderline personality: Elaborating and extending Linehan’s theory. Psychological Bulletin, 135, 495–510.  Davison, G. C., & Neale, J. M. (1994). Abnormal psychology (6th ed.). New York: Wiley.  Dimeff, L. A., McDavid, J., & Linehan, M. M. (1999). Pharmacotherapy for borderline personality disorder: A review of the literature and recommendations for treatment. Journal of Clinical Psychology in Medical Settings, 6, 113–138.  Doering, S., Horz, .S, Fischer-Kern, M., Schuster, P., Benecke, C., Buchheim, A., et al. (2010). Transference-focused psychotherapy v. treatment by community psychotherapists for borderline personality disorder: Randomised controlled trial. British Journal of Psychiatry, 196, 389–395.  Ellis, A. (1973). Humanistic psychotherapy: The rational– emotive approach. New York: Julian Press.  Etkin, A., & Wager, T. D. (2007). Functional neuroimaging of anxiety: A meta-analysis of emotional processing in PTSD, social anxiety disorder, and specific phobia. American Journal of Psychiatry, 164, 1476–1488.  Evershed, S., Tennant, A., Boomer, D., Rees, A., Barkham, M., & Watson, A. (2003). Practice-based outcomes of dialectical behaviour therapy (DBT) targeting anger and violence, with male forensic patients: A pragmatic and non-contemporaneous comparison. Criminal Behaviour and Mental Health, 13(3), 198–213.  Farrell, J. M., Shaw, I. A., & Webber, M. A. (2009). A schema-focused approach to group psychotherapy for outpatients with borderline personality disorder: A randomized controlled trial. Journal of Behavior Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry, 40, 317–328.  Feigenbaum, J. D., Fonagy, P., Pilling, S., Jones, A., Wildgoose, A., & Bebbington, P. E. (2012). A real-world study of the effectiveness of DBT in the UK National Health Service. British Journal of Clinical Psychology, 51(2), 121–141.  Feldman, G., Harley, R., Kerrigan, M., Jacobo, M., & Fava,  M. (2009). Change in emotional processing during a dialectical behavior therapy-based skills group for major depressive disorder. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 47 (4), 316–321. Foa, E. B., & Kozak, M. J. (1986). Emotional processing of fear: Exposure to corrective information. Psychological Bulletin, 99, 20–35.  Fossati, A., Madeddu, F., & Maffei, C. (1999). Borderline  personality disorder and childhood sexual abuse: A metaanalytic study. Journal of Personality Disorders, 13, 268–280.  Giesen-Bloo, J., Van Dyck, R., Spinhoven, P., van Tilburg, W., Dirksen, C., van Asselt, T., et al. (2006). Outpatient psychotherapy for borderline personality disorder: Randomized trial of schema-focused therapy vs. transferencefocused psychotherapy. Archives of General Psychiatry, 63, 649–658.  Goldberg, C. (1980). The utilization and limitations of paradoxical intervention in group psychotherapy. International Journal of Group Psychotherapy, 30, 287–297.  Gunderson, J. G. (1984). Borderline personality disorder. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press.  Harley, R., Sprich, S., Safren, S., Jacobo, M., & Fava, M. (2008). Adaptation of dialectical behavior therapy skills training group for treatment-resistant depression. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 196(2), 136–143.  Harned, M. S., Chapman, A. L., Dexter-Mazza, E. T., Murray, A., Comtois, K. A., & Linehan, M. M. (2008). Treating co-occurring Axis I disorders in recurrently suicidal women with borderline personality disorder: A 2-year randomized trial of dialectical behavior therapy versus community treatment by experts. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 76(6), 1068–1075.  Harned, M. S., Rizvi, S. L., & Linehan, M. M. (2010). Impact of co-occurring posttraumatic stress disorder on suicidal women with borderline personality disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 167(10), 1210–1217.  Harned, M. S., Korslund, K. E., Foa, E. B., & Linehan, M.  M. (2012). Treating PTSD in suicidal and self-injuring women with borderline personality disorder: Development and preliminary evaluation of a dialectical behavior therapy prolonged exposure protocol. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 50, 381–386. Herman, J. L. (1986). Histories of violence in an outpatient population: An exploratory study. American Journal of Orthopsychiatry, 56, 137–141.  Herman, J. L., Perry, J. C., & van der Kolk, B. A. (1989). Childhood trauma in borderline personality disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 146, 490–495.  Hill, D. M., Craighead, L. W., & Safer, D. L. (2011). Appetitefocused dialectical behavior therapy for the treatment of binge eating with purging: A preliminary trial. International Journal of Eating Disorders, 44(3), 249–261.  Hirvikoski, T., Waaler, E., Alfredsson, J., Pihlgren, C., Holmström, A., Johnson, A., et al. (2011). Reduced ADHD symptoms in adults with ADHD after structured skills training group: Results from a randomized controlled trial. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 49(3), 175–185.  Hollandsworth, J. G. (1990). The physiology of psychological disorders. New York: Plenum Press. Isometsa, E. T., Henriksson, M. M., Aro, H. M., Heikkinen,  M. E., Kuoppasalmi, K. I., & Lonnqvist, J. K. (1994). Sui  CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  cide in major depression. American Journal of Psychiatry, 151, 530–536.  Katz, L. Y., Cox, B. J., Gunasekara, S., & Miller, A. L. (2004) Feasibility of dialectical behavior therapy for suicidal adolescent inpatients. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 43, 276–282.  Kegan, R. (1982). The evolving self: Problem and process in human development. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.  Kellogg, S. H., & Young, J. E. (2006). Schema therapy for borderline personality disorder. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 62, 445–458.  Kernberg, O. F. (1984). Severe personality disorders: Psychotherapeutic strategies. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.  Kernberg, O. F., Selzer, M. A., Koenigsberg, H. W., Carr, A. C., & Appelbaum, A. H. (1989). Psychodynamic psychotherapy of borderline patients. New York: Basic Books.  Keuthen, N. J., Rothbaum, B. O, Fama, J., Altenburger, E., Falkenstein, M. J., Sprich, S. E., et al. (2012). DBT-enhanced cognitive-behavioral treatment for trichotillomania: A randomized controlled trial. Journal of Behavioral Addictions, 1(3), 106–114.  Kleindienst, N., Krumm, B., & Bohus M. (2011). Is transference-focused psychotherapy really efficacious for borderline personality disorder? British Journal of Psychiatry, 98(2), 156–157.  Koerner, K., & Linehan, M. M. (1992). Integrative therapy for borderline personality disorder: Dialectical behavior therapy. In J. C. Norcross & M. R. Goldfried (Eds.), Handbook of psychotherapy integration (pp. 433–459). New York: Basic Books.  Kohlenberg, R. J., & Tsai, M. (1991). Functioned analytic psychotherapy: Creating intense and curative therapeutic relationships. New York: Plenum Press.  Koons, C. R., Chapman, A. L., Betts, B. B., O’Rourke, B., Morse, N., & Robins, C. J. (2006). Dialectical behavior therapy adapted for the vocational rehabilitation of significantly disabled mentally ill adults. Cognitive and Behavioral Practice, 13, 146–156.  Koons, C. R., Robins, C. J., Tweed, J. L., Lynch, T. R., Gonzalez, A. M., Morse, J. Q., et al. (2001). Efficacy of dialectical behavior therapy in women veterans with borderline personality disorder. Behavior Therapy, 32, 371–390.  Kring, A. M., & Bachorowski, J. A. (1999). Emotions and psychopathology. Cognition and Emotion, 13, 575–599.  Kring, A. M. & Sloan, D. M. (2010). Emotion regulation and psychopathology: A transdiagnostic approach to etiology and treatment. New York: Guilford Press.  Kring, A. M. & Werner, K. H. (2004). Emotion regulation and psychopathology. In P. Philippot & R. S. Feldman (Eds.), The regulation of emotion (pp. 359–408). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.  Kyokai, B. D. (1966). The teachings of Buddha. Japan: Bukkyo Dendo Kyokai.  Lequesne, E. R., & Hersh, R. G. (2004). Disclosure of a diagnosis of borderline personality disorder. Journal of Psychiatric Practice, 10, 170–176.  Levy, K. N., & Scala, J. W. (2012). Transference, transference interpretations, and transference-focused psychotherapies. Psychotherapy, 49(3), 391–403.  Lieb, K., Völlm, B., Rücker, G., Timmer, A., & Stoffers, J. M. (2010). Pharmacotherapy for borderline personality disorder: Cochrane Systematic Review of randomised trials. British Journal of Psychiatry, 196, 4–12.  Lieb, K., Zanarini, M., Linehan, M. M., & Bohus, M. (2004). Seminar section: Borderline personality disorder. Lancet, 364, 453–461.  Linehan, M. M. (1987). Dialectical behavior therapy for borderline personality disorder: Theory and method. Bulletin of the Menninger Clinic, 51, 261–276.  Linehan, M. M. (1993a). Cognitive-behavioral treatment of borderline personality disorder. New York: Guilford Press.  Linehan, M. M. (1993b). Skills training manual for treating borderline personality disorder. New York: Guilford Press.  Linehan, M. M. (1997). Validation and psychotherapy. In A. Bohank & L. Greenberg (Eds.), Empathy reconsidered: New directions in psychotherapy (pp. 353–392). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.  Linehan, M. M. (in press). Skills training manual for treating borderline personality disorder (2nd ed.). New York: Guilford Press.  Linehan, M. M., Armstrong, H. E., Suarez, A., Allmon, D., & Heard, H. L. (1991). Cognitive-behavioral treatment of chronically parasuicidal borderline patients. Archives of General Psychiatry, 48, 1060–1064.  Linehan, M. M., Bohus, M., & Lynch, T. R. (2007). Dialectical behavior therapy for pervasive emotion dysregulation: Theoretical and practical underpinnings. In J. J. Gross (Ed.), Handbook of emotion regulation (pp. 581–605). New York: Guilford Press.  Linehan, M. M., Comtois, K. A., Murray, A., Brown, M. Z., Gallop, R. J., Heard, H. L., et al. (2006). Two-year randomized trial + follow-up of dialectical behavior therapy vs. therapy by experts for suicidal behaviors and borderline personality disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry, 63, 757–766.  Linehan, M. M., Dimeff, L. A., Reynolds, S. K., Comtois, K., Shaw-Welch, S., Heagerty, P., et al. (2002). Dialectical behavior therapy versus comprehensive validation plus 12step for the treatment of opioid dependent women meeting criteria for borderline personality disorder. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 67, 13–26.  Linehan, M. M., & Heard, H. L. (1993). Impact of treatment accessibility on clinical course of parasuicidal patients: In reply to R. E. Hoffman [Letter to the editor]. Archives of General Psychiatry, 50, 157–158.  Linehan, M. M., Heard, H. L., & Armstrong, H. E. (1993).   Borderline Personality Disorder  Naturalistic follow-up of a behavioral treatment for chronically parasuicidal borderline patients. Archives of General Psychiatry, 50, 971–974.  Linehan, M. M., & Koerner, K. (1992). A behavioral theory of borderline personality disorder. In J. Paris (Ed.), Borderline personality disorder: Etiology and treatment (pp. 103–121). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association.  Linehan, M. M., McDavid, J. D., Brown, M. Z., Sayrs, J. H., & Gallop, R. J. (2008). Olanzapine plus dialectical behavior therapy for women with high irritability who meet criteria for borderline personality disorder: A double-blind, placebo-controlled pilot study. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 69(6), 999–1005.  Linehan, M. M., Rizvi, S. L., Shaw-Welch, S., & Page, B. (2000). Psychiatric aspects of suicidal behaviour: Personality disorders. In K. Hawton & K. van Heeringen (Eds.), International handbook of suicide and attempted suicide (147–178). Sussex, UK: Wiley.  Linehan, M. M., Schmidt, H., III, Dimeff, L. A., Craft, J. C., Kanter, J., & Comtois, K. A. (1999). Dialectical behavior therapy for patients with borderline personality disorder and drug-dependence. American Journal of Addiction, 8, 279–292.  Linehan, M. M., Tutek, D. A., Heard, H. L., & Armstrong,  H. E. (1994). Interpersonal outcome of cognitive behavioral treatment for chronically suicidal borderline patients. American Journal of Psychiatry, 151, 1771–1776. Livesley, J. W., Jang, K. L., & Vernon, P. A. (1998). Phenotypic and genetic structure of traits delineating personality disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry, 55 , 941–948.  Loranger, A. W. (1995). International Personality Disorder Examination (IPDE) manual. White Plains, NY: Cornell Medical Center.  Lynch, T. R., Cheavens, J. S., Cukrowicz, K. C., Thorp, S. R., Bronner, L., & Beyer, J. (2007). Treatment of older adults with co-morbid personality disorder and depression: A dialectical behavior therapy approach. International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 22, 131–143.  Lynch, T. R., Morse, J. Q., Mendelson, T., & Robins, C. J. (2003). Dialectical behavior therapy for depressed older adults: A randomized pilot study. American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 11, 33–45.  Marlatt, G. A., & Gordon, J. R. (1985). Relapse prevention: Maintenance strategies in the treatment of addictive behaviors. New York: Guilford Press.  McDonell, M. G., Tarantino, J., Dubose, A. P., Matestic, P., Steinmetz, K., Galbreath, H., et al. (2010). A pilot evaluation of dialectical behavioural therapy in adolescent longterm inpatient care. Child and Adolescent Mental Health, 15(4),193–196.  McMain, S., Korman, L. M., & Dimeff, L. A. (2001). Dialectical behavior therapy and the treatment of emotion dysregulation. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 57(2), 183– 196.  McMain, S. F., Links, P. S., Gnam, W. H., Guimond, T., Cardish, R. J., Korman, L., et al. (2009). A randomized clinical trial of dialectical behavior therapy versus general psychiatric management for borderline personality disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 166, 1365–1374.  Mennin, D. S. (2004). Emotion regulation therapy for generalized anxiety disorder. Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy, 11, 17–29.  Mennin, D. S., Heimberg, R. G., Turk, C. L., & Fresco, D.  M. (2005). Preliminary evidence for an emotion dysregulation model of generalized anxiety disorder. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 43, 1281–1310. Merriam-Webster, Inc. (2006). Merriam-Webster online dictionary. Available online at www.m-w.com. Merriam-Webster’s New Universal Unabridged Dictionary. (1983). Cleveland, OH: Dorset & Baber. Mintz, R. S. (1968). Psychotherapy of the suicidal patient. In  H. L. P. Resnick (Ed.), Suicidal behaviors: Diagnoses and management (pp. 271–296). Boston: Little, Brown. Nadort, M., Arntz, A., Giesen-Bloo, J., Eikelenboom, M., Spinhoven, P., van Asselt, T., et al. (2009). Implementation of outpatient schema therapy for borderline personality disorder with versus without crisis support by the therapist outside office hours: A randomized trial. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 47, 961–973.  Neacsiu, A. D., Eberle, J. E., Kramer, R., Weismann, T., & Linehan, M. M. (2013). A treatment mechanism for emotion dysregulation across mood and anxiety disorders: A randomized controlled trial. Manuscript under review.  Neacsiu, A. D., Rizvi, S. L., & Linehan, M. M. (2010). Dialectical behavior therapy skills use as a mediator and outcome of treatment for borderline personality disorder. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 48(9), 832–839.  Nisenbaum, R., Links, P. S., Eynan, R., & Heisel, M. J. (2010). Variability and predictors of negative mood intensity in patients with borderline personality disorder and recurrent suicidal behavior: Multilevel analyses applied to experience sampling methodology. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 119(2), 433–439.  Nose, M., Cipriani, A., Biancosino, B., Grassi, L., & Barbui,  C. (2006). Efficacy of pharmacotherapy against core traits of borderline personality disorder: Meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. International Clinical Psychopharmacology, 21, 345–353. Paris, J. (2005). Borderline personality disorder. Canadian Medical Association Journal, 172, 1579–1583.  Peng, K., & Nisbett, R. E. (1999). Culture, dialectics, and reasoning about contradiction. American Psychologist, 54, 741–754.  Pistorello, J., Fruzzetti, A. E., MacLane, C., Gallop, R., & Iverson, K. M. (2012). Dialectical behavior therapy (DBT) applied to college students: A randomized clinical trial. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 80(6), 982–984.  Pretzer, J. (1990). Borderline personality disorder. In A. Free    CLINICAL HANDBOOK OF PSYCHOLOGICAL DISORDERS  man, L. Pretzer, B. Fleming, & K. M. Simon (Eds.), Clinical applications of cognitive therapy (pp. 181–202). New York: Plenum Press.  Rakfeldt, J. (2005). Dialectical behavior therapy with transitional youth: Preliminary findings. Best Practices in Mental Health, 1(2), 61–76.  Rathus, J. H., & Miller, A. L. (2002). Dialectical behavior therapy adapted for suicidal adolescents. Suicide and Life- Threatening Behavior, 32, 146–157.  Reiser, D. E., & Levenson, H. (1984). Abuses of the borderline diagnosis: A clinical problem with teaching opportunities. American Journal of Psychiatry, 141, 1528–1532.  Roepke, S., Schröder-Abé, M., Schütz, A., Jacob, G., Dams, A., Vater, A., et al. (2011). Dialectic behavioural therapy has an impact on self-concept clarity and facets of selfesteem in women with borderline personality disorder. Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy, 18(2), 148–158.  Safer, D., Robinson, A., & Jo, B. (2010). Outcome from a randomized controlled trial of group therapy for binge eating disorder: Comparing dialectical behavior therapy adapted for binge eating to an active comparison group therapy. Behavior Therapy, 41, 106–120.  Safer, D. L., & Joyce, E. E. (2011). Does rapid response to two group psychotherapies for binge eating disorder predict abstinence? Behaviour Research and Therapy,49(5), 339–345.  Safer, D. L., Telch, C. F., & Agras, W. S. (2001). Dialectical behavior therapy for bulimia nervosa. American Journal of Psychiatry, 158, 632–634.  Salbach-Andrae, H., Bohnekamp, I., Bierbaum, T., Schneider, N., Thurn, C., Stiglmayr, C., et al. (2009). Dialektisch behaviorale therapie (DBT) und kognitiv behaviorale therapie (CBT) für Jugendliche mit Anorexia und Bulimia nervosa im Vergleich [Dialectical behavior therapy and cognitive behavior therapy for anorexia and bulimia nervosa among adolescents: A randomized, controlled trial with a waiting control group]. Kindheit und Entwicklung [Childhood and Development], 18(3), 180–190.  Shearin, E. N., & Linehan, M. M. (1992). Patient–therapist ratings and relationship to progress in dialectical behavior therapy for borderline personality disorder. Behavior Therapy, 23, 730–741.  Siever, L. J., & Davis, K. L. (1991). A psychobiological perspective on the personality disorders. American Journal of Psychiatry, 148, 1647–1658.  Silk, K. R., Lee, S., Hill, E. M., & Lohr, N. E. (1995). Borderline personality disorder symptoms and severity of sexual abuse. American Journal of Psychiatry, 152, 1059–1064.  Simpson, J. A., & Weiner, E. S. (1989). Oxford English Dictionary (2nd ed.) [Online]. Retrieved December 17, 2000, from www.oed.com.  Soler, J., Pascual, J. C., Campins, J., Barrachina, J., Puigdemont, D., Alvarez, E., et al. (2005). Double-blind, placebo-controlled study of dialectical behavior thera   py plus olanzapine for borderline personality disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 162(6), 1221–1224. Erratum in American Journal of Psychiatry, 165(6), 777.  Soler, J., Pascual, J. C., Tiana, T., Cebria, A., Barrachina, J., Campins, M. J., et al. (2009). Dialectical behaviour therapy skills training compared to standard group therapy in borderline personality disorder: A 3-month randomised controlled clinical trial. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 47, 353–358.  Soloff, P. H., & Chiapetta, L. (2012). Subtyping borderline personality disorder by suicidal behavior. Journal of Personality Disorders, 26(3), 468–480.  Soloff, P. H., Lis, J. A., Kelly, T., Cornelius, J., & Ulrich, R. (1994). Risk factors for suicidal behavior in borderline personality disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 151, 1316–1323.  Stein, D. J., Simeon, D., Frenkel, M., Islam, M. N., & Hollander, E. (1995). An open trial of valproate in borderline personality disorder. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 56, 506–510.  Telch, C. F., Agras, W. S., & Linehan, M. M. (2001). Dialectical behavior therapy for binge eating disorder: A promising new treatment. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 69, 1061–1065.  Thorberg, F. A., & Lyvers, M. (2006). Negative mood regulation (NMR) expectancies, mood, and affect intensity among clients in substance disorder treatment facilities. Addictive Behaviors, 31(5), 811–820.  Trupin, E. W., Stewart, D. G., Beach, B., & Boesky, L. (2002). Effectiveness of a dialectical behaviour therapy program for incarcerated female juvenile offenders. Child and Adolescent Mental Health, 7(3), 121–127.  Turner, R. M. (2000). Naturalistic evaluation of dialectical behavioral therapy-oriented treatment for borderline personality disorder. Cognitive and Behavioral Practice, 7, 413–419.  van Asselt, D. I., Dirksen, C. D., Giesen-Bloo, J. H., van Dyck, R., Spinhoven, P., van Tilburg, W., et al. (2008). Out-patient psychotherapy for borderline personality disorder: Cost-effectiveness of schema-focused therapy v. transference-focused psychotherapy. British Journal of Psychiatry, 192, 450–457.  Van den Bosch, L., Verheul, R., Schippers, G. M., & van den Brink, W. (2002). Dialectical behavior therapy of borderline patients with and without substance use problems: Implementation and long-term effects. Addictive Behaviors, 2, 911–923.  Van Dijk, S., Jeffrey, J., & Katz, M. R. (2013). A randomized, controlled, pilot study of dialectical behavior therapy skills in a psychoeducational group for individuals with bipolar disorder. Journal of Affective Disorders, 145(3), 386–393.  Verheul, R., van den Bosch, L. M. C., Koeter, M. W. J., de Ridder, M. A. J., Stijnen, T., & van den Brink, W. (2003).   Borderline Personality Disorder  Dialectical behaviour therapy for women with borderline personality disorder: 12-month, randomised clinical trial in The Netherlands. British Journal of Psychiatry, 182, 135–140.  Waltz, J., Dimeff, L. A., Koerner, K., Linehan, M. M., Taylor, L., & Miller, C. (2009). Feasibility of using video to teach a dialectical behavior therapy skill to clients with borderline personality disorder. Cognitive and Behavioral Practice, 16(2), 214–222.  Wasser, T., Tyler, R., McIlhaney, K., Taplin, R., & Henderson, L. (2008). Effectiveness of dialectical behavior therapy (DBT) versus standard therapeutic milieu (STM) in a cohort of adolescents receiving residential treatment. Best Practices in Mental Health, 4(2), 114–125.  Weinberg, I., Gunderson, J. G., Hennen, J., & Cutter, C. J., Jr. (2006). Manual assisted cognitive treatment for deliberate self-harm in borderline personality disorder patients. Journal of Personality Disorders, 20, 482–492.  Wells, H. (1972). Alienation and dialectical logic. Kansas Journal of Sociology, 3, 7–32.  Whitaker, C. A. (1975). Psychotherapy of the absurd: With a special emphasis on the psychotherapy of aggression. Family Process, 14, 1–16.  Wolf, M., Ebner-Priemer, U., Schramm, E., Domsalla, M.,  Hautzinger, M., & Bohus, M. (2011). Maximizing skills acquisition in dialectical behavioral therapy with a CDROM- based self-help program: Results from a pilot study. Psychopathology, 44(2), 133–135.  Young, J. E., Klosko, J. S., & Weishaar, M. E. (2003). Schema therapy: A practitioner’s guide. New York: Guilford Press.  Zanarini, M. C. (2003). Zanarini Rating Scale for Borderline Personality Disorder (ZAN-BPD): A continuous measure of DSM-IV borderline psychopathology. Journal of Personality Disorders, 17, 233–242.  Zanarini, M. C., Frankenburg, F. R., & Parachini, E. A. (2004). A preliminary, randomized trial of fluoxetine, olanzapine, and the olanzapine–fluoxetine combination in women with borderline personality disorder. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 65, 903–907.  Zanarini, M. C., Frankenburg, F. R., Sickel, A. E., & Yong, L. (1996). The Diagnostic Interview for DSM-IV Personality Disorders. Belmont, MA: McLean Hospital, Laboratory for the Study of Adult Development.  Zanarini, M. C., Vujanovic, A., Parachini, E., Boulanger, J., Frankenburg, F., & Hennen, J. (2003). A screening measure for BPD: The McLean Screening Instrument for Borderline Personality Disorder. Journal of Personality Disorders, 17, 568–573.   CHaPter 11  Bipolar Disorder  DaviD J. Miklowitz  our goal in this book is to present creative and important psychological treatments with empirical support. This chapter on bipolar disorder by David J. Miklowitz presents his innovative approach called family‑focused treatment (ffT), a treatment with substantial existing evidence for efficacy. Based on years of systematic research on psychological factors contributing to the onset and maintenance of bipolar disorder, this sophisticated family therapy approach targets the most important psychosocial factors linked to the disorder and associated with poor outcome (e.g., appropriate psychoeducation, communication enhancement training, and problem‑solving skills training). This chapter, and especially the very useful case study, also illustrates an essential linkage between psychological and pharmacological approaches in the successful treatment of this very severe form of psychopathology.—D. H. B.  Bipolar disorder is one of the oldest and most reliably recognized psychiatric disorders. Our thinking about this disorder has evolved over the last 100 years, but the original descriptions (Kraepelin, 1921) of “manic– depressive insanity” greatly resemble our current conceptualizations. This chapter begins with a review of basic information about the disorder, its diagnosis, its longitudinal course, and drug treatment. This information about the illness is interesting in its own right, but it also provides the rationale for using psychosocial treatment as an adjunct to pharmacotherapy. The majority of the chapter describes a focused, time-limited, outpatient psychosocial treatment—family-focused treatment (FFT)—that comprises three interrelated modules: psychoeducation, communication enhancement training (CET), and problem-solving skills training (Miklowitz, 2008b; Miklowitz & Goldstein, 1997). It is designed for patients who have had a recent episode of mania or depression.  the DiaGNosis of BiPolar DisorDer  DSM‑5 Criteria  The core characteristic of bipolar disorder is extreme affective dysregulation, or mood states that swing from extremely low (depression) to extremely high (mania). Patients in a manic episode have euphoric, elevated mood or irritable mood; behavioral activation (e.g., increased goal-directed activity, excessive involvement in high-risk activities, decreased need for sleep, increased talkativeness or pressure of speech); and altered cognitive functioning (grandiose delusions or inflated selfworth, flight of ideas or racing thoughts, distractibility)— typically for more than 1 week. For the diagnosis of a manic episode, there must be evidence that the person’s psychosocial functioning (marital, occupational, or social) is disrupted, that hospitalization is required, or that psychotic features (e.g., grandiose delusions) are  462   Bipolar Disorder  present (see the fifth edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders [DSM-5; American Psychiatric Association, 2013]).  A patient in a hypomanic episode shows many of the same symptoms, but the duration is typically shorter (i.e., 4 days or more). Hypomanic symptoms also do not bring about severe impairment in social or occupational functioning and are not associated with the need for hospitalization or with psychosis. However, the symptoms must reflect a real change in a person’s ordinary behavior—one that is observable by others. The distinction between mania and hypomania, which is really one of degree rather than type of illness, is difficult for clinicians to make reliably. Often the degree to which the behavioral activation affects a patient’s functioning is underestimated by the patient, who can see nothing but good in his/her behavior. A theme of this chapter is the value of including significant others (i.e., parents, spouses/partners, and siblings) in patients’ assessment and treatment.  In previous editions of the DSM, patients could be diagnosed with bipolar I disorder on the basis of a single “mixed” episode, in which the criteria for a major depressive episode and a manic episode are met nearly every day for 1 or more weeks. This definition has caused considerable confusion among clinicians, who may ignore the requirement that episodes of both poles be syndromal and use the mixed designation to describe patients with a variety of co-occurring subsyndromal depressive and hypomanic or manic symptoms (Frank, 2011). One large-scale population study found that “mixed hypomania” is particularly common among women with bipolar I or II disorder (Suppes et al., 2005). These considerations have relevance for prognosis as well as diagnosis. Patients with major depressive disorder (MDD) who have two or more co-occurring manic symptoms have more similarity to patients with bipolar depression than to patients with MDD without manic symptoms on features such as age at onset, family history of bipolar disorder, functional impairment, suicide attempts, and long-term conversion to bipolar I disorder (e.g., Sato, Bottlender, Schröter, & Möller, 2003; Fiedorowicz et al., 2011).  In DSM-5 the mixed episode criteria are a much broader course specifier in manic, depressive, or hypomanic episodes. The specifier with mixed features is applied when three or more subthreshold symptoms from the opposite pole occur during a mood episode. However, there are unanswered questions about the treatment implications of this definition, such as  whether depression with subthreshold mixed symptoms should be treated with mood stabilizers in conjunction with antidepressants (First, 2010).  DSM-5 proceeds with the diagnosis of bipolar disorder somewhat differently than earlier DSM systems. First, the diagnostician determines whether the patient satisfies the cross-sectional criteria for a manic episode. If he/she does meet these criteria, the diagnosis of bipolar I disorder is applied. If the patient currently meets DSM-5 criteria for a major depressive episode, he/she is diagnosed as having bipolar disorder only if there is a past history of manic, mixed, or hypomanic episodes; otherwise, the diagnosis is likely to be MDD or another mood disorder, such as persistent depressive disorder. If the patient is in remission, there must be evidence of prior manic or mixed episodes. One implication of this rather complicated set of diagnostic rules is that a single manic (and in DSM-IV, a single mixed) episode, even in the absence of documentable depression, is enough to warrant the bipolar I diagnosis. The key word here is “documentable,” because patients often underreport their depression histories and reveal them only upon careful questioning.  How Has the Diagnosis of Bipolar Disorder Changed?  Every version of the DSM has brought changes in the way we think about bipolar disorder, and modifications are likely to continue as new editions are published. One consistent area of controversy has been the proposal to use separate criteria for child- and adolescent-onset bipolar illness. Manic and hypomanic episodes among children appear to be shorter than those in adults, with more polarity switches and longer subthreshold mixed states (Birmaher et al., 2009). Previously, DSM-IV (American Psychiatric Association, 1994) used the same criteria to diagnose mania in adults and children, despite the clear developmental differences in presentation (Leibenluft, Charney, Towbin, Bhangoo, & Pine, 2003). However, DSM-5 includes a new category, disruptive mood dysregulation disorder, to characterize children with frequent and explosive temper outbursts and persistent irritability. The investigators who proposed this category believe it will reduce false-positive diagnoses of bipolar disorder in children (e.g., Leibenluft, 2011), although not all agreed with this new disorder (e.g., Axelson, Birmaher, Findling, et al., 2011).  DSM-5 distinguishes between bipolar I and bipolar II disorders. In the former, patients have fully syndro    CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  mal manic episodes, but in bipolar II, patients must have had at least one major depressive episode and one hypomanic episode (in this chapter, the term “bipolar disorder” refers either to bipolar I or bipolar II disorder as defined in DSM-5, unless otherwise specified). DSM-5 also includes a course descriptor, “rapid cycling,” which appears to characterize between 13 and 20% of patients (Calabrese, Fatemi, Kujawa, & Woyshville, 1996). Rapid cycling is applied when patients have had four or more discrete major depressive, manic, or hypomanic episodes in a single year. The confusion in applying this course descriptor lies in the fact that it is difficult to tell when one episode has ended and another begins: If a patient quickly switches from mania to depression in a 48-hour period (what some refer to as “ultrarapid cycling”), is this truly a new episode or just a different presentation of the same episode (perhaps with mixed features)? Rapid cycling appears to be a transient state of the disorder and not a lifelong phenomenon (Coryell, Endicott, & Keller, 1992).  Finally, DSM-5 deals with the thorny problem of patients with depression who develop manic or hypomanic episodes that are brought on by antidepressants or other activating drugs. Because of the effects of antidepressants on the serotonin, norepinephrine, and dopamine systems, there is the potential for these drugs to induce activation, particularly in a patient who is already biologically vulnerable to mood swings. If a patient has never had a manic episode but then develops one after taking an antidepressant, the likely diagnosis is a substance-induced mood disorder. The diagnosis of bipolar disorder is only then considered if the symptoms of mania preceded the antidepressant (a difficult historical distinction), or if the mania symptoms continue for at least a month after the antidepressant is withdrawn. Similar diagnostic considerations apply to patients who abuse drugs (e.g., cocaine, amphetamine) that are “psychotomimetics” and can induce manic-like states.  Epidemiology, Comorbidity, and Differential Diagnosis  Across studies, cultures, and age groups, bipolar I and bipolar II disorders affect at least 2% of the population. The National Comorbidity Survey Replication (NCS- R), an epidemiological study of 9,282 U.S. adults using a lay-administrator structured diagnostic interview, reported lifetime prevalence rates of 1.0% for bipolar I disorder, 1.1% for bipolar II disorder, and 2.4% for sub   threshold bipolar illness (e.g., bipolar disorder not otherwise specified or cyclothymic disorder; Merikangas et al., 2007). In the international World Health Organization World Mental Health Survey Initiative, a study of 61,392 adults in 11 countries that used the same diagnostic instrument, lower lifetime prevalence rates were reported: 0.6% for bipolar I disorder, 0.4% for bipolar II disorder, and 1.4% for subthreshold bipolar disorder (Merikangas et al., 2011).  In a community sample of adolescents (ages 13–18), 2.5% met lifetime DSM-IV criteria for bipolar I or II disorder, with the prevalence increasing with age (Merikangas et al., 2012). Interestingly, 1.7% of adolescents met DSM-IV criteria for a manic episode without depression. Finally, in a meta-analysis of 12 studies across the world involving a total of 16,222 youth between ages 7 and 21, the rate of bipolar disorder was 1.8%, and did not differ across countries (Van Meter, Moreira, & Youngstrom, 2011).  Bipolar disorder virtually always co-occurs with other conditions, some of which become the focus of immediate treatment. The disorders with which bipolar disorder is comorbid have the common underpinning of affective dysregulation. When 1-year prevalence rates were considered in the NCS-R, the highest correlations were observed between mania/hypomania and anxiety disorders (62.9%), followed by behavior disorders (attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder [ADHD] and oppositional defiant disorder; 44.8%) and substance use disorders (36.8%) (Merikangas et al., 2007).  Some studies have found that patients with pediatric onset have more comorbid disorders than patients with adult onset patients (Leverich et al., 2007). The comorbidity of bipolar disorder and ADHD in children is between 60 and 90%, even when overlapping symptoms are not considered (Kim & Miklowitz, 2002). Risk for substance use disorders is five times greater in adolescents with bipolar disorder than in healthy adolescents (Wilens et al., 2004). Comorbidity with anxiety disorders is approximately 44% (Masi et al., 2012; Sala et al., 2010). Interestingly, anxiety disorders are often first diagnosed in children of parents with bipolar disorder and may represent the first signs of major mood illness (Henin et al., 2005).  The distinction between bipolar disorder and personality disorders is especially difficult. Notably, the hallmark of borderline personality disorder is affective instability. Akiskal (1996) has argued that what is commonly seen by clinicians as personality pathology is actually undertreated subsyndromal mood disorder.   Bipolar Disorder  When studies of the overlap of bipolar disorder and personality disorders are done, the estimates of comorbidity are actually quite conservative. For example, George, Miklowitz, Richards, Simoneau, and Taylor (2003) found that only 29% of patients with bipolar disorder meet the diagnostic criteria for personality disorders during a period of remission. Furthermore, the comorbid personality disorder diagnosis was not always borderline personality disorder and was often a disorder from cluster C (e.g., avoidant or dependent personality disorder).  The boundaries between bipolar and unipolar illness are sometimes difficult to draw. Depressions in bipolar and unipolar disorders may look quite similar, but, on average, bipolar depression has a younger age of onset, more short-term mood variability, and is more treatment-resistant than MDD (Cuellar, Johnson, & Winters, 2005). In the National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Related Conditions (N = 13,048), patients with bipolar depression endorsed suicidal ideation and psychomotor disturbance more often than did patients with unipolar depression, and patients with unipolar depression were somewhat more likely to endorse fatigue (Weinstock, Strong, Uebelacker, & Miller, 2009). Thus, the differences between bipolar and unipolar depression are not large, and past history of mania or hypomania (or family history of mania in a patient who has not had a manic episode) may provide more information for the differential diagnosis.  Even more complicated is the distinction between agitated depression of the unipolar type and mixed mania of the bipolar type; both are characterized by sadness and a highly anxious, restless, activated state. Goldberg and Kocsis (1999) recommend that clinicians attempting to make these distinctions place emphasis on attributes such as goal-drivenness and undiminished energy (despite lack of sleep), both of which tip the scales toward bipolar disorder rather than unipolar depressive illness.  The distinction between bipolar disorder and schizophrenia can also be a surprisingly difficult clinical judgment. When a patient who has schizophrenia presents with a psychotic episode, he/she can appear acutely activated, grandiose in thinking and actions, and elated or depressed. In conditions once thought to be etiologically distinct, more and more studies are finding a significant degree of genetic overlap between bipolar disorder and schizophrenia or other psychotic conditions (Berrettini, 2003). For example, a recent genomewide association study found significant overlap in gene variants  among patients with schizophrenia and patients with bipolar disorder who had mood-incongruent psychotic features (e.g., delusions or hallucinations that have no clear content related to sadness or elation) (Goes et al., 2012).  DSM-5 makes a distinction between schizoaffective disorder and major mood disorders with psychotic features. In schizoaffective disorder, delusions and hallucinations have been present for at least 2 weeks, in the absence of prominent affective symptoms. In major mood disorders, psychotic symptoms occur only during periods of significant mood disturbance. A 10-year follow-up of patients with schizophrenia, schizoaffective disorders, and major affective disorders (both bipolar and unipolar) found that “mood-incongruent” delusions and hallucinations (i.e., those whose content does not relate to feelings of grandiosity and elation or, alternatively, feelings of worthlessness) are a poor prognostic sign across diagnoses (Harrow, Grossman, Herbener, & Davies, 2000). Harrow and colleagues (2000) argue for a dimensional view of schizoaffective disorder, with some patients on the psychotic end and others on the mood end of the spectrum.  DSM-5 also describes a subsyndromal or subaffective condition: cyclothymic disorder. Patients with cyclothymic disorder alternate between periods of hypomanic symptoms and brief periods of depression that fall short of the criteria for major depressive illness. As soon as the person develops a full manic, mixed, or depressive episode, the diagnosis of bipolar I or II disorder is given. Again, these distinctions really concern the degree and duration of symptoms rather than their form. In my own experience, clinicians are prone to “push” patients with cyclothymia into the bipolar II category, especially if they feel that the patients are not reliable in their historical reporting. Sometimes it is better to observe the mood lability of a patient over time than attempt to distinguish cyclothymic disorder and bipolar disorder cross-sectionally.  DruG treatMeNt aND the course of BiPolar DisorDer  Standard Pharmacotherapy  The course of bipolar illness (its pattern of relapsing and remitting over time) is best considered with reference to the drug treatments that help stabilize patients and allow most to function in the community. In the   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  prepharmacological era (i.e., prior to 1960), patients were hospitalized for years at a time (Cutler & Post, 1982). Nowadays, the availability of mood stabilizers such as lithium carbonate, the anticonvulsants (e.g., divalproex sodium [Depakote], lamotrigine [Lamictal], and other agents), and the atypical antipsychotics (e.g., olanzapine [Zyprexa], quetiapine [Seroquel], risperidone [Risperdal], ziprasidone [Geodon], or aripiprazole [Abilify]) has done much to ameliorate the course of bipolar illness (Goldberg, 2004; Malhi, Adams, & Berk, 2009). Some of these drugs not only control the acute episodes of the illness but also have “prophylactic value,” which means that they help prevent future episodes or minimize the duration or severity of episodes that do occur.  Most psychiatrists describe three phases of drug treatment: an “acute phase,” in which the goal is to control the most severe symptoms of the manic, mixed, or depressive disorder; a “stabilization phase,” in which the goal is to help the patient recover fully from the acute phase, which often means treating residual symptoms (e.g., mild depression) or levels of social–occupational impairment; and a “maintenance phase,” in which the goal is to prevent recurrences and continue to treat residual symptoms. The drugs recommended for bipolar disorder vary according to the phase of treatment. During the acute and stabilization phases, an antipsychotic medication may accompany a mood stabilizer. An antidepressant may be recommended after a manic episode has stabilized if a patient has ongoing, residual depression symptoms. These phases of treatment are also relevant to the psychosocial–psychotherapeutic treatment of bipolar disorder, which I discuss later.  Symptomatic Outcome  If drug treatment is so effective, then why do we need psychosocial treatment? The problem that consistently arises in the drug treatment of bipolar disorder is “breakthrough episodes.” With lithium or anticonvulsant treatment, the rate of relapse over 1 year is about 37% (Gitlin, Swendsen, Heller, & Hammen, 1995). In 1,469 adults with bipolar I and II disorders, 49% had recurrences over 1 year; twice as many of these recurrences were of depressive (rather than manic or hypomanic) episodes. In a 12.8-year follow-up of 146 adult patients with bipolar I disorder, patients had syndromal or subsyndromal depressive symptoms for about 32% of the weeks of their lives, manic or hypomanic symp   toms for 9%, and mixed or cycling symptoms states for 6%; patients were in remission only about half of the time (Judd et al., 2002).  Keck and colleagues (1998) examined the 12-month course of bipolar disorder among 134 patients who began in an acute manic or mixed episode. The majority of the patients (N = 104) were treated with mood stabilizers, with or without accompanying antipsychotics or antidepressants. The investigators made a distinction among “syndromic recovery,” in which patients no longer met the DSM criteria for a manic, mixed, or depressive episode for at least 8 weeks; “symptomatic recovery,” a tougher criterion by which patients had to have minimal or no mood disorder symptoms for 8 weeks; and “functional recovery,” which required that patients regain their premorbid (preillness) level of employment, friendships, interests, and independent living status. Of the 106 patients who completed the study, 51 (48%) achieved syndromic recovery by 12-month follow-up. Only 28 (26%) achieved symptomatic recovery, and 25 (24%) reached functional recovery at follow-up. Predictors of poor outcome included low socioeconomic status, medication noncompliance, and longer duration of illness.  Social–Occupational Functioning  Patients with bipolar disorder experience significant impairment in work, social, and family functioning, and their chances of early illness recurrence increase dramatically when they have subsyndromal depressive symptoms (Altshuler et al., 2006; Gitlin, Mintz, Sokolski, Hammen, & Altshuler, 2011). Additionally, patients with persisting depressive symptoms often have cognitive impairment, which strongly affects social and occupational functioning (Altshuler, Bearden, Green, van Gorp, & Mintz, 2008). A study of 253 bipolar I and II patients revealed that only about 33% of the patients worked full time, and only 9% worked part time outside of the home; 57% of patients reported being unable to work or able to work only in protected settings (Suppes et al., 2001).  The relationship between mood symptoms and functioning appears to be bidirectional: Residual depressive symptoms are clearly associated with poorer social and occupational functioning (e.g., Gitlin et al., 2011), but other studies have shown that poor social functioning predicts a shorter time to mood disorder relapse (e.g., Weinstock & Miller, 2008).   Bipolar Disorder  Medication Nonadherence  Part of the reason why patients with bipolar disorder have so many “breakthrough episodes” is drug nonadherence. In one review, Colom, Vieta, Tacchi, Sanchez- Moreno, and Scott (2005) estimated that at least 60% of patients with bipolar disorder discontinue their medications at some point in their lives. Between 40 and 60% are partially or fully nonadherent in the year after their first hospitalization for a manic or mixed episode (Strakowski et al., 1998). One study of a large health maintenance organization found that patients took lithium for an average of only 76 days (Johnson & McFarland, 1996). Nonadherence has considerable implications for the course of the disorder: When patients stop their medications suddenly, they are at much higher risk for relapse or suicide (Baldessarini, Tondo, & Hennen, 2003).  The reasons that patients stop taking mood stabilizers are varied, and include side effects, lack of insight into the illness, younger age, lower socioeconomic status, lack of information about medications, negative feelings about having one’s moods controlled by a medication, missing high periods, recent hospitalizations, and low family support (Colom, Vieta, Tacchi, et al., 2005). Some of these issues are amenable to modification through adjusting dosages or substituting one agent for another. Other problems related to nonadherence can be addressed in adjunctive psychotherapy.  Why Psychotherapy?  What is the role of psychosocial treatment in a disorder with such a heavy biological and genetic basis? There is little doubt that medication is the first-line treatment for bipolar disorder. The evidence that lithium, the anticonvulsants, and the atypical antipsychotics reduce relapse rates and improve functioning is substantial. But can we do better? An optimal and perhaps overly optimistic view of the outcome of patients with bipolar disorder would include symptom stability for extended periods, minimal disruptions in social functioning after episodes, and having consistent work and family lives. Indeed, these outcomes are highly valued by patients, who often devise their own self-management strategies to cope with the illness (Murray et al., 2011).  The roles of adjunctive psychotherapy can include teaching skills for symptom management, augmenting social and occupational role functioning, and keeping  patients adherent to their drug regimens. Implicit in this objective is that the physiology and psychology of major psychiatric disorders are not fully separable. We know that changes in neural function (e.g., as revealed in functional magnetic resonance imaging scans) often occur among patients who respond to psychotherapy (e.g., Kumari et al., 2011). The time has come to think about psychotherapy and medication as working synergistically in the major mood disorders.  The strongest argument for including psychotherapy in an outpatient treatment program is to help patients to cope with stress triggers. As noted in the next section, certain forms of life events and family tensions are risk factors in the course of bipolar disorder. Psychotherapy can target these factors and teach patients adaptive coping mechanisms, which can then be brought to bear during periods of wellness to help stave off the likelihood of a future relapse.  a vulNeraBility–stress MoDel of recurreNces  Implicit in the notion that psychotherapy would be helpful to a patient with bipolar disorder is the notion that stress plays a role in eliciting symptoms of mood disorder. What is the evidence for this view? What are the targets for psychosocial intervention?  Life Events and Social Rhythms  Life events are consistently associated with relapses of bipolar depression, and in some studies, of mania as well (Johnson, 2005a). Two major pathways have been proposed for the association of life events and mood relapses. The first of these, the social rhythm stability hypothesis (Ehlers, Kupfer, Frank, & Monk, 1993), posits that major life events disrupt daily rhythms (i.e., when one wakes, eats, exercises, socializes, works, and sleeps) in mood disorders. Life events can act as zeitstorers, which disrupt established social and circadian rhythms (e.g., the production of neuroendocrines as a function of the time of day). For example, a previously unemployed patient who gets a job with constantly shifting work hours is forced to adopt a new pattern of daily routines, which may include changes in sleep– wake habits. Major events can also result in the loss of social zeitgebers—people or events that help maintain the stability of rhythms. For example, a spouse or   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  partner helps to maintain a person on predictable sleep schedules. A relationship separation, in addition to being a significant emotional event, results in the loss of this human timekeeper.  Patients with bipolar disorder are exquisitely sensitive to even minor changes in sleep–wake habits. Studies by Malkoff-Schwartz and colleagues (1998, 2000) have revealed that manic episodes are often precipitated by life events that change sleep–wake habits (e.g., changing time zones due to air travel). However, depressive episodes were not differentially associated with rhythm-disruptive life events. One of the clinical implications of these findings is that if patients can be taught to regularize their social rhythms, especially in the face of life events that normally disrupt those rhythms, then the outcome of bipolar disorder should be improved. Thus, variability in the sleep–wake cycle is a target for treatment. This is a central tenet of interpersonal and social rhythm therapy (IPSRT; Frank, 2005), as discussed below.  Life Events, Goal Dysregulation, and Mania  Across more than 12 studies, people with a history of mania and students who are vulnerable to mania have described themselves as more likely to react with strong emotions to reward (Johnson, Edge, Holmes, & Carver, 2012). Self-reported reward sensitivity has been found to predict a more severe course of mania among those with bipolar I disorder (Meyer, Johnson, & Winters, 2001; Salavert et al., 2007), and of conversion from bipolar spectrum disorder to bipolar II or I disorder in high-risk college students (Alloy et al., 2012). A related construct, heightened ambition, is associated with a more severe course of mania among patients with bipolar I disorder (Johnson et al., 2012). Impulsive responding, in which people pursue rewards without awareness of potential negative consequences, becomes elevated during the escalation to mania (Swann, Dougherty, Pazzaglia, Pham, & Moeller, 2004).  Sheri Johnson and colleagues (2000) hypothesize that excess reward sensitivity may heighten reactivity to successes, such that manic symptoms would be more likely after life events involving goal attainment (e.g., getting a promotion). Goal attainment may increase confidence, which then fuels increased goal engagement and accelerates the development of manic symptoms (Johnson, 2005b). In two longitudinal studies of patients with bipolar I disorder, goal-attainment life events predicted increases in manic symptoms but not  depressive symptoms, even after excluding life events that could have been caused by manic symptoms (e.g., job loss; Johnson et al., 2000, 2008).  Family Stress  Family conflicts are also a breeding ground for increased cycling of bipolar disorder. One method of measuring family stress is to evaluate a family’s level of “expressed emotion” (EE). In this procedure, a researcher administers the Camberwell Family Interview (Vaughn & Leff, 1976) to a family member (parent, spouse/partner, or sibling) for approximately 1 hour to assess the relative’s reactions to the patient’s psychiatric disorder, with particular emphasis on a recent illness episode. Later, a trained judge evaluates tapes of these interviews on three primary dimensions: critical comments (e.g., “When I talk to him, I get upset that he just shuts down. It’s like there’s no one there!”); hostility, or personal, generalized criticism of the patient (e.g., “I like nothing about him”); and emotional overinvolvement, or the tendency to be overconcerned, overprotective, or to use inordinately self-sacrificing behaviors in the patient’s care (e.g., “I don’t invite people to the house because Allen [son] doesn’t like it”). Family members who score high on one or more of these dimensions are called “high-EE”; those who do not are called “low-EE.”  EE is a well-established predictor of the course of schizophrenia. In Butzlaff and Hooley’s (1998) metaanalysis of 28 longitudinal studies of EE in schizophrenia, 23 studies replicated the same core finding: Patients who return after an illness episode to high-EE families are two to three times more likely to relapse in 9-month to 1-year prospective follow-ups than those returning to low-EE families. Several studies have documented a link between high-EE families and relapse among patients with bipolar disorder followed either prospectively or retrospectively (Honig, Hofman, Rozendaal, & Dingemanns, 1997; Miklowitz, Goldstein, Nuechterlein, Snyder, & Mintz, 1988; O’Connell, Mayo, Flatow, Cuthbertson, & O’Brien, 1991; Priebe, Wildgrube, & Muller-Oerlinghausen, 1989; Yan, Hammen, Cohen, Daley, & Henry, 2004). A 2-year study of family EE among bipolar adolescents undergoing family treatment also replicated this longitudinal association (Miklowitz, Biuckians, & Richards, 2006).  On first examination, one might conclude that patients with bipolar disorder are sensitive to stress in the family milieu, and that levels of EE elicit an underly    Bipolar Disorder  ing biological vulnerability. But the relationship is far from simple. First, it appears that the high-EE relatives of patients with bipolar illness, unipolar illness, or schizophrenia are more likely than low-EE relatives to interpret the patients’ negative problem behaviors as controllable by the patients (see, e.g., Hooley & Licht, 1997; Weisman, Lopez, Karno, & Jenkins, 1993; Wendel, Miklowitz, Richards, & George, 2000). Second, relatives and patients coping with bipolar disorder are often locked into verbally aggressive, negative cycles of face-to-face interaction. Simoneau, Miklowitz, and Saleem (1998) found that high-EE relatives of patients with bipolar disorder were more negative than low-EE relatives during face-to-face problem-solving interactions. The relatives and patients in high-EE families were also more likely to engage in counterproductive “attack– counterattack” cycles. Often the patients were provocateurs in these interchanges; they were not the “victims” of verbally aggressive or punitive relatives (Miklowitz, Wendel, & Simoneau, 1998; Simoneau et al., 1998).  Clearly, a psychosocial treatment program should consider aspects of the family’s affective environment— such as high-EE attitudes in relatives or the negative interchanges that characterize relative–patient communication—to be targets for intervention. But does one attempt to change these attitudes and interaction patterns directly, or instead make an “end run” around them? Family members coping with a spouse/ partner, offspring, or sibling who has bipolar disorder are understandably quite angry, and it makes little sense to tell them they should not be. Others feel that their overprotective behavior is more than warranted by the situation.  In developing FFT, my associates and I concluded that at least one component of dealing with these attitudes and transaction patterns is psychoeducation, which involves the provision of information to patients and family members about the disorder and its manifestations. As discussed earlier, relatives (parents, spouses, or siblings) need to realize that at least some proportion of the patient’s aversive behaviors (e.g., irritability, aggression, inability to work, or low productivity) can be attributed to a biochemically driven illness state. This may seem obvious to us as clinicians, but to family members who deal with the patient on a day-today basis, it is easy to attribute aversive behaviors to personality factors or laziness, or to believe that “He/ she is doing this to hurt me.” In parallel, patients need to become more cognizant of the way they provoke anger and resentment in family members.  Negative face-to-face interactions cannot be eradicated, but they can be made more productive through the techniques of communication and problem-solving skills training. Thus, families or couples can be taught to stick with one problem topic rather than trying to solve many at a time, or to use listening skills to avoid counterproductive attack–counterattack cycles. Later in this chapter, I explain these methods with reference to a difficult treatment case.  treatMeNt outcoMe stuDies  Controlled psychotherapy outcome studies are new to the field of bipolar disorder and certainly have not kept pace with research on drug treatment. This section describes several randomized controlled trials (RCTs) of individual and family/marital interventions. More thorough reviews of the studies in this area are available (Geddes & Miklowitz, 2013; Miklowitz & Scott, 2009).  Individual Therapy  Two models of individual therapy deserve emphasis here. Cognitive-behavioral models focus on risk factors for relapse, including medication nonadherence, excessive risk taking (or reward overestimation) prior to mania, and behavioral inactivity during depression. Lam, Hayward, Watkins, Wright, and Sham (2005; Lam et al., 2003) examined a 6-month, 12- to 18-session cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) model with drug treatment versus drug treatment alone (N = 103). Patients had been in remission for at least 6 months but had had at least three episodes in the past 5 years. At a 1-year follow-up, 44% of patients in CBT had relapsed compared with 75% of the patients who received drug treatment alone. Twelve to 30 months after treatment, CBT did not prevent relapse relative to drug treatment alone, but it did continue to show a positive influence on mood and days spent in episodes. The effects on depression were more significant than the effects on mania.  A multicenter effectiveness trial of CBT in the United Kingdom (N = 253) indicated that not all subpopulations of patients with bipolar disorder are equally likely to benefit from CBT (Scott et al., 2006). The study compared 22 sessions of CBT plus pharmacotherapy to treatment as usual (TAU) plus pharmacotherapy. The patients had been in a variety of symptomatic states before study entry. No effects were found for CBT on time   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  to recurrence. A post hoc analysis revealed that patients with less than 12 prior episodes had fewer recurrences in CBT than in TAU. However, patients with 12 or more episodes were more likely to have recurrences in CBT than in TAU. The authors concluded that CBT is most applicable to patients in the early stages of their disorder or in those whose course is less recurrent. However, a “metaregression” of six RCTs concluded that there was no evidence that relapses were moderated by number of prior episodes (Lam, Burbeck, Wright, & Pilling, 2009).  Cognitive rehabilitation, a form of behavioral treatment that emphasizes attention, concentration, and memory strategies, may be a useful adjunct to pharmacotherapy for patients with bipolar disorder who have cognitive impairment. In an 18-case open trial, Deckersbach and colleagues (2010) found that after 14 sessions of treatment, patients had improvements in depressive symptoms, occupational functioning, and executive functioning compared to their baselines. Randomized trials of cognitive rehabilitation in patients with neuropsychological impairments are warranted.  Ellen Frank and colleagues (2005) investigated the efficacy of IPSRT—a treatment that includes not only the core elements of Klerman, Weissman, Rounsaville, and Chevron’s (1984) model of interpersonal psychotherapy for depression but also a component in which patients self-regulate their daily routines and sleep– wake cycles. Patients with a recent mood episode were randomly assigned to either 45-minute IPSRT sessions and mood-stabilizing medications or an active clinical management intervention, also with medications. The latter comprised 20-minute sessions with a psychotherapist who focused on drug side effects and symptom management. Randomization was done first during an acute phase of treatment, with sessions held weekly; and again at the beginning of a preventive, maintenance phase of treatment, with sessions held biweekly or monthly for up to 2 years. Patients who received IPSRT in the acute phase had longer intervals prior to recurrences in the maintenance phase than patients who received clinical management in the acute phase. IPSRT was most effective in delaying recurrences in the maintenance phase among patients who succeeded in stabilizing their daily routines and sleep–wake cycles during the acute phase (Frank et al., 2005). IPSRT also had a positive impact on vocational functioning (Frank et al., 2008). Thus, consistency of routines may protect against a worsening course of the disorder and enhance functioning.  Group Psychoeducation  The effects of group psychoeducation have been documented in several large-scale RCTs, including one at a Veterans Administration outpatient clinic (Bauer et al., 2006) and another at a health maintenance organization (Simon, Ludman, Bauer, Unutzer, & Operskalski, 2006). In both studies, psychoeducation groups were embedded in larger systems of care, including patient monitoring by a nurse care manager and monitoring of the physician’s adherence to treatment guidelines. These systematic care models were shown to be highly effective in improving illness course and functioning compared to usual care for bipolar patients in these settings.   An RCT focused on the combination of pharmacotherapy and group psychoeducation was undertaken at the University of Barcelona (Colom et al., 2003). A total of 120 remitted patients with bipolar disorder who were receiving pharmacological treatment were allocated to (1) 21 sessions of structured group psychoeducation or (2) 21 sessions of an unstructured support group, both administered by psychologists. Psychoeducation sessions included lectures, role play, discussions of beliefs and attitudes, behavioral interventions and between-session homework assignments. Over 2 years, individuals who received group psychoeducation were significantly more likely than those allocated to the unstructured group to show lower relapse and hospitalization rates and higher, more stable plasma lithium levels (Colom et al., 2003; Colom, Vieta, Sanchez- Moreno, et al., 2005). Moreover, a 5.5-year follow-up of this sample revealed that the gains associated with group psychoeducation were sustained (Colom et al., 2009). Thus, group psychoeducation appears to be a cost-effective adjunct to pharmacotherapy for bipolar patients who begin in remission.  Family Therapy  There are now several studies of family interventions as adjuncts to medication for patients with bipolar disorder. Here, I focus on trials published after 2000; the reader is referred to more comprehensive reviews (Miklowitz, 2008a; Miklowitz & Scott, 2009) for coverage of earlier family and marital studies.  Five randomized trials have been completed on FFT. Two of these were conducted with adults recruited from hospital settings following an acute episode, one at the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA;   Bipolar Disorder  Rea et al., 2003) and one at the University of Colorado (Miklowitz, George, Richards, Simoneau, & Suddath, 2003). One study was conducted in the context of the Systematic Treatment Enhancement Program for Bipolar Disorder (STEP-BD; Miklowitz et al., 2007b), which examined three intensive psychotherapies (FFT, IPSRT or CBT) in comparison with a control condition for patients with bipolar depression. Two RCTs have been conducted with pediatric-onset patients, one involving adolescents with bipolar disorder (Miklowitz et al., 2008) and the other with symptomatic children and adolescents (ages 9–17) who were genetically at risk for bipolar disorder (Miklowitz et al., 2013). These studies are examined in detail below.  The UCLA and Colorado Studies  These studies each examined a 9-month, 21-session FFT intervention that comprised psychoeducation, communication enhancement training, and problemsolving training. Participants were patients and their parents or spouses. Patients were recruited during an index episode of bipolar disorder and maintained on mood-stabilizing medications, with or without antipsychotic or antidepressive agents. However, the studies differed in an important respect: At Colorado, the comparison “crisis management” group received two sessions of family education and individual crisis sessions, as needed, over 9 months. In the UCLA study, patients in the comparison group received an individual case management and problem-solving intervention that was of similar intensity (21 sessions) to the FFT intervention.  Despite these design differences, the results that emerged from the Colorado and UCLA studies were quite similar. In the Colorado study (Miklowitz et al., 2003), FFT and medication led to lower frequencies of relapses and longer delays prior to relapses over a 2-year period than did crisis management and medication. FFT was also associated with more improvement in depression and mania symptoms—effects that did not appear until the 9- and 12-month follow-ups but continued for the full 24 months of follow-up. In the UCLA study (Rea et al., 2003), the effects of FFT were seen on hospitalization rates over a 2-year follow-up. The effects of FFT on time to relapse were not seen in the first year but did appear in the second year. Notably, rates of rehospitalization in the 1- to 2-year period following the 9-month treatment were 12% in the FFT group and 60% in the individual therapy group; for re   lapse, the rates were 28% and 60%, respectively. Results of both studies suggest that there may be a delayed effect of FFT: Patients and family members may need to “absorb” the treatment and incorporate the education and skills training into their day-to-day lives before it has ameliorative effects on the illness.  This latter point was clarified further by Simoneau, Miklowitz, Richards, Saleem, and George (1999), who examined family interaction transcripts obtained in the Colorado study before and after FFT or crisis management treatment. Families (patients with their parents or spouses) participated in interactional assessments that comprised 10-minute problem-solving discussions that were transcribed and coded via the Category System for Coding Partner Interactions (Hahlweg et al., 1989). Forty-four families returned at 1 year for the same assessment, after the FFT or crisis management protocol had been completed. Interestingly, at the posttreatment (1 year) interactional assessments, patients in FFT and those in crisis management could not be distinguished on the basis of frequency of negative interactional behaviors (e.g., criticisms). But there were clear differences at posttreatment in positive interactional behaviors, particularly in the nonverbal sphere. After FFT, patients and relatives were more likely to smile at each other, nod when others were speaking, and lean toward each other when speaking. Moreover, the degree to which patients improved in their nonverbal interactional behavior over the course of psychosocial treatment was correlated with their degree of symptom improvement over the year of treatment.  FFT appeared to have ameliorated certain tensions within the family environments. Future studies using multiple, time-lagged assessments of family interaction and patients’ symptoms would help to disentangle the directional relationship between improvements in family communication and patients’ symptomatic outcomes.   The STEP-BD Study  STEP-BD examined the effectiveness of treatment with mood stabilizers in combination with psychosocial treatments in 15 participating sites in the United States (Miklowitz et al., 2007b). Patients with bipolar disorder in a depressive episode (N = 293) were randomly assigned to mood-stabilizing medications—with or without antidepressants—and 30 sessions of FFT, IPSRT, CBT, or collaborative care (CC), a three-session psychoeducational treatment. Patients assigned to any   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  intensive psychotherapy had higher recovery rates over 1 year and recovered an average of 110 days faster than patients in CC. Patients in intensive therapy were also more likely to remain stable in mood over the yearlong study. In FFT, 77% of the patients recovered by 1 year; in interpersonal therapy, 65%; and in CBT, 60%. In the CC condition, 52% recovered. The differences between the intensive modalities did not reach statistical significance. It is worth noting that in STEP-BD, there was no evidence that patients randomly assigned to mood stabilizers with adjunctive antidepressants recovered any more rapidly from depression than patients assigned to mood stabilizers with adjunctive placebo (Sachs et al., 2007).  STEP-BD, one of the largest randomized treatment studies for bipolar disorder, suggests that psychotherapy is an essential component of the effort to stabilize patients with bipolar disorder in a depressive episode. When clinicians are treating bipolar, depressed patients with mood stabilizers or atypical antipsychotics, adding an intensive therapy may be associated with more rapid recovery than adding an antidepressant (Miklowitz et al., 2007a, 2007b). The common ingredients of intensive treatments—such as teaching strategies to manage mood, identifying and intervening early with prodromal symptoms, enhancing patients’ compliance with medications, and working toward resolution of key interpersonal or family problems—may contribute to more rapid recoveries. FFT proved to be a particularly potent treatment in this study, although its limitations also became apparent: Only 54% of the patients assessed for the study had families who were accessible and willing to participate in treatment.  Family Psychoeducation in Early‑Onset Bipolar Disorder  More recent applications of family psychoeducation have focused on patients with juvenile-onset bipolar disorder, who most frequently live with or are strongly connected with their families of origin. FFT for adolescents (FFT-A; Miklowitz et al., 2004) uses the same 21-session structure, adapted to the developmental needs of this age group (e.g., the occurrence of more frequent, briefer episodes, typically with a mixed presentation). A 2-year RCT of 58 adolescent patients with bipolar disorder revealed that, compared to patients who received three sessions of family psychoeducation (enhanced care, or EC), patients in FFT-A recovered more rapidly from their baseline depressive symptoms, spent less time  depressed at follow-up, and had greater improvements in depressive symptoms over a 2-year follow-up (Miklowitz et al., 2008). Furthermore, the effects of FFT-A were moderated by the level of EE in families during the pretreatment period. Adolescents from high-EE families showed greater improvement in both depressive and manic symptoms over 2 years in FFT-A than in EC; the effects of FFT-A in adolescents from low-EE families were not as robust (Miklowitz et al., 2009).  A version of FFT has been developed for children and adolescents who are at risk for developing bipolar disorder. These youth have (1) a first-degree relative (usually a parent) with bipolar I or II disorder and (2) significant mood dysregulation and impairment, in the form of major depression or bipolar disorder not otherwise specified (BD-NOS). Children with BD-NOS have brief (1–3 days) and recurrent periods of mania or hypomania that represent a change from baseline. A follow-up of children with BD-NOS and a positive family history of mania found that up to half “converted” to bipolar I or II disorder within 5 years (Axelson, Birmaher, Strober, et al., 2011).  In a 1-year RCT, 40 high-risk children (ages 9–17) with MDD or BD-NOS were randomly assigned to a high-risk version of FFT (FFT-HR) or to a one- to two-session education control (Miklowitz et al., 2013). The participants in FFT-HR had more rapid recovery from their initial mood symptoms, more weeks in remission from mood symptoms, and more improvement in hypomania symptoms over 1 year than participants in the education control. As was found in the adolescent sample, the magnitude of the treatment effect was greater among high-risk children in high-EE (vs. low- EE) families.  Other models of family intervention for pediatric bipolar disorder are showing promise. In a large (N = 165) wait-list trial, Fristad Verducci, Walters, and Young (2009) found that children with mood disorders who were assigned to multifamily groups showed greater mood improvement over 6 study months than children on a wait list. Moreover, children on the wait list who participated in the multifamily groups 1 year later showed the same amount of improvement between 12 and 18 months.  Finally, a family-focused CBT treatment developed for school-age children with bipolar disorder incorporates psychoeducation, cognitive restructuring, and affect regulation interventions (West & Weinstein, 2012). This 12-session treatment has shown positive effects in open trials. Results of an RCT are pending.   Bipolar Disorder  Summary  The addition of psychosocial treatment—family, group, or individual—to pharmacotherapy leads to more positive outcomes of bipolar disorder than can be achieved with pharmacotherapy alone. In drawing conclusions, we must keep in mind the different clinical conditions of patients at the outset of treatment. For example, the studies of CBT and group psychoeducation focused on patients in remission, whereas those of FFT and IPSRT focused on patients who were symptomatic and only partially recovered from an acute episode.  The remainder of this chapter is devoted to the specifics of delivering FFT. For whom is it intended? How does it proceed? How are families educated about bipolar disorder, and how do they learn new styles of communicating or solving problems? In reviewing these methods, the reader may wish to reflect on the various targets of family intervention (i.e., family attitudes or expectations, interpersonal conflict, medication nonadherence) and the various domains of outcome that are presumed to be influenced by family interventions via their impact on these targets.  coNtext of theraPy  Treatment Objectives and Structure  FFT has six objectives, all of which concern coping with an episode of bipolar disorder. These are summarized in Table 11.1. Some of these pertain to dealing with the current episode; others are more focused on anticipating episodes in the future, and the stress  table 11.1. the six objectives of familyfocused treatment  Assist the patient and relatives in the following: •• Integrating the experiences associated with recent episodes of bipolar disorder •• Recognizing and accepting the patient’s vulnerability to future episodes •• Accepting the need for mood-stabilizing medications for symptom control •• Distinguishing between the patient’s personality and his/her bipolar symptoms •• Recognizing and learning to cope with stressful life events that trigger recurrences of mania or depression •• Reestablishing functional family relationships after a mood episode  triggers for these episodes. A strong case is made for the protective effects of medications and a stable, nonstressful family environment.  For patients with syndromal bipolar disorder, FFT is usually given in 21 outpatient sessions lasting 1 hour each. Sessions are given weekly for 3 months, biweekly for 3 months, and monthly for 3 months. Although the 21-session version is described here, shorter versions have been developed for high-risk populations: children at risk for bipolar disorder (12 sessions over 4 months) (Miklowitz et al., 2013) and adolescents/ young adults at risk for psychosis (18 sessions over 6 months) (Schlosser et al., 2012).  This 9 month, 21-session structure was originally proposed by Falloon, Boyd, and McGill (1984) for the behavioral treatment of families of patients with schizophrenia. The session-by-session plan is more a guide for the clinician than a requirement because some families require less intensive contact at the beginning, others require more intensive contact later, and still others simply do not need this much treatment. The treatment is designed to parallel stages of recovery from a mood episode. During the stabilization phase, about seven sessions are devoted to psychoeducation, in which patients and their relatives become acquainted with the nature, course, and treatment of bipolar disorder. At this stage, patients are often still symptomatic and usually are functioning socially or occupationally at a level lower than their preepisode capabilities (Keck et al., 1998). Psychoeducation is an attempt to hasten clinical stabilization by reducing the family tensions that often accompany the stabilization phase. This is done through helping a patient and his/her family members make sense of the different events that have precipitated the acute episode, come to a common understanding of the causes and the treatment of the illness, develop plans for how the family will act if there are signs of a developing recurrence, and modulate expectations for the patient’s and the family’s functioning in the recovery period.  Once the family has begun the communication training module (seven to 10 sessions), the patient is usually fully stabilized from the acute episode, although he/she may still have residual mood symptoms. At this point, the patient is usually able to tolerate exercises oriented toward resolving family conflict and promoting behavior change. For example, he/she can practice listening while another family member speaks, and family members can do the same for him/her. These exercises can be difficult when a patient’s emotions are   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  still dysregulated, but the structure introduced by communication training can help the patient modulate how he/she expresses emotions.  During the final phase, problem-solving training (four to five sessions), the mood episode is largely remitted and the patient has moved into the maintenance phase of drug treatment. At this stage, and sometimes even earlier, the patient and family are motivated to identify and address quality-of-life issues that have been disrupted by the illness (e.g., how a married/cohabiting patient can find work; how parents can help a young adult offspring move out of the home and gradually become more independent). The last few sessions of FFT, held monthly, help to consolidate gains made during the 9-month treatment.  Setting  FFT has been done in a variety of outpatient settings, such as the Child and Adolescent Mood Disorders Program (CHAMP) at the UCLA School of Medicine; the Didi Hirsch Community Mental Health Services in Culver City, California; the Colorado Family Project in Boulder, Colorado; the Pediatric Bipolar Disorders program at Stanford University; and the Child and Adolescent Bipolar Services program at the University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine.  UCLA-CHAMP specializes in the treatment of adolescents and children who are on the bipolar spectrum (bipolar I, bipolar II, or BD-NOS). The staff comprises faculty members in psychology and psychiatry, psychiatry fellows and psychology interns, marriage and family therapists, and psychology graduate students. The clinic, opened in January 2010, evaluates 10–12 new patients and families per month.  Client Variables  FFT is conducted with patients with bipolar disorders (bipolar I, bipolar II, or BD-NOS) who live with (or in close proximity to) their parents, siblings, or, for adults, spouses/partners. Patients can be of any age. Family participants can also include combinations of parental and spousal relatives, or divorced parents of the person with bipolar disorder. In the latter case, we may conduct some of the sessions with the patient and one parent and other sessions with the patient and the other parent.  Patients with bipolar disorder can present as manic, mixed, hypomanic, depressed, or rapid cycling. The  polarity of the most recent episode, however, is a moving target—it may change before the patient is seen next. Patients who are manic or hypomanic, particularly those who are elated and grandiose, are often in denial about whether they are really ill, and may believe that the disorder and its treatment are simply ways for others to control them. Depressed patients may be more motivated for psychosocial treatment but may have cognitive difficulty assimilating the educational content of sessions. Patients with a mixed episode or rapid-cycling bipolar disorder can be candidates for FFT. Any of these presentations may require emergency interventions such as changes in medications or hospitalization during treatment. Although there is no contraindication for offering FFT to patients who have been symptomatically recovered for lengthy periods, in our experience, they and their family members are less motivated for treatment than those who have recently coped with a mood episode.  Patients with comorbid alcohol or other substance use disorders pose special problems. These patients are usually resistant to psychosocial treatment and medication. They are also difficult to diagnose; the effects of drugs or alcohol can mimic the cycling of a mood disorder. Generally, patients with active substance use disorders are more successfully treated if they are “dry” before FFT commences. It is often necessary to supplement FFT with chemical dependency programs (e.g., dual-diagnosis Alcoholics Anonymous groups). Nonetheless, a protocol for treating adolescents with bipolar disorder and substance abuse has been developed (Goldstein, Goldstein, & Miklowitz, 2008; Miklowitz, 2012).  Concurrent Drug Treatment  We require that our patients be seen simultaneously by a psychiatrist, who monitors the patient’s medications. Typically, a regimen includes a primary mood stabilizer, usually lithium carbonate, divalproex sodium (Depakote), or lamotrigine (Lamictal). The choice of these mood stabilizers is at least in part a function of whether the patient presents with clear-cut episodes of euphoric mania, in which case lithium is often recommended. Lamotrigine is increasingly used for bipolar depression. More and more, we are seeing patients treated with atypical antipsychotics (risperidone [Risperdal], quetiapine [Seroquel], aripiprazole [Abilify], ziprasidone [Geodon], or olanazapine [Zyprexa]) as either primary   Bipolar Disorder  mood stabilizing agents or adjuncts to traditional mood stabilizers. There is strong evidence that these agents are highly effective in controlling mania (Scherk, Pajonk, & Leucht, 2007), and some (notably, quetiapine) have antidepressant properties as well (Malhi et al., 2009). These agents are particularly valuable if the patient is highly agitated or psychotic. Antidepressants (e.g., paroxetine [Paxil], venlafaxine [Effexor], bupropion [Wellbutrin]) are still recommended as adjuncts to mood stabilizers or atypical antipsychotics if the patient’s depression does not remit, but they are given sparingly because of the risk of switching from depression into manic, mixed, or rapid-cycling states (Altshuler et al., 1995) and, in children, a concern about a slightly increased risk of suicidal ideation or behaviors (Vitiello & Swedo, 2004). However, there is little evidence that antidepressants cause mania among patients with bipolar depression who are simultaneously treated with mood stabilizers or atypical antipsychotic agents (Sachs et al., 2007).  A core principle of FFT is that the family therapist must have regular contact with the patient’s psychiatrist. This contact is established early in treatment. A close affiliation between the psychosocial and pharmacological treatment team enhances the likelihood of the patient’s remaining compliant with his/her medications; it also decreases the likelihood of “splitting,” or the tendency for a patient (or even family members) to have a “good doctor” and a “bad doctor.” For example, patients frequently complain about their physicians and say to their FFT clinicians, “I wish you could just monitor my medications.” An FFT clinician who has a regular dialogue with a patient’s physician can avoid the trap that is being set by encouraging the patient to bring up these problems with the physician directly.  Some patients who refuse all medications assume that coming to therapy will be a substitute for drug treatment. These patients often have had bad experiences with pharmacotherapy and psychiatrists, and may also believe that they are not ill, or that the illness they do have can be treated using “alternative medicine.” We have generally taken a hard line with these patients and do not accept them into FFT unless they commit to standard pharmacotherapy (usually lithium, anticonvulsants, and/or atypical antipsychotics). Patients with bipolar disorder who are unmedicated are highly likely to have relapses, and it is not in their best interests for the clinician to imply that their illness can be managed with psychosocial treatment alone.  Therapist Variables  In our UCLA and Colorado studies, therapists’ ages have ranged from 23 to 55 years, with from 1 to 30 years of clinical experience. The majority have been graduate students in clinical psychology or psychology interns, psychiatry fellows, or postdoctoral psychology fellows. Few have had extensive background in family therapy before learning FFT. The 15-site STEP-BD program involved both therapists with doctorates and social workers who varied considerably in treatment experience. In other words, there is no requirement that an FFT therapist has to have a certain amount of clinical training at the outset.  Although there have been no studies of therapist variables as predictors of the outcome of FFT, our clinical experience has been that two variables influence the uptake of this intervention. The first is the ability to think of a family or couple as a system in which members are interdependent and mutually influence other members’ behaviors. Therapists who have trouble with FFT often have difficulty making the transition to this systemic way of thinking. They tend, for example, to conduct family sessions as if they were individual sessions, with one patient and several observers. Some of these same problems arise in learning other forms of family therapy.  The second positive predictor is the willingness to think biopsychosocially—that is, to see bipolar disorder as a biologically based illness that requires medications, even if its symptoms are partially evoked by concurrent stressors. Thus, a therapist often must argue for the patient’s drug adherence even when psychosocial issues are more interesting and seem more pressing.  We have found that the following training protocol works well for learning FFT. First, therapists attend an FFT workshop conducted over 1–2 days. Then, they begin attending group supervision sessions in which trained FFT therapists discuss their cases, and in which they are able to observe sessions (or listen to tapes). They read the published treatment manual (Miklowitz, 2008b) and, when relevant, the adapted manuals for adolescents with BD or children at risk for BD. Then they serve as cotherapists to trained FFT therapists. After treating two cases with close supervision, they are usually ready to see families or couples independently, or even take on trainees themselves.  The cotherapy model has several advantages for training. It has a long history in the family therapy lit    CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  erature (see, e.g., Napier & Whitaker, 1988). Cotherapists have a way of keeping their fellow therapists on track. Also, if one person appears to be feeling “ganged up on” by one clinician and other family members, the other therapist can bridge the gap by allying him/herself with this family member. In-session dialogue between the clinicians can also provide effective modeling of communication skills for members of a family or couple.  PretreatMeNt assessMeNts  Diagnostic Evaluation  Bipolar disorder is becoming an increasingly common diagnosis in inpatient and outpatient community settings. Although this is a positive development given its underidentification in the past, there is also an element of sloppiness in modern diagnostic evaluations. Nowhere is this more obvious than in the diagnosis of children and adolescents, who are now being called “bipolar” with little supporting evidence (Carlson et al., 2009). The inadequacy of community diagnostic evaluations derives in part from inadequate insurance reimbursement for the evaluation phases of patients’ treatment. Some of the patients referred to us have been more aptly diagnosed as having cyclothymic disorder, borderline personality disorder, or even MDD. Many adolescents are referred with “rage attacks.” Our colleagues in community practice have often noted the same problems when patients who presumably have bipolar disorder are referred to them.  Upon seeing a new patient, a clinician often finds it useful to determine the reliability of the diagnosis with a formal assessment, using all or part of a structured diagnostic interview. Within our research protocols, we have used the Structured Clinical Interview for DSMIV— Patient Version (SCID; First, Spitzer, Gibbon, & Williams, 1995) as the diagnostic assessment device. The SCID is well described elsewhere (Spitzer, Williams, Gibbon, & First, 1992). When the patient is under age 18, we use the Schedule for Affective Disorders and Schizophrenia for School-Age Children— Present and Lifetime Version (K-SADS-PL), with the accompanying K-SADS Depression and Mania Rating Scales (Axelson et al., 2003; Chambers et al., 1985; Kaufman et al., 1997). The K-SADS-PL requires separate interviews with the child and at least one parent, followed by consensus ratings of each symptom item.  These instruments are being updated for DSM-5 to include changes such as the addition of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder or the broader definition of autism spectrum disorders.  Some of the factors that can affect the reliability of the data obtained from the SCID or K-SADS-PL include whether the patient is acutely ill or stable; acutely ill patients are less reliable in their symptom reports. Typically, patients in a manic state minimize their symptoms, whereas depressed patients may do the reverse. Patients with bipolar disorder also have trouble with retrospective reporting: “I’ve had over 1,000 episodes” and “I’ve been constantly manic–depressed since I was an infant” are common responses to diagnostic interviews.  Whether one uses the structured or an open-ended clinical interview, it is often difficult to determine whether a patient’s mood dysregulations and associated changes in activity are at the subsyndromal or syndromal levels. Some patients report brief periods of hypomania or irritability that alternate with more severe depressions. These brief, activated periods do not always reach the DSM duration threshold for hypomania (4 days or more), especially among children and teens. In some cases, the patient is “one symptom short.” Some of these patients are better characterized as having cyclothymic disorder or MDD. For children with manic symptoms who do not meet the duration or symptom count criteria, the diagnosis of BD-NOS is often given.  Hagop Akiskal (1996) has encouraged clinicians to consider a broader bipolar spectrum that includes core temperamental disturbances, including hyperthymia (exuberance, overoptimism, grandiosity, stimulus seeking, physical intrusiveness with others) or “sub-bipolar dysthymia.” In FFT, the broadening of the bipolar spectrum to include these patients introduces a quandary: Does the clinician proceed with such patients in the same way as with patients with bipolar I or bipolar II disorder? How does the clinician educate the patient and family about the factors that bring about manic or depressive episodes if discrete episodes cannot be identified? If a patient has never had a full manic episode, should the therapist proceed under the assumption that the patient eventually will develop mania spontaneously? Do the same self-management techniques (e.g., using problem solving to minimize family conflict) apply?  Our general impression has been that patients who do not go through clear-cut cycles of mood episodes comprise a different population of patients than those   Bipolar Disorder  with true bipolar disorder. Therefore, before we recommend a course of FFT, we require that there be evidence of an episodic course of illness, even if at the subthreshold level. Nonetheless, psychosocial interventions almost certainly have a role to play in the stabilization of patients with these broad spectrum presentations, an important direction for future research.  Mood Chart  Clarity on the diagnosis, as well as the patient’s progress in treatment, is aided by asking the patient to keep a daily mood chart. One such instrument, the Social Rhythm Metric (Monk, Kupfer, Frank, & Ritenour, 1991), asks the patient to document daily mood on a –5 (Depressed) to +5 (Euphoric/activated) scale, along with social routines that may influence these moods (e.g., sleep–wake times, times when the patient socializes, the intensity of this social stimulation, the patient’s exercise habits, and other factors).  Leverich and Post (1998) have developed a self-rated “life chart” that requires the patient to keep track of daily mood variations, medications, life stressors, and sleep. Data from mood/activity charts help the clinician and patient to evaluate collaboratively the type of cycling the patient experiences and the degree to which social stressors contribute to mood fluctuations. Figure  11.1 is an example of a mood chart; note the cycling of the disorder in relation to specific social stressors and sleep patterns reported by the patient. In this example, a stressor (a pet’s illness) is associated with sleep disruption and the appearance of mixed mood symptoms at the subsyndromal level. Family Assessments  FFT begins with a thorough assessment of family attitudes and behaviors to identify the targets of intervention. The research studies at UCLA have begun with the Camberwell Family Interview, the instrument for rating EE discussed earlier. This interview, usually done when the patient is acutely symptomatic, focuses on the prior 3-month period, which usually includes the prodromal phases of symptom buildup. The interview yields answers to the following questions: What is the current level of tension in the household and in the relative–patient relationship? Which of the patient’s behaviors are eliciting stimuli for family arguments or hostility? Do family members understand that the patient has bipolar disorder, or are they likely to attribute the patient’s negative behaviors to internal or controllable factors?  A problem with the EE/Camberwell Family Interview method is its lack of exportability to community  1/27 1/28 1/29 1/30 1/31 2/1 2/2 2/3 2/4 2/5 2/6 2/7 2/8 2/9 2/10 2/11 2/12 Hours of sleep 7 6 8 6 6 6 7 10 3 5 6 5 6 4 5 6 stayed out til3 am argumentwith Dad rejectingevent withboyfriend cat got sick went to hospital cat out of hospital High  Normal mood  Low  5 4 3 2 1 0 –1 –2 –3 –4 –5  figUre 11.1. Example of a self-rated mood chart.   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  care settings. Interviews with two parents can total 3 hours, and the coding of interview tapes can add an additional 6 person-hours per family. If a clinician’s purpose is treatment planning rather than research, he/ she may be able to substitute a self-report measure such as the Perceived Criticism Scale (Hooley & Teasdale, 1989). This measure simply asks the patient to rate, on a 1- to 10-point scale, the degree to which close relatives express critical comments toward him/her, and the degree to which he/she expresses critical comments toward relatives. We evaluated the predictive validity of this scale in a sample of 360 bipolar adults followed over 1 year (Miklowitz, Wisniewski, Miyahara, Otto, & Sachs, 2005). The degree to which patients reported being upset or distressed by criticism from relatives was a strong predictor of their levels of depression over a 1-year prospective period. Interestingly, the amount of criticism they perceived from relatives was not prognostically significant.  In our research protocols, we typically bring the family in for an interactional assessment before treatment is initiated. First, each member of the family, including the patient, identifies one or several family problem topics. Then, the family discusses one or more of these topics while the clinician observes through a one-way mirror. Transcripts of these 10-minute problem-solving discussions can then be coded using manuals such as the Category System for Coding Partner Interactions (Hahlweg et al., 1989) or the Global Assessment of Relational Functioning (Dausch, Miklowitz, & Richards, 1996).  The clinician can also rely on simple observations of the family’s communication and problem-solving behavior to inform the skills training modules of FFT. To quote Yogi Berra, “You can observe a lot by just watching.” First, many family members or patients are unable to focus on a single problem, and instead “cross-complain” or accuse other family members to counteract the accusations directed at them. Some engage in attack–counterattack cycles. For any particular family, the clinician must first identify the form these interchanges take, which dyadic or triadic relationships they involve; the content areas that trigger the interchanges (e.g., medication-taking habits, independence, interpersonal boundaries); and whether members of the family are able to stop these cycles before they spiral out of control. Who criticizes whom, and how often? How does the target person respond? Does the original problem ever get solved? How clear (or disorganized) is the speech of patients or relatives?  Process of treatMeNt  Psychoeducation  Table 11.2 summarizes the topical domains that are covered in FFT. The initiation of the psychoeducation module of FFT requires three conditions. First, the patient must be seeing a psychiatrist and have begun a medication regimen. Second, a diagnostic assessment must have been completed. Third, the patient must be able to tolerate family sessions. There is no requirement that the patient be in remission or recovery.  table 11.2. family-focused treatment: structure and topical outline  I. Psychoeducation The symptoms and course of bipolar disorder •• The signs and symptoms of (hypo)mania and  depression •• The development of the most recent mood episode •• The role of life events in most recent episode •• The course of the disorder over time  The etiology of bipolar disorder  •• The vulnerability–stress model ||The role of stress ||Genetic and biological predispositions  •• Risk and protective factors in the course of the disorder  Interventions and self-management •• Keeping a mood chart •• Types of medications •• Types of psychosocial treatments •• How the family can help •• Self-management of the disorder •• The relapse prevention drill  II. Communication enhancement training •• Expressing positive feelings •• Active listening •• Making positive requests for change •• Expressing negative feelings  III. Problem-solving skills training •• Define problems •• Generate solutions •• Evaluate advantages/disadvantages •• Choose one or a combination of solutions •• Develop an implementation plan •• Review the problem’s status   Bipolar Disorder  In the seven or more weekly sessions that comprise the psychoeducation module, participants (patients and their close relatives) become acquainted with the symptoms of bipolar disorder; the way episodes develop; the roles of genetics, biology, and stress; pharmacological treatments; and the role of stress management strategies.   The Initial Sessions: Providing a Rationale  As in most other forms of therapy, the clinicians begin by explaining the rationale for FFT. Many participants ask why family or couple sessions should accompany medication for a patient adjusting to a recent episode of bipolar disorder. Particularly helpful in orienting participants is the “reentry model” (Miklowitz, 2008b, p. 104):  An episode of mood disorder can be quite traumatic to all members of the family. . . . In bipolar disorder, when the person returns home and begins to recover, there is a “getting reacquainted” period in which everyone has to get to know everyone else again, and when everyone tries to make sense of what happened. This is a tough time for any family, and part of our purpose here is to make this “reacquaintance period” less disturbing to all of you. We’d like during this year to get you, as a family, back to where you were before became ill. We want to give you some tools to deal with this recovery period.  There are two purposes for this introduction. First, it communicates to the family members that their emotional reactions to the patient’s illness—even if quite negative—are normal and expectable. Second, it implies that the therapy will include exploration and clarification of participants’ emotional reactions to information about the disorder. This feature of the therapy can be made even more explicit:  If feelings come up for you when we’re discussing this material, please bring them up. We’re interested in knowing how this material applies to you and your own experiences. You may or may not agree with some of the material we present here. . . . The purpose of focusing on this material is to put your experiences into a context that will make sense. (p. 110)  Next, the treatment is previewed:  We’re going to work with you on two different levels. One is on encouraging ’s ongoing  work with his psychiatrist so that he can get himself stabilized on medications. The second is on how you as a family can minimize stress. . . . We think there are several ways to do this, including acquainting you with the facts about bipolar disorder, and working with you on improving your communication and problem solving with each other. These strategies should increase ’s chances of making a good recovery and help you as a family cope with the disorder. How does this sound to you? (p. 107)  The Symptoms of Bipolar Disorder  FFT proceeds with a series of handouts that are used as stimuli for generating family or couple discussions. These contain descriptions of the symptoms of manic, hypomanic, or depressive episodes, with illustrations. The purpose of these handouts is not for the participants to memorize the diagnostic criteria. Rather, they provide a starting point for destigmatizing the illness and breaking family taboos against talking about it. The patient is asked to look at the lists and describe to family members the way it feels when one is euphoric, irritable, unable to sleep, or activated by racing thoughts or grandiose plans. Likewise, family members describe the behaviors they observe when the patient cycles into mania or hypomania. A similar dialogue is undertaken for depression symptoms. Consider the following dialogue among a patient, mother, father, and therapist.  Patient: Well, the thing is, there’s the manic and then there’s the hypomanic. When I’m manic, I really should be hospitalized. I control the weather; I’m famous. When I’m hypomanic, well, I just can get into that from having too much stress, too much caffeine, and being all revved up. . .  motHer: I can tell when she’s high because I start getting real mad at her. She provokes me.  FatHer: And she gets this look in her eyes. And she says we’re not listening to her. . .  Patient: But you’re not! That’s when you’re most likely to tune me out!  tHeraPist: Let’s hold on that for now, about listening. It’s very important, and certainly something we’ll want to focus on as we go along, but what else do you notice when you get manic or hypomanic? [Redirects the focus.]  Patient: I get sort of, well, reactive. . . I experience   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  everything so intensely, but see, they know this as who I am.  Note the themes that arise in this discussion of symptoms, and how these relate to the six objectives of FFT outlined in Table 11.1. The patient’s vulnerability to recurrences is made explicit by the family’s identification of the prodromal signs of her episodes. The patient points to the role of disturbed family communication. She alludes to questions about whether some of her symptoms are really just personality traits (i.e., intensity and reactivity). There is a beginning discussion of stress factors that may play a role in triggering her episodes.  The Vulnerability–Stress Model and the Life Events Survey  Early in psychoeducation, the family clinicians make a strong argument for the conjoint influences of stress, biological imbalances of the brain, and genetic vulnerability in the course of bipolar illness. A handout illustrating these vulnerability–stress interactions is provided, and various risk and protective factors are reviewed. For example, the patient and family members are warned of the impact of “poor sleep hygiene” (i.e., keeping irregular hours, having unpredictable bedtimes); alcohol and drug use; stressful family interchanges; and provocative, overstimulating interpersonal interactions. They are encouraged to make use of available protective factors (e.g., social supports), and help the patient maintain adherence to his/her pharmacotherapy regimen. The purposes of the patient’s various medications are given, and the role of blood level monitoring (where relevant) is reviewed. In outlining protective factors, a special emphasis is placed on keeping the family environment low in conflict and on maintaining reasonable performance expectations of the patient during the recovery period. In the following vignette, the clinician reminds the patient and his mother that depression is not the same as lack of effort, and that a period of recovery prior to regaining one’s pre-illness occupational status is to be expected.  tHeraPist: (to Gary, the patient) I think you can’t expect too much just yet. You’re still recovering from your episode. It may take some time to get back on track.  motHer: How long? He’s been like this now for a while.  tHeraPist: I’m sure that’s frustrating, but you have to think of this as a convalescent period. When someone has a bad flu, he may need an extra day or two in bed to recover completely. For bipolar disorder, this period of time can average 3 to 6 months. But, Gary, with your medication treatments and our family sessions, and the fact that you’ve maintained your friendships, I have every expectation that you’ll recover and be able to get back to work.  The clinician here offers hope but does not paint a rosy picture of the future. Often the family has been through these episodes before, and a clinician who offers an excessively optimistic view of the future will be dismissed as unrealistic.  Describing the biology and genetics of the disorder is critical to justifying the role of medications. However, it is not necessary for the clinician to go into detail about the neurophysiology of the disorder. Instead, the clinician begins by asking the participants to review their family pedigree and discuss any other persons in the family who have had episodes of depression or mania. In reviewing this history, the family is told that the vulnerability to bipolar disorder may take many forms, including major depression without mania, alcoholism, suicide, and dysthymia. Next, the clinician explains the notions behind neural dysregulation in bipolar disorder:  “We know that people with bipolar disorder have trouble regulating their emotional states, sleep, and arousal, all of which are regulated by the limbic system, an important circuit in your brain. In mania, we think that the limbic system becomes overactive, and the frontal cortex—the ‘executive’ in your brain— stops being able to do its job. It’s almost like having your foot on the gas pedal when the brakes are not working. When a person gets depressed, the system shuts down, and the circuits become underactive. These changes in brain activity can’t be controlled through your conscious efforts, but the medications you take can go a long way toward balancing the activity in your nervous system.”  When family members begin to attribute the patient’s aversive behaviors to willfulness (the “fundamental attributional error”), the clinician can remind them of the existence of neural dysregulation. But the family and patient should also be discouraged from overemphasizing the biological nature of the disorder,   Bipolar Disorder  to the point of neglecting stress factors such as longstanding family conflicts. In other words, the patient is not entirely taken off of the hook: He/she is encouraged to self-monitor when getting into arguments with family members, and to determine whether his/her reactions to these conflicts reflect an unresolved symptom state or a reemergence of conflicts that would have been troublesome even before he/she became ill.  Clarifying the stress triggers for the most recent episode is aided by a handout describing life changes that may have occurred when the episode was developing. Some of these changes are quite severe and negative (e.g., death of a parent); others are mild but may have provoked changes in sleep–wake cycles (e.g., taking a vacation). The clinician engages the family or couple in a discussion about what stressors may have provoked the patient’s current episode, with the caveat that the triggers for mania and depression may be quite different. It is not critical that the participants agree on a singular cause for the most recent episode, but they may benefit from the awareness that mood episodes are affected by environmental as well as neurobiological factors.  The Relapse Drill  Toward the end of psychoeducation, the family and patient are given their first exposure to problem solving. The task is to review the prodromal signs of a developing episode and go through the steps that are necessary to prevent a full relapse. Participants are asked to generate alternative courses of action should the patient relapse into mania or depression, which can include arranging emergency psychiatric services (e.g., calling the patient’s psychiatrist), introducing behavioral activation exercises (e.g., assisting the depressed patient in scheduling more outdoor activity during the day). Each family member is asked to perform a function in the relapse prevention plan. For example, in some families it may make sense for a parent to undertake contact with the physician. In others, the patient may want the first opportunity to do so. The family or couple is encouraged to leave phone numbers of emergency contact people, including the family clinicians, in an easily accessible place.  Dealing with Resistance to the Illness Concept  Patients with bipolar disorder often have strong reactions to the psychoeducational materials, as do their  family members. These materials require that the participants recognize bipolar disorder as an illness that will eventually recur. Younger patients are particularly likely to reject the notion of a recurrent illness, particularly if they are still hypomanic; they feel powerful and in control, and the idea of having an illness feels like shackles. Moreover, they are particularly attuned to the stigma associated with bipolar disorder or any other psychiatric diagnosis, and fear that their behavior will now be labeled as that of a crazy person. Resistance can also originate with family members. Relatives of depressed patients are apt to see the disorder as willfully caused and not the product of biochemical imbalances. Resistance from one member is often associated with intense family conflicts.  Accepting a psychiatric disorder is a painful process for patients and relatives. Often the psychoeducational materials raise questions, such as “Why me? Why now? What kind of life will I have? Will people treat me like I’m mentally ill from now on? Will I ever get back to normal?” Relatives ask themselves similar painful questions, such as “Will I always have to take care of him/her? Are my dreams and hopes for him/her gone?” Spouses/partners may ask, “Should I leave him/her?” When asking themselves these questions, some patients respond by “underidentifying,” or denying the reality of the disorder, or by acknowledging the illness superficially but living their lives as if it were not real.  Others “overidentify” and unnecessarily limit themselves. For example, one woman avoided romantic relationships because “No one will ever be able to get close to me because of my mood swings.” Likewise, family members can deny the realities of the disorder or, in contrast, overmonitor the patient’s health status and try to limit his/her behavior unnecessarily. Family conflict reaches a maximum when there is a mismatch between coping styles, such as when patients underidentify and relatives overidentify, or the reverse.  FFT clinicians proceed with a sensitivity to the painful emotional issues underlying these reactions to the illness. One method for dealing with these reactions is to predict that denial will occur, and to reframe it as a sign of health. For example, consider a young man with hypomania who has accepted taking medications but denies being ill, and whose parents overcontrol and overmonitor his behavior. To this young man, the clinician might say:  “Although I appreciate that you’re taking medication and going along with the treatment plan, I’m going to   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  guess that you’re not always going to want to do this. You probably have some questions about whether this diagnosis is right for you or whether you’ll have more symptoms. I can understand why you’d have these questions. Coming to terms with having bipolar disorder—or really any illness—is a very painful process that can be hard to accept. This is a normal and a healthy struggle. So, as we’re going through our material, you may find yourself reacting to it and feeling that it can’t be relevant to you. But I’d like for you to agree that if you have these reactions, you’ll bring them up so we can discuss them.”  Note that this intervention has a paradoxical flavor, but that the clinician stops short of actually encouraging the patient to remain resistant or to increase his level of disagreement with the diagnosis. Instead, the clinician reframes this denial as healthy and expectable, and connects it with an underlying emotional struggle.  A second way to intervene is through “spreading the affliction.” Being labeled as mentally ill can put a person in a one-down position vis-à-vis other family members, including siblings with whom he/she may already feel competitive. A possible side effect of psychoeducation is the exaggeration of these structural family problems. The clinician can avoid this trap by encouraging other members of the family to discuss their own experiences with depression, anxiety, or other problems. This process can help normalize mood problems and take the patient “off the hot seat.”  The following vignette involves Josh, a 25-yearold with a recent manic episode. He reacted strongly because he thought everyone was telling him he was “whacked out.” According to Josh, all he had done was “party too much.” During one of the psychoeducation sessions, his father admitted to having had a depressive episode in college.  tHeraPist: Josh, you seem like you’re reacting to something I just said about bipolar disorder. Were you offended?  JosH: I dunno. It wasn’t anything you said; just I get tired of being the only one in the family who has problems.  tHeraPist: Is that really true? Has anyone else in the family ever had any problems with depression? Or what I’ve called mania?  FatHer: (pause) I did, and I’ve told Josh about this. Remember what I told you about college?  JosH: (sullen) I don’t know. Why don’t you clue us in? FatHer: I had that long period when I couldn’t sleep and eat, and I couldn’t study. I dropped out for a semester.   The session then focused on the father and his own history of depression. He revealed a history of psychosis involving delusional thinking. Although the patient was sullen at first, he became more cooperative in the discussions that followed, and more willing to talk about how the illness label made him feel stigmatized.  A third method of dealing with resistance involves making analogies to medical disorders. The illness will feel less stigmatizing to patient and family if they can see it within the continuum of other kinds of chronic physical illness. Diabetes and hypertension are often good comparisons, particularly because the influence of stress can also be brought to bear:  “Bipolar disorder involves biological imbalances much like hypertension does, and it’s affected by stress in much the same way. Most people have changes in blood pressure when something stressful happens. But people with hypertension have a vulnerability to extreme shifts in their blood pressure. In the same way, most people have mood changes when something important happens, but people with bipolar disorder operate at greater extremes.”  In making these analogies, the clinician validates the patient’s feelings about social stigma:  “Although there are some similarities with illnesses like hypertension, bipolar disorder can be tougher to live with because other people tend to be afraid of it and don’t know what it means. They can think you’re doing it on purpose. You have to take the time to educate other people—particularly those people who are most important to you—and explain it in a way that they won’t be freaked out by it.”  Communication Enhancement Training  The second module of FFT, CET, begins at approximately Session 8 and lasts for about seven or eight sessions (five weekly sessions, followed by two or three biweekly sessions). CET is guided by two assumptions. First, aversive family communication is a common sequel to an episode of a psychiatric illness and to a large   Bipolar Disorder  extent reflects distress within the family or couple in members’ attempts to deal with the disorder. Second, the frequency of aversive communication can be reduced through skills training.  CET uses a role-playing format to teach patients and their relatives four communication skills: expressing positive feelings, active listening, making positive requests for changes in others’ behaviors, and giving negative feedback. These skills are central to the behavioral family management approach to schizophrenia of Falloon and colleagues (1984) and Liberman, Wallace, Falloon, and Vaughn (1981). The degree to which each of these skills dominates the role-play exercises varies according to the family assessments conducted earlier. Treatment of a family with much heated conflict and high-EE attitudes might focus on adaptive ways in which participants could ask for changes in each other’s behaviors. Treatment of an emotionally disengaged couple might focus on positive feedback and listening skills to coax the partners into experimenting with a more interdependent relationship.  The module begins with an explication of the CET method for the family:  A person can be at risk for another relapse of bipolar disorder if the home environment is tense. . . . Good communication and problem solving can be among those “protective factors” against stress that we talked about before. For a close relative, learning effective communication skills can be a way of decreasing tension and improving family relationships. . . . We want to help you communicate in the most clear and the least stressful way possible. . . . We’ll be asking you to turn your chairs to each other and practice new ways of talking among yourselves. (Miklowitz, 2008b, pp. 208)  Note that CET is linked with two of the six objectives of the larger treatment program: helping participants to cope with stress triggers and restoring functional family relationships after an illness episode. The first two skills, positive feedback and active listening, generally foster a feeling of collaboration between members of the couple or family. In contrast, making positive requests for change and giving negative feedback are more conflict-oriented, and are only introduced once participants are used to the role-playing and behavioral rehearsal format.  For each skill, the clinician gives participants a handout that lists the skill’s components (e.g., for active listening: make good eye contact, nod your head,  ask clarifying questions, paraphrase/check out what you heard). Then the clinician models the skill for the family. For example, the clinician might compliment one member of the family for his/her cooperativeness with the treatment, or model effective listening while another family member talks about a problem. After the skill is introduced and modeled, participants are asked to practice the skill with each other, with coaching and shaping by the clinician. Typically the therapist coaches one participant at a time on appropriate ways to use a given skill. The feedback of other family members is actively solicited. The speaker or listener is then asked to try the skill again, until he/she has approximated its use. A homework assignment, in which participants keep a written log of their efforts in using the skills between sessions, facilitates generalization of the learning process to the home and work settings.  Many times, the skills are harder than they look. Consider Jessie, a 38-year-old woman with bipolar disorder who had had several episodes of psychotic mania and also a borderline level of mental retardation. She worked part-time as a gift wrapper in a department store. Jessie was trying to move into her own apartment and required help finding a moving van. She was instructed to learn to make positive requests of her father, with whom she and her sister lived.  tHeraPist: Maybe that’s a good topic to ask your dad about. Can you look at this “Positive Requests” handout and use these steps to ask your dad to help you move?  FatHer: It won’t help. There won’t be anything to move because she still hasn’t packed a single box! (Laughs.)  Jessie: Well, get me the damn boxes and I’ll do it.  tHeraPist: (derailing this interchange) Do you think you could ask your dad for something specific, like helping you find a moving company?  Jessie: (Looks at father, smirking.) Dad, will you help me find a moving company? (Giggles.)  FatHer: (more serious) You’re not. . . you’re not looking at this. (Indicates handout.) You’re supposed to say, “I’d appreciate it if you would. . . ”  Jessie: (Shrugs.) All right, I’d appreciate it if you would! Get me a phone number. Please.  tHeraPist: (after a pause) Well, you got part of it that time, Jessie. Dad, what did you like about what she just said to you?   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  FatHer: (sarcastically) Gee, all the sincerity.  Jessie: (Laughs nervously.)  tHeraPist: Well, if you didn’t care for it, can you say how she might say it to you?  FatHer: How about something like “I’d appreciate it if you’d get me those phone numbers. It’d make it a lot more comfortable for me to plan my move.”  tHeraPist: Nice job, Dad. Jessie, what did your dad do that you liked or didn’t like? Jessie: He followed the sheet. He did all the things you said.  tHeraPist: True, but you don’t have to say it exactly the way he did. You can put your own spin on it. Do you feel you could try doing it one more time?  Jessie: (Gasps, giggles.)  tHeraPist: I know it’s hard being in the hot seat. But you’re doing fine. Keep trying.  Jessie: Dad, could you get me those phone numbers of the movers? I’d appreciate it. That way I could be. . . I wouldn’t have to worry about the move, and, well, just thank you for your help.  tHeraPist: That was very good, Jessie. Dad, how did you like it that time? FatHer: (a little tentative) That was better. It made a lot more sense.  These kinds of skills are most difficult to learn if the patient is highly symptomatic and/or cognitively impaired, or if the level of conflict in the family is so severe that productive conversations cannot ensue. This patient was moderately hypomanic and also had limited intellectual resources. Clearly, the skills training taxed her and made her nervous. However, with patience and practice, Jessie was able to adopt some of the communication skills, and her relationship with her father gradually improved. Her father, who was often quite critical, became more and more convinced that her limited functioning was a result of her bipolar disorder rather than lack of effort, as he had believed previously.  The FFT manual (Miklowitz, 2008b) describes “short-fuse” families. These families begin with apparently innocuous discussions, which quickly escalate into angry, back-and-forth volleys of criticism or hostility. Our research indicates that these are usually high- EE families or couples, but not invariably (Simoneau et al., 1998). We have been surprised that relatives who, on the surface, appear benign and supportive of the pa   tient during the EE/Camberwell Family Interview become quite aggressive and confrontational when facing the patient in a one-to-one interaction. Not surprisingly, the likelihood that this will occur is greatly augmented if the patient is hypomanic and irritable. Short-fuse families typically have difficulty with communication training because the participants’ emotions quickly get out of hand (see the case study presented later). But much can be accomplished by modifying the skills training to the family’s natural styles. For example, the therapist can encourage the participants to use active listening skills during their arguments. After a negative, back-and-forth interchange involving a couple, a clinician said:  “I think this is an important discussion. You’re a couple that really likes to get things out in the open. But I’m afraid that you’re missing out on each other’s viewpoints. So let’s see if we can make it more productive. I want you each to paraphrase each other’s statements before making your next argument, like we did in the active listening exercises. Also, why don’t you turn your chairs to each other so that you can more easily keep eye contact?”  Note again the use of reframing. It is better to cast a couple’s or family’s ongoing dynamics (unless clearly abusive or threatening) as an adaptive way of coping that needs modification than to label these dynamics as “bad” or “dysfunctional.”  A short-fuse family may also be able to make good use of positive requests for change or negative feedback exercises, in which the partners make constructive suggestions about specific aspects of each other’s behavior (e.g., “I don’t like it when you talk down to me about my health habits”) and offer suggestions as to ways these behaviors could be improved (e.g., “Could you be more aware of your tone of voice?”). These exercises often set the stage for problem solving, the final module of FFT.  Problem‑Solving Skills Training  Families of patients with bipolar disorder often have difficulty with problem solving, especially if the patient has recently been ill (e.g., Simoneau et al., 1998). Family problems in adjusting to the postepisode phases of bipolar disorder appear to fall into one of four categories: medication nonadherence, difficulty resuming prior work and social roles, repairing the financial and   Bipolar Disorder  social damage done during manic episodes (“life trashing”), and relationship/living situation conflicts.  In FFT, the purposes of problem solving are threefold: (1) to open a dialogue among family members about difficult conflict topics; (2) to allow them a context in which to share their emotional reactions to these problems; and (3) to help them develop a framework for defining, generating, evaluating, and implementing effective solutions to problems. This module occupies the final four to five sessions of FFT, and usually begins by the fourth or fifth month, when sessions have been tapered to biweekly. Problem solving is positioned last in FFT because the patient is usually in remission by this point and is more able, both cognitively and emotionally, to experiment with new ways of behaving. Furthermore, if the psychoeducation and CET have gone well, family members are more ready to see their own role in generating or maintaining family conflicts and are more open to hearing each other’s viewpoints.  In problem solving, families are taught to break broad problems down into smaller units that are more amenable to solution. Family members are given a problem-solving worksheet in which they are asked to take the following steps: define the problem (with each participant’s input); “brainstorm” all possible solutions without evaluating them; consider each solution individually and weigh its advantages and disadvantages; choose a best solution or combination of solutions; and plan and implement the chosen solutions. Once they have had at least a moderately successful experience in solving a relatively minor problem, participants are given a homework task in which they record their attempts to solve a new, larger problem. Assignments are sometimes quite modest; some families are simply given the task of defining one or more problems to work on in the upcoming session.  The rationale for problem solving is presented as follows:   Up until now, we’ve been talking mainly about how you communicate with each other. Now we’d like to deal with some of the concrete problems of living you’ve all been alluding to. But rather than our just giving you suggestions about what to do about these—which probably wouldn’t work that well anyway—we’d like to teach you a way of solving problems cooperatively, as a family. (Miklowitz, 2008b, pp. 259)  This rationale is then followed by a review of the steps for solving problems and familiarizing the family  or couple with a problem-solving worksheet. The clinician also reviews some of the problems the members raised during earlier phases of treatment.  Consider this case example of the problem-solving method. Karla, age 35, moved in with her new boyfriend, Taki, shortly after her divorce. She was in poor shape financially; she had a tendency to “spend to improve my self-esteem.” In fact, most of her spending sprees occurred during hypomanic periods, and Karla had become hypomanic shortly after meeting Taki, who was quite well off. Perhaps due to eagerness to make the relationship work, he gave Karla access to his credit cards. During their first months together, his bills increased hugely. Karla’s own employment was inconsistent. She had had trouble for years keeping to a budget and maintaining a checking account. They had begun to fight heavily about this problem. Karla argued that money was his way of controlling women, and Taki argued that she was taking advantage of him and being inconsiderate.  First, the clinician returned to the communication enhancement exercises. He encouraged the couple to expand on these broader issues before zeroing in on the more specific problem of spending. Karla voiced her opinion about what she felt was the “meat of the problem,” while Taki listened. Then Taki described his take on the underlying issues, while Karla listened and paraphrased. The structure imposed by problem solving eventually helped them define the issue more specifically: Karla spent more on clothing and “comfort items” than either of them thought she should, but it was unrealistic for her to try to support herself given her unresolved symptomatic state. Various options were then considered: Taki doing most of the buying, Karla being assigned her own account with an upper limit negotiated each month, and the two of them simply separating their finances. These and other options were evaluated as to their advantages and disadvantages. Finally, they agreed on a somewhat complicated but clever solution: Karla was to obtain three bank debit cards assigned to each of three accounts. Each card was labeled with an expense item (e.g., “doctor bills”) and had a spending limit posted on it. They were to meet weekly to determine whether the solution was working, and to practice listening skills with each other when they began to disagree.  In this example, the problem was to some degree generated by the patient’s residual symptoms. There were also relationship dynamics: Karla tended to become overly dependent on men and then to devalue them, and   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  Taki tended to rescue women and then become angry about being in the rescuer role. The clinician decided to let them first “ventilate” about these larger relationship themes. Allowing a certain amount of emotional expression about loaded issues often reduces a family’s or couple’s resistance to dealing with more specific problems (in this case, disagreements about spending).  When taking families or couples through their first problem-solving exercises, FFT clinicians monitor participants’ reactions to the method. Reactions can vary from “This is just what we need” to “Gee, how superficial.” Patients with bipolar disorder and their family members seem to crave spontaneity and enjoy fastpaced, unpredictable interchanges. They get bored easily. The communication and problem-solving exercises impose structure and encourage goal-directedness but can also generate resistance. Resistance can take the form of changing the subject, “cross-complaining,” or being unwilling to cooperate with the homework tasks.  When addressing resistances, a clinician reiterates the rationale for problem solving (e.g., “Sometimes you have to gain confidence from solving minor problems before you move on to bigger ones”). But often he/she must determine whether it is really the problem-solving method that family members object to or whether there are certain costs or painful consequences associated with attempting to solve a problem (e.g., a mother’s fear that her son with bipolar disorder will be unable to handle agreed-upon tasks that require greater independence). Family members who fear the consequences of solving a problem often approach solutions, then quickly abandon the problem-solving process, arguing that “this is not really the issue.” The therapist has a number of options available. One is to take responsibility for the unsolved problem. For example, he/she can say, “Perhaps it was wrong of me to encourage you to solve this problem. Maybe you have other things you want to deal with first. Would you like to table it for now?” Alternatively, the clinician may proceed more paradoxically, framing the family’s difficulty as due to “healthy avoidance”:  “Solving a problem as a family involves some costs– benefits thinking. There are certainly some benefits to solving this problem, but there may be some hidden costs as well. I think if the costs of solving this problem outweigh the benefits, it’s certainly understandable that you’d want to avoid putting a solution in place. Is that what’s happening here?”  Both of these interventions give the family members “permission” to leave the problem untouched. Later, when the pressure is off, they may be able to return to the problem and have more success the second time around.  Terminating FFT  FFT is terminated after 9 months. As termination approaches, a therapist reviews with the family members the six goals for treatment (discussed earlier) and the degree to which those goals were or were not realized. The status of the patient’s bipolar disorder is evaluated relative to that at the beginning of treatment. In some cases, maintenance or “tune-up” FFT sessions are recommended.   Referrals for subsequent treatment for both the patient and other family members are discussed. For example, some patients follow up FFT with individual therapy or mutual support groups involving other persons with bipolar disorder. Family members may choose to attend support groups of the Depressive and Bipolar Support Alliance (www.dbsalliance.org) or the National Alliance on Mental Illness (www.nami.org). In our experience, it is unusual for families to request additional family or couple therapy after FFT, but referrals are made, if requested.  The clinicians reiterates the importance of continued medication adherence and incorporation of communication and problem-solving skills into the family’s dayto- day life. Finally, a review of the relapse drill (see the earlier “Psychoeducation” section) is conducted: The patient’s prodromal signs are reviewed, and the steps the patient and family can take to avert a relapse are reiterated.  case stuDy  Debra, a 36-year-old European American woman, lived with her husband Barry, age 46, and their 8-year-old daughter Jill. She had completed 2 years of college and worked part time as a sales clerk in a luggage shop. She had been married previously. Debra was referred for FFT by a university clinic, where she had been diagnosed with bipolar II disorder. The initial SCID confirmed this diagnosis. Her depression was marked by loss of interests and “being bummed” for several weeks at a time. She also complained of loss of appetite, wak    Bipolar Disorder  ing several times each night, fatigue, guilt, and loss of concentration. She denied having suicidal thoughts. She recounted that her current depression was “a really big one” and had lasted on and off for a full year. Debra also said, “I’ve had tons of small ones.” She dated the first onset of her depression to approximately 8 years earlier, following her divorce from her first husband.  Debra also admitted to having had a hypomanic episode in the previous month, including about 5 days of elevated and irritable mood. She explained, “My confidence level was up.” She admitted to racing thoughts, increased activity and talkativeness, and becoming involved in many different projects. She had trouble dating the onset and offset of these periods, noting, “I’ve been this way all my life.” She did admit that Barry had commented on these mood phases. Debra complained, “He now tells me I’m getting manic every time we get in an argument. . . . It’s his newest weapon against me.” She denied having delusions or hallucinations.  Debra had been treated previously with sertraline (Zoloft) and bupropion (Wellbutrin). Her psychiatrist had recently started her on divalproex sodium (Depakote) at 1,500 mg/day, a medication that she said had made a difference in stabilizing her mood.  Barry, an attorney, presented as a “no-nonsense” type of man. He responded to the clinicians in a very businesslike manner and insisted that he had no problems of his own to discuss “except those that relate to Debra’s care.” He denied any psychiatric history himself. He preferred to talk about FFT as an educational course and became defensive if his wife referred to it as “therapy.” The FFT clinicians, a male–female cotherapy team, did not dissuade him from labeling the treatment this way, believing that they would need to work on building a rapport with him before addressing his defensive style.  Family Assessment  Based on the Camberwell Family Interview, Barry met the criteria for a high level of EE. He voiced nine criticisms during his 1-hour interview. He tended to complain at length about Debra’s memory, work habits, and disorganization (e.g., “She never remembers about parent–teacher meetings,” “She forgets to turn in her time sheet at work—it drives me crazy”). Barry admitted that he still loved Debra but found her very frustrating. He was convinced that she had ADHD as well as bipolar disorder.  Debra and Barry came in for the family interactional assessment well dressed and smiling. The clinicians interviewed them individually, and arrived at an important problem topic for them to discuss: Barry’s claim that Debra lied to him. Her response was to apologize for her past misdeeds and to argue, “I’m not lying or withholding. . . . Those are usually things I’ve forgotten or just don’t think are important.” Upon discussing this issue, the couple’s dynamics became apparent, with Barry speaking in an accusatory, scolding mode and Debra apologizing and justifying her behavior. As Barry became more accusatory, Debra looked more and more depressed.  Barry: Lying is a way of life for you. You twist the truth and say you don’t remember things.  DeBra: But I really don’t. I’ve been trying to tell you everything. Sometimes I just forget. (Starts rocking her chair.)  Barry: (holding Debra’s chair still) Why do you think it’s OK to lie to me? DeBra: I don’t. I’m being up front with you. Maybe you want to believe there’s more, but there’s not.  Barry: I think you’ll always do this. It’s your bag. How would you like it if I lied to you? How would it make you feel? Would you want to stay married to me?  DeBra: (sullen) No, probably not. But I’m trying to be open with my feelings, kinda with you as a practice case. (Smiles awkwardly.)  Barry: You’re doing that little smile again. The one you do when you’re trying to get away with something.   DeBra: (defensive) Oh, give me a break. Barry: Is it because we’re talking so directly? I don’t know if it’s your personality or if it’s the bipolar stuff acting up, but you have no tolerance for anything these days, especially people.  The therapists who viewed this assessment were struck by Barry’s level of criticism, paired with Debra’s tendency to take a one-down position. They also learned during the assessment that Barry doled out Debra’s medications and made her doctor appointments for her, and also usually attended them with her. An initial appointment for FFT was set with two clinical psychologists, one of whom was a trainee.   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  Psychoeducation (Sessions 1–7)  During the initial session, the clinicians (Therapist 1 and Therapist 2 in the dialogues below) described the FFT program to Barry and Debra, with particular emphasis on the psychoeducational component. They previewed the communication enhancement and problem-solving modules. The couple listened politely but expressed skepticism.  Barry: We’ve been in and out of therapy for years. I haven’t been impressed. tHeraPist 1: When you say “We,” do you mean you as a couple? Barry: As a couple, and she’s had her own therapy.  DeBra: I thought Dr. Walker was good. Barry: Yeah, but you hadn’t had the bipolar diagnosis yet. She was just treating you for depression. And she got into that whole “You were probably abused as a child and forgot about it” thing.  tHeraPist 1: What was your couple therapy like?  Barry: A lot of digging into our childhoods and getting in touch with our feelings.  tHeraPist 1: Debra?  DeBra: It wasn’t that bad. I thought it was pretty useful. tHeraPist 1: Well, it sounds like you’ve got different opinions on how helpful those sessions were. Let me tell you how this will be different. Our treatment is going to be focused mainly on the present, and we’ll be working on how you as a couple are coping with bipolar disorder. Barry, you’re going to be affected by the cycling of Debra’s mood disorder, but Debra, you’re also going to be affected by the way Barry responds to your symptoms. I’m not saying your past will be irrelevant, but it’s just not our focus. Barry: I need help dealing with all of this. The more information I get, the better. tHeraPist 1: I’m sure that’s true. But we won’t just throw a lot of information at you—we want to individualize it to your situation. I think you’ll have a much easier time if you come to a common understanding of the disorder as a couple and learn to communicate about it.  In this dialogue, the therapist made a distinction between FFT and more generic forms of couple therapy. At this point, the clinicians already suspected that there would be resistance from Barry, especially around  tasks in which he was asked to look at his own behavior and its contribution to Debra’s mood problems.  The psychoeducation itself began in the second session and continued through the seventh. The first task was to encourage the couple to come to a shared definition of “bipolar disorder.” During the assessments, both had mentioned the term “cycling,” but without apparent agreement on what it meant.  tHeraPist 1: I want to be sure we’re all on the same page when we talk about the meaning of the term “bipolar.” Debra, you did a great job just now of explaining what depression feels like. Let’s talk about the other side now. (Passes around a handout describing the symptoms of mania/hypomania.) Barry, which of these have you observed when Debra gets hypomanic?  Barry: (surveying the handout) Well, all of these except appetite disturbance. . . . I guess you could say she has grandioseness—she thinks one day she’ll be wealthy. (Laughs.)  tHeraPist 2: When was the last time you think she was like that? Barry: Last time I was working on a case—she always gets like that when I’m working on a case.  DeBra: I agree, but I think it’s because I have a lot more to do when he’s working all the time. . . . He thinks it’s some “abandonment” thing, but I think he forgets the realities I face when he’s gone. (Looks at list.) I get more energy, I feel uncomfortable in my own body, I jump outta my skin. . . probably a good day to go shopping! (Giggles.) I probably get crankier, don’t have much tolerance for people in general.  Barry: Especially me. (Smiles.)  This was the first time that Debra had defended herself, by commenting on how relationship problems fed into her mood swings. Interestingly, her assertive stance cut through some of her husband’s negativity. The therapists soon realized that Barry and Debra lacked a consensus about what really constituted a bipolar episode. This is a critical point in FFT: The members of a couple or family need to come to a shared perception of when the patient is getting ill, so that they can institute procedures to keep the patient’s episodes from spiraling (e.g., visits to the physician, reduction in the patient’s workload, learning to deescalate negative verbal exchanges). But it was not yet clear that Debra had discrete episodes.  