Typical Problems

For patients undergoing integrative therapy, the typical
problem entails the burden of a lot of work within and
between sessions. As purposefully more inclusive and
ambitious, integrative treatment probably asks more of
the client. We routinely collaborate on homework—
because the research strongly supports it (Kazantzis,
Whittington, & Dattilio, 2010), and because Amber
explicitly requested it. In collaboration with the client,
the therapist must properly pace or “dose” the amount
of work and ensure that the client’s motivational distress
remains motivating, not disabling. With Amber,
the recurrent question was “Does this feel challenging
but not overwhelming for you?”

For therapists conducting integrative therapy, a common
problem involves retreat into their standard relationship
style and default treatment method. When the
research advises a more directive stance, for example,
therapists may begin in a directive way but then gradually
slip back into their customary less-directive stance.
Or as another example, therapists more accustomed to
working with patients in the action stage will start in a
more exploratory stance compatible with the patient’s
contemplation stage, but subsequently provide actionoriented
processes well before the patient is ready to
plunge into the action stage. Periodic reevaluations,
ongoing client feedback, and therapists’ self-awareness
to fit the patient (not only themselves) tends to correct
these lapses.

For neophyte therapists, the core challenge in our
approach is to avoid the extremes: overemphasizing either
the treatment method or the healing relationship,
adhering to either a rule-bound treatment manual or
an intuitive seat-of-the-pants syncretism, relying exclusively
on the empirical research or on participant
preferences. We strive for balanced flexibility, the Aristotelian
mean, that systematically incorporates all of
these without succumbing to the human tendency of
polarization. This can prove problematic for psychotherapists
trained to think in either–or, binary ways
about psychotherapy. It can also be daunting in a multidisorderd
patient, like Amber, with multiple goals sequenced
over time. “One treatment fits all” becomes an
attractive, easier alternative to the hard work of tailoring
psychotherapy to the unique individual and singular
situation.

Outcome and Prognosis

Over the course of 50 weekly individual sessions and
several maintenance sessions, Amber impressively reduced
her depression and maintained her abstinence.
Her depression consistently declined over time, as
shown in Figure 15.3. The largest drop in her anxiety
scores occurred between weeks 26 and 32, when the
EMDR was conducted. Her cravings to drink, drug,
and shoplift gravitated to 0 on the 0- to 10 scale after 3
months of psychotherapy, but her urge to gamble would
periodically spike to the 3- or 4-point range. She did
not behaviorally succumb to those temptations, however.
Symptomatically, Amber’s test scores were in the
normal range, and she was better than ever.

Interpersonally, the patient achieved impressive
gains as well. She was less impulsive, more emotionally
self-regulating, more self-soothing, and increasingly
assertive and expressive. She certainly no longer
met the diagnostic criteria for borderline personality
disorder, but she was susceptible to some behavioral
avoidance and abandonment fears in her new dating
relationships. She mourned the years lost to drugs and
addressed her existential guilt and shame, as much as
most humans can.

Her medications were gradually halved over the year
of our psychological treatment, from 80 mg to 40 mg
of fluoxetine and from 60 mg to 20 mg of BuSpar. She
continues on those medications as maintenance with
plans eventually to reduce them. And Amber continues
to attend AA meetings twice a week and monthly


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

maintenance psychotherapy sessions, where her most
recent BDI-II and BAI scores were both 3, well within
normal limits.

Despite all of these positive outcomes, as with most
cases in psychotherapy, not all of Amber’s goals were
realized. She continues to smoke cigarettes (a maximum
of 3 per day), and full-time employment has proven
elusive because her felony record leaves her ineligible
for many positions. She does work the equivalent
of three-quarters time between two jobs and is applying
to graduate school in a human service profession.
And Amber is prone to occasional bouts of anxiety and
avoidance when confronting new situations.

From all accounts, the prognosis is promising indeed.
She is the “new” Amber as I phrased it, or, as she
memorably put it, the Amber “2.0.”

Case Commentary

We have chosen to illustrate our treatment approach
for depression and substance abuse with a complex,
multidisordered woman. As is typical, she suffered for
many years and from more than two discrete disorders.
The chronic course of comorbid disorders increases
the need for integrative treatment, including, in Amber’s
case, individual psychotherapy, pharmacotherapy,
support groups, self-help resources, and a few conjoint
family sessions. The high rates of comorbidity of personality
disorders and PTSD among substance abusers
complicates psychotherapy and increases the need to
sequence treatment methods and goals thoughtfully.

The psychotherapist can accept some credit for the
salubrious outcomes in this case, but Amber deserves
the lion’s share. She worked hard to master new skills,
prevent relapses, and intentionally expose herself to
anxiety-provoking situations. She was a bright, motivated,
and psychologically minded client who progressed
from the contemplation stage to the action stage and
ultimately to long-term maintenance. All these patient
features predict more successful outcomes in all forms
of psychotherapy.

Several circumstances also proved fortuitous. Amber
participated regularly in AA meetings, was motivated
by the “sobering” experiences of prison, and was supported
by her parents, who contributed to payment for
50 sessions of psychotherapy. Fewer sessions with a
therapist working in a public clinic would probably not
have yielded the same benefits. Although Amber was
not favorably impressed by her previous therapy experiences,
it was clear the she had benefited from the so


cialization into psychotherapy and perhaps from moving
from earlier stages of change to later stages before
undertaking this course of treatment.

Where our integrative approach was probably most
effective was in fitting or tailoring the therapy relationship
and treatment methods specifically to Amber. The
treatment proceeded stepwise in accordance with the
research evidence, the patient’s preferences, stage of
change, and her other transdiagnostic characteristics.
The therapist systematically addressed depression,
substance abuse, and others disorders by combining
therapy methods (those traditionally associated with
person-centered, behavioral, cognitive, exposure, feminist,
psychodynamic, and experiential traditions) and
healing resources (psychotherapy, pharmacotherapy,
self-help, and AA spirituality) in a seamless and responsive
manner.

Predictors of Success and Failure

No therapy or therapist is immune to failure. It is at
such times that experienced clinicians often wonder
whether therapy methods from orientations other than
their own might more usefully have been included in
the treatment, or whether another orientation’s strength
in dealing with the particular problems might complement
the therapist’s own orientational weakness. Integrative
therapies assume that each orientation has its
particular domain of expertise and that these domains
can be linked to maximize their effectiveness (Pinsof,
1995). In this way, rival therapy systems are increasingly
viewed not as adversaries but as welcome partners
(Landsman, 1974); not as contradictory but as
complementary.

When integrative therapy fails, it may be a result of
failure to follow the guiding integrative principles, a
dearth of skill in implementing a particular treatment,
a poor fit between the particular patient and the particular
therapist, or inaccurate evaluation of the patient
dimensions that indicate the optimal therapist style and
objectives. Each of these alternatives should be considered
when a patient is not accomplishing his/her goals
at a rate expected among similar patients. Our approach
embraces an initial evaluation of the transdiagnostic
patient dimensions, as well as periodic review of treatment
processes to ensure that the therapy methods are
a good fit as defined by the research. Finally, formal
feedback about progress is helpful and often initiates a
discussion of things that slow or block progress and of
procedures that may help move through such impasses.


Depression and Substance Abuse

In the past few years, we have begun sharing with the
patient the results of serial testing (e.g., that presented
in Figure 15.3) or the Innerlife STS progress graphs to
illustrate points of impasse and success.

coNclusioNs

Psychotherapy is a treatment method and a healing relationship
fit to the individual patient and context. In
this chapter, we have endeavored to demonstrate how
psychotherapists can do exactly that for patients suffering
from depression and substance abuse, thereby
increasing treatment effectiveness and efficiency. Such
treatment selection must be systematic, flexible, and
evidence-based. For these reasons, integrative psychotherapy
seems particularly indicated for complex patients
with comorbid disorders, such as Amber, and for
patients whom pure form or monotherapies have failed
or been only partially successful.

Our chapter presentation and case illustration may
convey the impression that integrative psychotherapy
can be thoroughly planned from the beginning, but
clinical reality is not so accommodating. Although
we try to formulate the case and plan treatment at the
outset, we expect and welcome the invariable turn of
events. Treatment selection is nonlinear and dynamic;
a behavior or change at one point in time impacts all
subsequent behavior. “You never know what to expect
the next session” is one of the fascinations of psychotherapy.
We are continuously moving with the patient
and evolving with the unanticipated, but we do so informed
by clinical experience and research evidence.

This chapter has outlined our integrative therapy
and detailed its step-by-step process of systematic
treatment selection in substance abuse and depression.
This process applies research knowledge from multiple
theoretical orientations on both diagnostic and transdiagnostic
patient characteristics to the optimal choice of
technical and relational methods. Such a therapy posits
that many treatment methods and interpersonal stances
have a valuable place in the repertoire of the contemporary
psychotherapist. Their particular and differential
place can be determined through outcome research,
seasoned experience, and positioning the client at the
center of the clinical enterprise. Integrative therapy offers
the evidence-based relationships, treatments, and
responsiveness to meet the multifarious needs of individual
patients and their unique contexts well into the
21st century.

referenCes

Alberti, R., & Emmons, M. (1995). Your perfect right: A
guide to assertive living (7th ed.). San Luis Obispo, CA:
Impact.

American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and
statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.). Arlington,
VA: Author.

Antonuccio, D. O. (1995). Psychotherapy for depression: No
stronger medicine. American Psychologist, 50, 450–452.

Antonuccio, D. O., Danton, W. G., & DeNelsky, G. Y. (1995).
Psychotherapy versus medication for depression: Challenging
the conventional wisdom with data. Professional
Psychology: Research and Practice, 26, 574–585.

Barkham, M., Margison, F., Leach, C., Lucock, M., Mellor-
Clark, J., Evans, C., et al. (2001). Service profiling and
outcomes benchmarking using the CORE_OM: Toward
practice-based evidence in the psychological therapies.
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 69, 184–
196.

Beutler, L. E. (2009). Making science matter in clinical practice:
Redefining psychotherapy. Clinical Psychology: Science
and Practice, 16, 301–317.

Beutler, L. E., & Clarkin, J. (1990). Systematic treatment selection:
Toward targeted therapeutic interventions. New
York: Brunner/Mazel.

Beutler, L. E., Clarkin, J., & Bongar, B. (2000). Guidelines
for the systematic treatment of the depressed patient. New
York: Oxford University Press.

Beutler, L. E., & Harwood, T. M. (2000). Prescriptive psychotherapy:
A practical guide to systematic treatment selection.
New York: Oxford University Press.

Beutler, L. E., Harwood, T. M., Alimohamed, S., & Malik,

M. (2002). Functional impairment and coping style. In J.
C. Norcross (Ed.), Psychotherapy relationships that work
(pp. 145–173). New York: Oxford University Press.
Beutler, L. E., Harwood, T. M., Kimpara, S., Verdirame, D.,
& Blau, K. (2011). Coping style. In J. C. Norcross (Ed.),
Psychotherapy relationships that work (2nd ed., pp. 336–
353). New York: Oxford University Press.

Beutler, L. E., Harwood, T. M., Michelson, A., Song, X., &
Holman, J. (2011). Reactance/resistance. In J. C. Norcross
(Ed.), Psychotherapy relationships that work (2nd ed.,
pp. 261–278). New York: Oxford University Press.

Beutler, L. E., & Malik, M. L. (2002). Diagnosis and treatment
guidelines: The example of depression. In L. E.
Beutler & M. L. Malik (Eds.), Rethinking the DSM
(pp. 251–278). Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association.

Beutler, L. E., Moleiro, C., Malik, M., Harwood, T. M., Romanelli,
R., Gallagher-Thompson, D., et al. (2003). A
comparison of the Dodo, EST, and ATI factors among comorbid
stimulant-dependent, depressed patients. Clinical
Psychology and Psychotherapy, 10, 69–85.


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

Burns, D. (1999). Feeling good: The new mood therapy (rev.
ed.). New York: Avon.

Burlingame, G., McClendon, D. T., Alonso, J. (2011). Group
cohesion. In J. C. Norcross (Ed.), Psychotherapy relationships
that work (2nd ed., pp. 110–131). New York: Oxford
University Press.

Castonguay, L. G., & Beutler, L. E. (Eds.). (2006). Principles
of therapeutic change that work. New York: Oxford University
Press.

Clarkin, J. F., & Levy, K. N. (2004). The influence of client
variables on psychotherapy. In M. J. Lambert (Ed.), Bergin
and Garfield’s handbook of psychotherapy and behavior
change (5th ed., pp. 194–226). New York: Wiley.

Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical power analysis for the behavioral
sciences (2nd ed.). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

Cuijpers, P., van Straten, A., Andersson, G., & van Oppen, P.
(2008). Psychotherapy for depression in adults: A metaanalysis
of comparative outcome studies. Journal of Consulting
and Clinical Psychology, 76, 909–922.

Cuijpers, P., van Straten, A., Schuurmans, J., van Oppen, P.,
Hollon, S. D., & Andersson, G. (2010). Psychotherapy for
chronic major depression and dysthymia: A meta-analysis.
Clinical Psychology Review, 30, 51–62.

DeRubeis, R. J., Hollon, S. D., Amsterdam, J. D., Shelton,

R. C., Young, P. R., Salomon, R. M., et al. (2005). Cognitive
therapy vs medications in the treatment of moderate
to severe depression. Archives of General Psychiatry, 62,
409–416.
Elliott, R., Bohart, A. C., Watson, J. C., & Greenberg, L. S.
(2011). Empathy. In J. C. Norcross (Ed.), Psychotherapy
relationships that work (2nd ed., pp. 132–152). New York:
Oxford University Press.

Eysenck, H. J. (1970). A mish-mash of theories. International
Journal of Psychiatry, 9, 140–146.
Farber, B. A., & Doolin, E. M. (2011). Positive regard. In

J. C. Norcross (Ed.), Psychotherapy relationships that
works (2nd ed., pp. 168–186). New York: Oxford University
Press.
Friedlander, M. L., Escudero, V., Heatherington, L., & Diamond,
G. M. (2011). Alliance in couple and family therapy.
In J. C. Norcross (Ed.), Psychotherapy relationships
that work (2nd ed., pp. 92–109). New York: Oxford University
Press.

Halford, G. S., Baker, R., McCredden, J. E., & Bain, J. D.
(2005). How many variables can humans process? Psychological
Science, 16, 70–76.

Harwood, T. M., Beutler, L. E., & Groth-Marnat, G. (Eds.).
(2011). Integrated assessment of adult personality (3rd
ed.). New York: Guilford Press.

Hettema, J., Steele, J., & Miller, W. R. (2005). Motivational
interviewing. Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 1,
91–111.

Hollon, S. D. (1990). Cognitive therapy and pharmacotherapy
for depression. Psychiatric Annals, 20, 249–258.

Horvath, A. O., Del Re, A., Flückiger, C., & Symonds, D.
(2011). Alliance in individual psychotherapy. In J. C. Norcross
(Ed.), Psychotherapy relationships that work (2nd
ed., pp. 25–69). New York: Oxford University Press.

Housley, J., & Beutler, L. E. (2007). Treating victims of
mass disaster and terrorism. Cambridge, MA: Hogrefe &
Huber.

Irvin, J. E., Bowers, C. A., Dunn, M. E., & Wang, M. C.
(1999). Efficacy of relapse prevention: A meta-analytic
review. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,
67, 563–570.

Kazantzis, N., Whittington, C., & Dattilio, F. (2010). Metaanalysis
of homework effects in cognitive and behavioral
therapy: A replication and extension. Clinical Psychology:
Science and Practice, 17, 144–156.

Kessler, R. C., Berglund, P., Demler, O., Jin, R., Merikangas,

K. R., & Walters, E. E. (2005). Lifetime prevalence and
age-of-onset distributions of DSM-IV disorders in the National
Comorbidity Survey Replication. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 62, 593–602.
Kreisman, J. J., & Straus, H. (2006). Sometimes I act crazy:
Living with a borderline personality disorder. Hoboken,
NJ: Wiley.

Lambert, M. J., Morton, J. J., Hatfield, D., Harmon, C., Hamilton,
S., Reid, R. C., et al. (2004). Administration and
scoring manual for the Outcome Questionnaire–45. Salt
Lake City, UT: OQ Measures.

Lambert, M. J., & Shimokawa, K. (2011). Collecting client
feedback. In J. C. Norcross (Ed.), Psychotherapy relationships
that work (2nd ed., pp. 203–223). New York: Oxford
University Press.

Landsman, J. T. (1974, August). Not an adversity but a welcome
diversity. Paper presented at the annual meeting of
the American Psychological Association, New Orleans,
LA.

Linehan, M. M. (1993a). Cognitive-behavioral treatment
of borderline personality disorder. New York: Guilford
Press.

Linehan, M. M. (1993b). Skills training manual for treating
borderline personality disorder. New York: Guilford
Press.

Lueger, R. J., Howard, K. I., Martinovich Z., Lutz, W., Anderson,
E. E., & Grissom, G. (2001). Assessing treatment
progress of individual clients using expected treatment
response models. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,
69, 150–158.

Marlatt, G. A., & Donovan, D. M. (Eds.). (2007). Relapse
prevention: Maintenance strategies in the treatment of
addictive behaviors (2nd ed., pp. 267–271). New York:
Guilford Press.

Miller, S. D., Duncan, B. L., Sorrell, R., & Brown, G. S.
(2005). The Partners for Change Outcome System. Journal
of Clinical Psychology: In Session, 61, 199–208.

Miller, W. R., & Moyers, T. B. (2005). Motivational inter



Depression and Substance Abuse

viewing. In G. P. Koocher, J. C. Norcross, & S. S. Hill
(Eds.), Psychologists’ desk reference (2nd ed., pp. 267–
271). New York: Oxford University Press.

Moyers, T. B., & Rollnick, S. (2002). A motivational interviewing
perspective on resistance. Journal of Clinical
Psychology: In Session, 58(2), 185–193.

Miller, W. R., & Rollnick, S. (2002). Motivational interviewing:
Preparing people for change (2nd ed.). New York:
Guilford Press.

Norcross, J. C. (2010). The therapeutic relationship. In B. L.
Duncan, S. D. Miller, B. E. Wampold, & M. A. Hubble
(Eds.), Heart and soul of change (2nd ed., pp. 113–142).
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.

Norcross, J. C. (Ed.). (2011). Psychotherapy relationships
that work (2nd ed.). New York: Oxford University Press

Norcross, J. C. (2013). Changeology: Five steps to realizing
your goals and resolutions. New York: Simon &
Schuster.

Norcross, J. C., & Beutler, L. E. (1997). Determining the
therapeutic relationship of choice in brief therapy. In J.

N. Butcher (Ed.), Personality assessment in managed
care: A practitioner’s guide. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Norcross, J. C., Beutler, L. E., & Levant, R. F. (Eds.). (2006).
Evidence-based practices in mental health: Debate and
dialogue on the fundamental questions. Washington, DC:
American Psychological Association.

Norcross, J. C., Campbell, L. M., Grohol, J. M., Santrock, J.
W., Selagea, F., & Sommer, R. (2013). Self-help that works
(4th ed.). New York: Oxford University Press.

Norcross, J. C., & Goldfried, M. R. (Eds.). (2005). Handbook
of psychotherapy integration (2nd ed.). New York: Oxford
University Press.

Norcross, J. C., & Karpiak, C. P. (2012). Clinical psychologists
in the 2010s: Fifty years of the APA Division of
Clinical Psychology. Clinical Psychology: Science and
Practice, 19, 1–12.

Norcross, J. C., Krebs, P. M., & Prochaska, J. O. (2011).
Stages of change. In J. C. Norcross (Ed.), Psychotherapy
relationships that work (2nd ed., pp. 279–300). New York:
Oxford University Press.

Osler, W. (1906). Aequanimatas. New York: McGraw-Hill.

Paul, G. L. (1967). Strategy of outcome research in psychotherapy.
Journal of Consulting Psychology, 31, 109–118.

Pinsof, W. M. (1995). Integrative problem-centered therapy:
A synthesis of biological, individual, and family therapies.
New York: Basic Books.

Prochaska, J. O., & Norcross, J. C. (2013). Systems of psychotherapy:
A transtheoretical analysis (8th ed.). Pacific
Grove, CA: Brooks/Cole.

Rogers, C. R. (1957). The necessary and sufficient conditions
of therapeutic personality change. Journal of Consulting
Psychology, 21, 95–103.

Rosen, C. S. (2000). Is the sequencing of change processes by
stage consistent across health problems?: A meta-analysis.
Health Psychology, 19, 593–604.

Safran, J. D., Muran, J. C., & Eubanks-Carter, C. (2011). Repairing
alliance ruptures. In J. C. Norcross (Ed.), Psychotherapy
relationships that work (2nd ed., pp. 224–238).
New York: Oxford University Press.

Shapiro, F. (2012). Getting past your past: Take control of
your life with self-help techniques from EMDR therapy.
New York: Rodale.

Shirk, S. R., & Karver, M. (2011). Alliance in child and adolescent
therapy. In J. C. Norcross (Ed.), Psychotherapy
relationships that work (2nd ed., pp. 70–91). New York:
Oxford University Press.

Smith, T. B., Rodriguez, M. D., & Bernal, G. (2011). Culture.
In J. C. Norcross (Ed.), Psychotherapy relationships that
work (2nd ed., pp. 316–335). New York: Oxford University
Press.

Swift, J. K., Callahan, J. L., & Vollmer, B. M. (2011). Preferences.
In J. C. Norcross (Ed.), Psychotherapy relationships
that work (2nd ed., pp. 301–315). New York: Oxford
University Press.

Tryon, G. S., & Winograd, G. (2011). Goal consensus and
collaboration. In J. C. Norcross (Ed.), Psychotherapy relationships
that work (2nd ed., pp. 153–167). New York:
Oxford University Press.

Wolitzky, D. L. (2011). Psychoanalytic theories of psychotherapy.
In J. C. Norcross, G. R. VandenBos, & D. K.
Freedheim (Eds.), History of psychotherapy (2nd ed.,
pp. 65–100). Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association.


Chapter 16

Treatment of Sleep Disturbance

Katherine a. Kaplan
allison G. harvey

Perhaps the best-kept secret among health and mental health practitioners everywhere
is the marked superiority of brief psychological treatments for insomnia compared to
popular and frequently advertised medications. With approximately 6% of members of
the adult population suffering from insomnia to the degree that they meet diagnostic
criteria, and as many as 12% reporting that insomnia interferes significantly with their
daytime activities, the problem is significant and most often poorly treated. Insomnia
very frequently accompanies other psychological disorders, and recent evidence indicates
that insomnia predates and may contribute to or even cause these comorbid disorders,
which is all the more reason why every health and mental health practitioner should be
aware of the cutting-edge brief interventions presented in this chapter. Indeed, the American
Academy of Sleep Medicine recommends these protocols as a first-line treatment
for people with all forms of insomnia, including those currently using hypnotic drugs.
Among the leaders in this burgeoning field, Kaplan and Harvey outline a state-of-the-art
integrated behavioral and cognitive approach with strong evidence for both efficacy and
durability that should be in the armamentarium of every health professional.—D. H. B.

Sleep disorders are common and associated with considerable
morbidity and functional impairment. In this
chapter we focus on insomnia, given its high prevalence
and public health impact. We also briefly discuss hypersomnolence
disorder given the rising possible role
of psychological treatments for patients with this disorder.
A wide range of other sleep disorders, which are
beyond the scope of this chapter, are each prevalent
and impairing. For example, obstructive sleep apnea/
hypopnea involves transient closure of the upper airway
during sleep that results in pauses in breathing, leading
to daytime sleepiness and cardiovascular problems.
Restless legs syndrome involves an involuntary urge to
move one’s legs during sleep that leads to partial or full
awakenings, resulting in sleep fragmentation and day


time sleepiness. It is important for clinicians to have a
working knowledge of these and other sleep disorders,
as well as to know when to refer patients to a sleep center,
neurologist, or other health professional (Kryger,
Roth, & Dement, 2010).

Insomnia is a prevalent sleep disturbance that involves
difficulty with falling asleep, staying asleep, or
waking too early in the morning. It is associated with
considerable functional impairment and health-related
costs. Insomnia is often comorbid with, and predicts
the development of, numerous psychological and medical
conditions. As such, insomnia represents an important
target for intervention. This chapter begins with a
brief overview of human sleep, along with diagnostic
and theoretical considerations, because this knowledge

640


Sleep Disturbance

provides the basis for delivering cognitive-behavioral
therapy for insomnia (CBT-I), which is the focus of this
chapter.

sleeP aND iNsoMNia

Sleep Stages

Human sleep can be divided into (1) non–rapid eye
movement (or NREM) sleep that can be subdivided
into three stages (N1, N2, and N3) through which sleep
progressively deepens, and (2) rapid eye movement (or
REM) sleep. In adults, each NREM–REM cycle spans
70 to 120 minutes (Kryger et al., 2010). NREM sleep
is thought to be important for conservation of energy
and restoration. This phase of sleep is associated with
the most rapid cell division in some tissues, as well as
increased protein synthesis (Kryger et al., 2010). The
functions of REM sleep are understood to include a
role in learning (Karni, Tanne, Rubenstien, Askenasy,
& Sagi, 1994) and in the unlearning of irrelevant information
(Crick & Mitchison, 1983), as well as memory
consolidation (Walker & Stickgold, 2006), emotional
processing, and mood/emotion regulation (Yoo, Gujar,
Hu, Jolesz, & Walker, 2007). It is well established that
sleep deprivation has detrimental effects in many domains
of health (Zee & Turek, 2006), including the
immune system, the neuroendocrine system, and the
cardiovascular system (Banks & Dinges, 2010). Given
these important functions, disorders of sleep have
major public health implications.

Two‑Process Model of Sleep

The two-process model of sleep regulation (Borbely,
1982) is important in that it underpins the treatment
we describe later. In fact, many clinicians describe
this model to clients as part of the rationale for delivering
stimulus control and sleep restriction described
below. The model proposes that sleep and wakefulness
are dependent on two processes, a homeostatic process
and a circadian process (Achermann & Borbely,
2010). The homeostatic process influences sleep likelihood.
Sleep pressure increases with time spent awake,
resulting in an increased tendency to sleep when a
person has been sleep-deprived, and a decreased tendency
to sleep after having had a substantial amount
of sleep or a substantial nap. The circadian rhythm is
an internal biological clock that operates on roughly a

24-hour basis. It is responsible for variations in melatonin,
temperature, and other biological functions, including
levels of alertness throughout the day (Lack
& Bootzin, 2003). These two processes work together
such that sleep is likely to occur when sleep pressure
(the homeostatic process) is high and level of alertness
(the circadian process) is relatively low. Thus, if a person
naps in the afternoon, he/she may have difficulty
falling asleep that evening because homeostatic sleep
pressure is low; likewise, if a person goes to bed early
following a poor night of sleep, even if sleep pressure
is high, circadian arousal may prevent sleep onset
from occurring.

Some, but not all, studies have found impaired sleep
homeostasis in persons with insomnia (e.g., Besset,
Villemin, Tafti, & Billiard, 1998; Stepanski, Zorick,
Roehrs, & Roth, 2000). There is a similar lack of consensus
in the research about whether circadian rhythm
abnormalities play a role in insomnia. Environmentally
induced phase shifts, such as those occurring as a result
of shift work or jet lag, can cause acute insomnia. There
is also evidence that hyperarousal, a central notion in
theories of insomnia that we discuss below, may not
be a 24-hour issue for some but rather may fluctuate
according to circadian influences (Perlis, Smith, & Pigeon,
2005).

Sleep across the Lifespan

Sleep changes across the lifespan. This is very important
because it impacts therapists’ expectations of sleep
outcomes when working with clients of different ages.
With age, slow-wave sleep decreases, while lighter
sleep and awakenings become more common across
the night. Moreover, both circadian and homeostatic
processes are influenced by age. For example, the circadian
system grows increasingly less sensitive to zeitgebers
such as melatonin and morning light with age
(Van Someren, 2000). Throughout adolescence, there
is a well-documented circadian shift in favor of later
bedtimes and rise times, with a more slowly building
homeostatic pressure to fall asleep (Jenni, Achermann,
& Carskadon, 2005). This pattern can result in initial
insomnia (difficulty falling asleep at night). In middleto-
older adulthood, circadian shifts can again favor of
early bedtimes and rise times, resulting in terminal
insomnia (early morning awakening with difficulty
falling back asleep; Ancoli-Israel, 2009). Along with
circadian rhythms, the homeostatic process also shows
age-dependent changes across the lifespan. Individuals


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

in their 60s and 70s showed reduced homeostatic pressure
to sleep and achieve less total sleep time (TST)
relative to members of a comparison group in their 20s
(Klerman & Dijk, 2008).

the iNsoMNia DiaGNosis

The following section describes diagnostic considerations,
reviews prevalence and comorbidity, and presents
several models of insomnia that have been influential
in conceptualizing CBT-I treatment targets.

There are three main classification systems for sleep
disorders: the second edition of the International Classification
of Sleep Disorders (ICSD; American Academy
of Sleep Medicine, 2005), the Research Diagnostic
Criteria (RDC; Edinger et al., 2004), and the Diagnostic
and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM5;
American Psychiatric Association, 2013). Within
DSM-5 criteria, a diagnosis of insomnia may be given
when there is a subjective complaint of trouble falling
or staying asleep. These difficulties must be associated
with daytime impairment and must not be better accounted
for by another medical or psychiatric condition.


The insomnia diagnostic criteria described earlier
have been clarified with quantitative criteria. The quantitative
criteria require that self-reported sleep-onset
latency (SOL) and/or wake after sleep onset (WASO)
must be greater than 30 minutes for at least 3 nights
per week over a period of at least 6 months (Lichstein,
Durrence, Taylor, Bush, & Riedel, 2003). Note that
self-reports of insomnia complaints are sufficient for
the diagnosis, without objective evidence for sleep disturbance
(see “Assessment” below).

Insomnia Prevalence and Comorbidity

It is estimated that about 6% of the general adult population
meets diagnostic criteria for a formal diagnosis
of insomnia based on DSM-IV-TR criteria. Approximately
33% of the general population reports some significant
symptoms of insomnia. Additionally, as many
as 12% of individuals in the general adult population
suffer from the daytime sequelae of sleep disturbance
(Hohagen et al., 1993; Ohayon, 2002). More recent surveys
suggest that health-related costs of insomnia are
considerable, regardless of the diagnostic system used
to define it (Roth et al., 2011).

Because insomnia can be associated with a wide
range of medical illnesses and psychological disorders,

the previous DSM edition (i.e., DSM-IV-TR; American
Psychiatric Association, 2000) made distinctions
between “primary” and “secondary” or comorbid
insomnia. The distinction between primary and secondary
insomnia was blurred, however, by epidemiological
research suggesting that insomnia may predate,
and predict, psychological disorders (Breslau,
Roth, Rosenthal, & Andreski, 1996; Ford & Kamerow,
1989). Indeed, a National Institutes of Health (NIH;
2005) state-of-the-science conference concluded that
the term “secondary” should be replaced with “comorbid”
on the basis of evidence that insomnia comorbid
with another disorder likely contributes to the maintenance
of the disorder (Harvey, 2001; Smith, Huang, &
Manber, 2005). These conclusions were recognized in
DSM-5, which does not distinguish between “primary”
and “secondary” insomnia, but has only one “insomnia
disorder.”

For older adults, insomnia is often accompanied by
medical illnesses, which may complicate issues of assessment
and treatment, further compounding burden
and cost (Morin et al., 2006). In a large epidemiological
study, Ford and Kamerow (1989) found that there
is approximately a 50% comorbidity rate between insomnia
and other psychological disorders or medical
illnesses; other studies have yielded a rate as high as
75% (Lichstein, 2000). In cases of comorbid insomnia,
additional empirical and clinical attention may
be especially important because there appears to be a
cyclical influence of sleep disturbance and medical illness
or psychological disorders, with worsening sleep
problems leading to a decline in general health and
increased psychiatric symptoms that, in turn, worsen
sleep problems. Fortunately, evidence suggests that
insomnia responds to CBT-I treatment even if the accompanying
disorder is not under control (Rybarczyk,
Lopez, Schelble, & Stepanski, 2005). Smith and colleagues
(2005) concluded that treatment effects are
generally moderate to large for CBT-I administered in
the context of accompanying disorders or illnesses, and
are comparable to treatment effects in primary insomnia.


Models of Insomnia

This section begins with a discussion of an influential
overarching framework, the Spielman model. We then
move on to describe several behavioral, cognitive, and
combination models of insomnia that help to explain
particular facets of the disorder that should be addressed
and treated in CBT-I.


Sleep Disturbance

Spielman’s Three-Factor Model

This is a diathesis–stress model often referred to as
the three-factor or the three-P model. According to
Spielman, Caruso, and Glovinsky (1987), acute or
short-term insomnia occurs as a result of predisposing
factors (e.g., traits) and precipitating factors (e.g.,
life stressors). This acute form can then develop into a
chronic or longer-term disorder as a result of perpetuating
factors (e.g., poor coping strategies). Predisposing
factors (e.g., a tendency to worry) constitute a vulnerability
for insomnia, and this vulnerability remains
across the life of the disorder. Precipitating factors trigger
acute insomnia, but their influence tends to wane
over time. In contrast, perpetuating factors take hold of
and maintain insomnia. CBT-I targets these perpetuating
factors, seeking to reduce the additive effects of
predisposing, precipitating, and perpetuating factors
below the threshold for insomnia diagnosis.

Behavioral Models

One of the most important behavioral models for insomnia
is the stimulus control model (Bootzin, 1972).
It is based on the conditioning principle that insomnia
occurs when the bed or bedroom ceases to be paired
specifically with sleep, but has become paired with
many possible responses (e.g., being awake and anxious
about not sleeping). As will become evident later
in this chapter, this theory has led to the development of
“stimulus control,” an intervention with strong efficacy
(Morin et al., 2006).

Cognitive Models

Some of the earliest research on cognitive processes in
insomnia noted that individuals with insomnia tended
to overestimate wakefulness and underestimate TST
(Bixler, Kales, Leo, & Slye, 1973; Carskadon et al.,
1976), and researchers began to explore the role of cognitive
arousal in insomnia (Borkovec, 1982; Lichstein
& Rosenthal, 1980). Seminal work in the 1990s highlighted
the importance of unhelpful beliefs about sleep
(Morin, 1993) and delineated the content of presleep
intrusive thoughts (Watts, Coyle, & East, 1994; Wicklow
& Espie, 2000). The last decade has ushered in an
increase in empirical attention to other cognitive mechanisms
in insomnia, including attention to threat and
the use of safety behaviors to allay perceived threats
(Espie, 2002; Harvey, 2005; Harvey, Tang, & Browning,
2005).

One cognitive model of insomnia aims to specify
the cognitive processes that serve to perpetuate insomnia
(Harvey, 2002a) and represents an important
component of CBT-I as outlined here. According to this
conceptualization, contributors to the maintenance of
insomnia include the following cascade of cognitive
processes that operate at night and during the day: (1)
worry and rumination, (2) selective attention and monitoring,
(3) misperception of sleep and daytime deficits,

(4) dysfunctional beliefs about sleep (based on Morin,
1993), and (5) counterproductive safety behaviors that
serve to maintain beliefs. Many of the specific predictions
generated by this model have been empirically
tested, leading to refinement of the model (Harvey,
2005) and a new cognitive therapy treatment approach
that has preliminary support in an open trial (Harvey,
Sharpley, Ree, Stinson, & Clark, 2007).
Combination Models

Morin’s (1993) cognitive-behavioral model of insomnia
incorporates cognitive, temporal, and environmental
variables as both precipitating and perpetuating factors,
with hyperarousal as the key precipitating factor
of insomnia. Conditioning can then exacerbate this
arousal. For example, a person may associate temporal
(e.g., bedtime routines) and environmental (e.g., bedroom)
stimuli with fear of being unable to sleep. Worry
and rumination may then result. Additional perpetuating
factors may ensue, including, as in the cognitive
model, daytime fatigue, worry, and emotional distress
about sleep loss and maladaptive habits (e.g., excessive
time in bed).

In summary, adequate treatment of insomnia targets
both cognitive and behavioral processes to address
their mutually maintaining effects. Each of the models
reviewed earlier has been influential in conceptualizing
the insomnia diagnosis and identifying treatment
targets. In the next section, we review evidence for the
effectiveness of CBT-I as a multicomponent treatment
for insomnia.

eviDeNce for cBt‑i treatMeNt

CBT-I has been established as an effective treatment in
multiple meta-analyses (e.g., Irwin, Cole, & Nicassio,
2006; Montgomery & Dennis, 2003; Morin, Culbert,
& Schwartz, 1994; Murtagh & Greenwood, 1995) and
in a review by the Standards of Practice Committee of
the American Academy of Sleep Medicine (Chesson et


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

al., 1999; Morin et al., 1999), which has been updated
(Morin et al., 2006).

A number of randomized controlled trials (RCTs)
have compared one or more components of CBT-I to
each other and/or to placebo. A recent review found
CBT-I to be highly effective and to have sustainable
gains over long-term follow-up, up to 24 months in
adult and older adult samples (Morin et al., 2006).
This review used the American Psychological Association’s
Society of Clinical Psychology criteria for wellsupported,
empirically based treatments (Chambless &
Hollon, 1998) and concluded that these criteria are met
by stimulus control, paradoxical intention, relaxation,
sleep restriction approaches, and the administration of
multiple components in the form of CBT-I. The sleep
hygiene intervention alone has not been found to be effective
as a treatment for insomnia. Cognitive therapy
for insomnia is a promising new approach, but randomized
trials are still needed for it to meet criteria for an
empirically supported treatment.

There are multiple classes of medications, both prescribed
and over the counter, that can be used to treat
insomnia (Kryger et al., 2010), including benzodiazepines,
nonbenzodiazepine hypnotics (e.g., zolpidem,
zaleplon, and eszopiclone), antidepressants (e.g., trazodone
and doxepin), and over-the-counter antihistamines
(e.g., diphenhydramine and doxylamine).
However, there is evidence that nonpharmacological interventions
for insomnia are more acceptable to clients
(Morin, Gaulier, Barry, & Kowatch, 1992) and produce
more durable effects (Morin et al., 2009; Sivertsen et
al., 2006) than do hypnotic medications alone. In the
case of comorbid insomnia, the optimal intervention
would alleviate insomnia without causing adverse interactions
with other prescribed medication; therefore,
a nonpharmacological intervention may be the best
choice for these cases of insomnia (Harvey, 2008).

In summary, CBT-I appears to be an efficacious and
promising intervention to address sleep disturbance,
particularly in treating comorbid insomnia. In the next
section, we discuss treatment objectives, setting, and
client–therapist variables that are considered when administering
CBT-I.

the coNtext of theraPy

Treatment Objectives and Structure

CBT-I aims to target and reverse the behavioral and cognitive
processes that maintain insomnia. This is done in

a time-limited format. Treatment usually comprises six
to eight sessions, each 50 minutes in length. Because
there are multiple targets to address in a limited period
of time, it is essential that treatment be agenda-driven,
goal-oriented, and center around an individualized case
formulation derived for each client.

The overall treatment structure is illustrated in Figure
16.1. The first session of treatment focuses on explaining
treatment rationale and objectives, deriving a
case formulation, and providing psychoeducation on
sleep and insomnia. This is generally followed by two
to three sessions with a behavioral emphasis, and two to
three sessions with a cognitive emphasis. However, the
therapist will decide whether to pursue behavioral targets
or cognitive targets, or some combination of both
in tandem, based on the individualized case formulation.
For example, a client who presents with excessive
worry, rumination, unhelpful beliefs about sleep,
and myriad safety behaviors is likely to benefit from
treatment that begins with cognitive targets. A client
whose sleep disturbance is characterized by schedule
irregularity, daytime napping, and excessive time in
bed is likely to benefit from treatment that begins with
behavioral targets. The final session summarizes tools
learned, and anticipates and plans for sleep setbacks.

Setting

The CBT-I overview presented here is an outpatientbased
treatment, delivered in an individual rather than
group setting. Sessions are typically held weekly. The
therapist will find it helpful to have a table on which
to spread out materials (diaries, handouts, thought records),
along with a calculator to derive weekly sleep
averages and sleep efficiency scores. The client is encouraged
to keep all treatment-related materials in a
binder or folder and reinforced for bringing this weekly
to session.

Though treatment is conducted on an individual
basis, the social and familial context of the sleep environment
should not be ignored. Clients will have
bedmates, children, or pets that may disrupt sleep, and
often the therapist will have to improvise to adapt treatment
guidelines to the lives of individual clients. Social
contexts, when used strategically, can also facilitate
treatment adherence and behavior change. Encouraging
the use of friends, family, and technology to aid in
adherence to sleep principles—for example, in regularizing
sleep–wake times, sleep restriction, and stimulus
control, each of which is described below—can be helpful.
Many clients use cell phone alarms as reminders


Sleep Disturbance

Session 1: Introduction
• Treatment overview
• Case formulation
• Goal setting
• Motivational Interviewing
•
Sleep and circadian education

• Sleep restriction
• Stimulus control
• Sleep hygiene
• Wind-down routine
• Wake-up routine
3 Sessions: Behavioral Targets
• Worry
•Attention and monitoring
•Unhelpful beliefs about sleep
• Safety behaviors
• Daytime energy
3 Sessions: Cognitive Targets
Session 8: Relapse Prevention
• Treatment review
• Anticipate obstacles
•
Lapse vs. relapse
•
Review goal attainment

figUre 16.1. Treatment flow diagram. Note the practitioner’s discretion in beginning with behavioral or cognitive
targets as indicated by case conceptualization.

to begin a wind-down period or to wake up at the same
time each morning. Likewise, recruiting the support of
family and friends to call or visit in the morning so as to
prevent oversleeping, or to respect a “no-calls” period in
the hour before bed to promote a relaxing wind down,
can be crucial to the success of the strategies.

Client Variables

The treatment described here is for individuals who
experience “insomnia,” defined as difficulty falling or
staying asleep at least three nights per week. This treatment
is equally suitable for men and women. Though
we present a treatment here that is suitable for adults,
adaptations can be readily made for teenagers (Clarke
& Harvey, 2012; Harvey, 2009). This treatment is ef


fective in clients who present with a variety of comorbid
diagnoses, including anxiety, depression, and other
psychological conditions, along with a variety of medical
comorbidities. Special considerations are needed
for clients with concurrent alcohol and substance use
disorders given their myriad effects on sleep.

Many clients who present for treatment are taking
concurrently a sleep medication, either prescribed or
over the counter, and many of these medications are
taken nightly. Clients may wish to reduce or cease
their use of these medications. There is an evidence
base for how to approach discontinuation of prescribed
medication, and readers are referred to several protocols
for more information (Belleville, Guay, Guay, &
Morin, 2007; Lichstein et al., 1999). Any change to a
prescribed medication regimen is made in collabora



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

tion with the prescribing provider. Over-the-counter
sleeping agents do not appear to have substantial discontinuation
effects (Morin, Koetter, Bastien, Ware, &
Wooten, 2005) and may be stopped without physician
collaboration.

Therapist Variables

It is essential to establish a collaborative working relationship
between clinician and client. Along with
genuine empathy and support, a strong therapist–client
alliance is necessary because much of the treatment
depends on the client’s compliance with implementing
different clinical recommendations. In this context, the
therapist’s role is one of facilitator and problem-solver.
He/she provides specific guidelines, instructions,
and corrective feedback. Therapy is directive, taskoriented,
and teaches clients problem-solving skills to
improve sleep and to cope with residual insomnia after
completing treatment. In turn, the client is also actively
engaged in the therapeutic process and is responsible
for implementing clinical procedures.

The treatment is highly structured and requires time,
effort, and diligent adherence with homework assignments.
This cannot be overemphasized. Although some
procedures may initially appear simplistic and straightforward,
the client is cautioned that regular and consistent
adherence to the entire program, including homework,
is the key to successful outcome.

It is often necessary to contrast the CBT-I approach
with medication treatment for insomnia. It is essential
to point out that, with CBT-I, there is no “quick fix”
for chronic insomnia. To avoid premature termination,
the client is cautioned that no immediate results should
be expected after one or two office visits. A time commitment
of 6–8 weeks is required. This time-limited
format is emphasized to maximize compliance. Considering
that most clients will have suffered with insomnia
for years, this represents a very short investment
of time.

It is also important to convey a sense of hope and
model a positive yet realistic attitude regarding outcome.
An occasional poor night of sleep, particularly
associated with a stressor, is normal and should be
anticipated. Also, it is important to emphasize that a
goal of treatment is to equip the client with tools and
methods to continue making sleep gains once therapy
is over.

Finally, therapists work with clients to encourage a
system of regular rewards and positive reinforcement

to facilitate behavior change. Clients can be motivated
to comply with treatment recommendations with use of
small daily rewards, such as a morning trip to the coffee
shop or taking an enjoyable bath. Likewise, therapists
are encouraged to highlight successes in sessions
rather than failures. For example, if a client’s weekly
sleep diary reveals that naps were taken on 4 of 7 days,
praise the client for the 3 days naps were not taken,
and perhaps do a functional analysis of how naps were
avoided. Point out positive nighttime sleep parameters
(e.g., reduced time to fall asleep or nighttime wakefulness)
on days that naps were not taken.

assessMeNt

Subjective Estimates

As is evident from the DSM-5 criteria, insomnia is defined
subjectively. As such, three levels of self-reported
sleep data are collected from clients during an assessment
for insomnia (see Buysse, Ancoli-Israel, Edinger,
Lichstein, & Morin, 2006, for further information on
insomnia assessment). First, a clinical sleep history is
taken to assess for diagnostic criteria and the presence
of comorbid problems. Information gathered includes
the duration, frequency, and severity of nighttime sleep
disturbance, including estimates of the key sleep parameters:
SOL, number of awakenings after sleep
onset, total amount of time awake after sleep onset,
TST, and an estimate of sleep quality (SQ). Information
about the onset and duration of the insomnia and type
of symptoms (i.e., sleep onset, sleep maintenance, early
morning waking problem, or combinations of these) is
collected. A description of the daytime correlates and
consequences of insomnia is key. In addition, obtaining
information about medications (prescription and over
the counter) and screening for the presence of comorbid
psychological disorders and medical problems (including
other sleep disorders) are also important.

Second, one or more validated measures can be used
to index the presence and severity of sleep disturbance
(e.g., Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index; Buysse, Reynolds,
Monk, Berman, & Kupfer, 1989), insomnia (e.g.,
Insomnia Severity Index; Bastien, Vallieres, & Morin,
2001), and daytime sleepiness (e.g., Stanford Sleepiness
Scale; Hoddes, Zarcone, Smythe, Phillips, & Dement,
1973). The Duke Structured Interview for Sleep
Disorders (Edinger et al., 2009), a semistructured interview
that assesses research diagnostic criteria for


Sleep Disturbance

sleep disorders, may also be used to establish sleep disturbance
diagnoses.

Third, asking the client to complete a sleep diary
(Carney et al., 2012) each morning as soon as possible
after waking for 2 weeks can provide prospective estimates
of sleep. A sleep diary provides a wealth of information,
including night-to-night variability in sleeping
difficulty and sleep–wake patterns, and can be used to
determine the presence of circadian rhythm problems,
such as a delayed sleep phase or an advanced sleep
phase. Also, sleep diaries reduce several problems associated
with the methods just discussed that rely on
retrospective report, such as answering on the basis
of saliency (i.e., the worst night) or recency (i.e., last
night) (Smith, Nowakowski, Soeffing, Orff, & Perlis,
2003). Interestingly, the “enhanced awareness” of sleep
patterns facilitated by diary keeping can reduce anxiety
over sleep loss and thus contribute to better sleep
(Morin, 1993, p. 71). A sample sleep diary is illustrated
in Figure 16.2.

Objective Estimates

Polysomnography (PSG) is used to classify sleep into
various stages. It involves placing surface electrodes on
the scalp and face to measure electrical brain activity,
eye movement, and muscle tone. The data obtained are
used to classify each epoch by sleep stage and in terms
of sleep cycles (NREM and REM). Disadvantages associated
with PSG include its expense, discomfort for
participants, and labor-intensive nature. Although PSG
is not needed for the routine assessment of insomnia
(Reite, Buysse, Reynolds, & Mendelson, 1995), it is
important if the client is suspected of having a comorbid
sleep disorder, such as sleep apnea or periodic limb
movement disorder.

Actigraphy is an alternative means of providing an
objective estimate of sleep. An actigraph is a small,
wrist-worn device that contains a sensor, a processor,
and memory storage. The sensor samples physical motion
and can be downloaded and analyzed to generate
various estimates of sleep parameters, though it cannot
differentiate stages of sleep. Correlation between
actigraphy- and polysomnography-defined estimates of
TST is quite strong, ranging from .88 to .97 in adult
nonpatients (Jean-Louis et al., 1997). It is worth noting,
however, that actigraphy validation for insomnia
patients has been met with variable success. Actigraphy
appears to be less accurate in populations with fragmented
sleep (Paquet, Kawinska, & Carrier, 2007) and

in periods of quiet wakefulness, such as the sleep-onset
period (Lichstein et al., 2006). Numerous studies have
documented that actigraphy has a tendency to overestimate
TST and underestimate wake time during sleep
in insomnia (Lichstein et al., 2006; Vallieres & Morin,
2003). Thus, although actigraphy is not required for the
assessment of insomnia and may be subject to overestimation
of TST, it nonetheless provides an overview of
the sleep–wake cycle in a way that is minimally intrusive
(Morgenthaler et al., 2007).

iNtroDuciNG treatMeNt

Following an assessment of insomnia history, severity,
and collection of 7–14 days of diary data, a first treatment
session with the client should be scheduled. This
first session has several critical treatment components:
to provide a treatment overview and rationale, to derive
an individualized case formulation, and to educate
the client about basic sleep processes. After this initial
session, behavioral and cognitive processes are selectively
targeted. The treatment concludes with a review
of tools and a focus on relapse prevention.

Treatment Overview

As a first introduction to treatment, the therapist presents
an overview of the therapy in the first session. This
can take the following format:

“The treatment that you will receive is called
cognitive-behavioral therapy for sleep (CBT for
short). CBT is a psychological intervention that is
designed to help you change some behaviors (sleep
habits, sleep schedules) and thoughts and beliefs
(worries about sleeplessness and its consequences)
that contribute to and perpetuate your sleep problem.
These are selected as the target because research
shows this is an effective strategy. The main characteristics
of CBT for insomnia are that it is sleepfocused,
relatively brief compared to other types of
psychotherapy, and you take a very active role in
your own treatment. Your treatment will involve six
to eight weekly, 50-minute individual therapy sessions.
The main agenda of each of these sessions
will include reviewing your sleep diary from the
previous week, providing practical recommendations
and home projects to facilitate changes sleep
habits, schedules, beliefs, thoughts, and so forth, and


In the morning, fi ll out the night information
for the prior night . . . mo/day
Tuesday3/25 / / / / / / /
1. Yesterday, I napped from to
(Note the times of all naps.)
1:30 to
2:30 P.M.
2. Yesterday, I took mg of medication
and/or oz. of alcohol as sleep aid.
Ambien5 mg
3. Last night, I went to bed and turned the
lights off at _ o’clock (A.M. or P.M.).
10:45 P.M.
11:15 P.M.
4. After turning the lights off, I fell asleep
in minutes.
40 min.
5. My sleep was interrupted times.
(Specify number of nighttime
awakenings.)
3
6. My sleep was interrupted for
minutes. (Specify duration of each
awakening.)
1045
7. Last night, I left my bed times. 3
8. This morning, I actually awoke at
o’clock. (Note time of last awakening.)
6:15 A.M.
9. This morning I had planned to wake
up at o’clock A.M. or P.M. (or leaveblank if you did not plan a specifi c time).
10. This morning, I actually got out of bed at
o’clock (specify the time).
6:40 A.M.
11. When I got up this morning I felt .
(Answer on a 1- to 5-point scale: 1 =
Exhausted, 5 = Refreshed.)
2
12. Overall, my sleep last night was .
(Answer on a 1- to 5-point scale: 1 =
Restless, 5 = Very sound.)
3

figUre 16.2. Sample sleep diary.

648


Sleep Disturbance

to help you solve problems that may interfere with
your progress and homework assignments. The main
objective is to help you improve your sleep and your
daytime functioning. To achieve these goals, you
will be provided with direct guidance, but you will
be responsible for implementing the recommendations
at home.”

After presenting this overview, the therapist provides
additional information about how this intervention was
developed and about its clinical effectiveness. This
information is useful to enhance treatment credibility
and to induce a sense of hope in clients who have longstanding
insomnia, and at the same time cautions others
against expecting rapid changes in sleep.

”This treatment has been developed by psychologists
as an alternative to medication therapies. It is
based on clinical research and has been tested extensively
throughout the world. This treatment has
been shown effective with hundreds of individuals
suffering from insomnia problems similar to yours.
This treatment will help improve your sleep and,
most importantly, develop self-management skills
to regain control of sleep and cope more adaptively
with occasional sleep difficulties you may encounter
even after completing this program. Although it
may take more time to improve your sleep with this
approach than with medication, research has shown
that CBT produces sleep improvements that are well
maintained long after completing treatment.”

Therapists are encouraged to emphasize the collaborative
nature of the treatment and the importance of
homework as core foundations in treatment. The cornerstone
of this approach, which is common to most
CBTs, is that the client assumes an active role in his/
her treatment. As such, he/she is encouraged to develop
new skills to achieve better control of his/her sleep.

Maintaining a daily sleep diary is an essential requirement
of treatment, and this is made very clear during
first therapy session. Therapists explain that a daily
diary is important to (1) document the nature and severity
of the initial sleep problem; (2) assess night-to-night
variations in sleep patterns and identify factors that
contribute to improved or worsened sleep; (3) monitor
treatment progress; and (4) evaluate compliance with
treatment procedures. The treatment can become difficult
if a client fails to monitor his/her sleep or forgets
to bring in his/her diary. As noncompliance with self


monitoring is likely related to noncompliance with treatment
procedures, therapists are encouraged to address
this issue up front if it becomes a problem. There is no
need for the client to monitor the clock in order to provide
accurate times. Only one’s “felt sense” of the timing
of sleep is needed. If self-monitoring is overlooked on a
particular day, clients should be discouraged from going
back and estimating sleep parameters retrospectively.
Compliance with the diary daily is often enhanced when
completion time and place is identified. For example, the
client and therapist can discuss a time (breakfast) and
location (kitchen) for filling in the diary.

Functional Analysis and Case Formulation

To derive a case formulation, the therapist and client
discuss frequency, intensity, and duration of insomnia
and its antecedents. Sleep-related behaviors and consequences
are assessed: before bed (e.g., bedtime routine),
during the night (e.g., cell phone left on), on waking
(e.g., sleepiness, lethargy) and during the day (e.g.,
caffeine use, napping). The relationship between sleepspecific
thoughts, emotions, and behaviors is charted
across the night and day. Figure 16.3 is an example of
a case conceptualization form for the nighttime period.

The case formulation is designed to elicit the client’s
curiosity about his/her sleep and to start forming a picture
of what is going on. The therapist can introduce the
exercise as follows:

“It will be helpful in planning our sessions together
to get a very detailed picture of what the experience
of insomnia is like for you, almost like putting
your sleep under a microscope. The way we do this
is by identifying together a recent typical night and
then after that a recent typical day. I’ll ask you lots
of questions about each, so that I can get a sense of
the kind of things that are going on. It’s like a fingerprint,
everyone is a bit different so the treatment
needs to be a bit different. Would that be all right?”

The first step is to help the client to choose a very
specific recent example of an “insomnia episode” during
the night. Make sure you work on deriving only
one model (i.e., either the day or the night) at a time.
A very specific episode is a situation that happened on
one particular day and at a particular time. Be sure to
check in regularly to ensure that the night was typical.
Sometimes a selected night or day is not typical or it
was not very distressing. The therapist should stop that


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

Antecedents

Typical Thursday, nothing unusual


Situation

Woke up at 2:00 am


Thoughts

Oh my God, it’s 2:00 am. I won’t be
able to cope tomorrow, and I’ve


got such a big day ahead, with
so much to do!


Feelings and Arousal

Anxious
Frustrated
Scared


Monitoring Safety Behaviors/Responses

Look at clock Stayed in bed
Notice tension in neck Turned on TV
Notice eyelids not heavy


Outcome: All of this made it hard to get back to sleep!

figUre 16.3. Case conceptualization form completed for the night.


Sleep Disturbance

model as soon as this becomes apparent and start again
with a typical, distressing night. Examples of some
very specific recent episodes may include “Last Tuesday
night I worked until 1:00 A.M. and then I couldn’t
get to sleep” or “On Friday at work I had a terrible day, I
felt sick, looked terrible and performed badly.” Spend a
few minutes asking information-gathering questions to
explore the content of the nighttime or daytime model.
The aim of this initial discussion is to obtain a very detailed
description of exactly what happened, along with
the consequences of it. The following is an example of
a client who awoke at 2:00 A.M. (Figure 16.3):

tHeraPist: What woke you up?

client: Don’t know.

tHeraPist: How did you know what time it was?

client: I looked at my clock and saw it was 2:00 A.M.

tHeraPist: When you looked at the clock and noticed
it was 2:00 A.M. what ran through your mind?

client: I thought, “Oh my God.”

tHeraPist: OK, so you looked at the clock and noticed
it was 2:00 A.M. and you thought “Oh my God.”
Could you tell me more? What do you mean by “Oh
my God?”

client: Oh my, I won’t cope tomorrow, I’ve got such a
big day ahead with so much to do.

tHeraPist: So when you thought, “Oh my, I’ve got
such a big day ahead with so much to do,” how did
you feel?

client: Really anxious.

Drawing on classic treatment development work
by David M. Clark’s team (Clark et al., 1999, 2006),
the following are useful questions to ask when deriving
the model. The following illustrates questions for
nighttime models, with analogous daytime questions in
brackets [ ]:

For identifying negative thoughts:

••
“What went through your mind/what were you
thinking before getting into bed [on waking], as
you got into bed [as you got ready for the day], and
as you noticed you weren’t getting to sleep [weren’t
performing well]?”

••
“What did you think would happen as a result?”
••
“What would that mean? What would be so bad
about that?”

For identifying safety behaviors:
••
“When you thought X might happen, did you do
anything to try to prevent it from happening?”
••
“Is there anything you do to ensure you get to sleep
[perform well during the day]?”

For identifying feelings:
••
“When you are afraid that X will happen, what do
you notice happening in your body?”
••
“What kind of emotions do you have as you think
X?”
••
“How about your energy level?”

For identifying monitoring:
••
“How did you know that X would happen?”
••
“How did you determine or measure how close to
falling asleep you were or what the time was [that
you were feeling so tired]?”
••
“How do you monitor/measure when the insomnia
is back?”
••
“How do you know that you hadn’t fallen asleep
[were still tired]?”

It is important for the therapist to ask questions to
illustrate the cyclical relationship among thoughts, feelings,
and behaviors that is often evident in insomnia.
These questions focus on the arrows. It is often important
to connect “monitoring” and “safety behaviors”
back to thoughts. Here are some questions that will
help:

For connecting thoughts, feelings and behaviors:

••
“When you are concentrating on (give examples
of monitoring, like looking at the clock), what
thoughts occur to you? Anything run through you
mind?”

••
“When you are concentrating on (give examples
of safety behaviors, like remaining in bed for long
periods of time), what is its impact on your getting
back to sleep?”

••
“When you monitor these things (when you cope
by doing X), does that help you worry less or does
it trigger more worries?”

Drawing out the consequences:

••
“Does watching out for fatigue and tension have
any consequences [for your day]?”
••
“Were there any consequences of these thoughts,


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

emotions or behaviors for getting back to sleep
[how the rest of your day went]?”

Once the model has been derived, the therapist
shares the personalized version with the client, asking
for feedback and reactions. The therapist might say the
following:

“This has been very helpful. Let me show you what
I have been scribbling here, and I’d like for you to
give me feedback about which parts I understand
and which parts I have got wrong. This is so similar
to what we very often find. These kinds of thoughts
[name some] seem to lead to these kinds of feelings
[name them]. Both put together make it difficult to
sleep. On top of that, the thoughts and feelings can
put us into a state of vigilance. Then we start monitoring
the environment and our bodies [name some
examples of the kinds of monitoring in which client
engages], which often triggers more thoughts, which
triggers more feelings. Then, very understandably,
we try to cope by doing things like [name some of
the safety behaviors]. Now some of these really are
likely to be helpful in getting us back to sleep, but
sometimes during the treatment we will test out the
extent to which they are helpful by doing an experiment,
to double check. That’s why we call them safety
behaviors. Safety behaviors are things that people
do in order to try and fix the problem they have but
which, inadvertently, sometimes contribute to the
problem. We may test out whether these behaviors
are helpful or unhelpful. How does this model fit for
you?”

Once the model has been completed, it is important
to ask clients if they can think of ways to intervene.
If an area is identified, draw a double line across the
maintaining arrows to visually represent cutting into
the cycle. Most often clients are not able to come up
with ways to intervene, so the therapist can help them
by saying something like the following:

“I suggest that one of our targets be these thoughts .. .
if we can change them we will change your feelings.
This alone will be very helpful for helping you get
back to sleep. In addition, we’ll also target the monitoring.
When we change the monitoring people typically
feel much more relaxed and sleep much better.
Then, as I have already said, if you are interested,
we’ll test with experiments the things you are doing

to cope right now, just in case some are feeding into
the cycle.”

Summarize by pointing out that a change in one or more
parts of the perpetuating cycle will shift the system.

Goal Setting

Once the case conceptualization/insomnia models are
derived, specific goals are collaboratively identified
and written down in session. Goals are clearly stated
(e.g., “falling asleep within 30 minutes each night”
instead of “falling asleep more quickly at night”) and
feasible (e.g., “sleeping through the night with only several
brief awakenings” instead of “sleeping through the
night without waking,” as the latter is not biologically
feasible). Practitioners and clients can establish goals
for both the nighttime (falling asleep, staying asleep,
advancing bedtime) and the daytime (increasing energy,
reducing caffeine consumption). Goals are revisited
briefly midway through treatment and at the conclusion
of treatment.

Therapy goals are set in Session 1 but may need to be
reevaluated and readjusted periodically as the intervention
unfolds. It is important to set realistic, operational,
and well-defined goals. Goal setting is useful to keep
the therapy focused. By setting well-defined goals, the
therapeutic alliance remains oriented to the client’s
needs and desires and minimizes diversion to irrelevant
materials. It also provides useful information about the
client’s sleep expectations, which sometimes need to be
adjusted during the goal setting process.

Motivational Interviewing

Motivational interviewing (MI) is a communication
method that emphasizes accepting the client as an individual,
avoiding argumentation/lectures, and focusing
on the process of eliciting and shaping language in
favor of change (i.e., change talk; Miller & Rollnick,
2002). MI also includes regular, straightforward reviews
of perceived pros and cons of change because
many sleep-incompatible/interfering behaviors are rewarding.


A straightforward review of perceived pros and cons
of the change is conducted. For example, clients often
struggle with waking up at around the same time on
both weekdays and weekends. Allowing the client to
generate advantages and disadvantages with therapist
guidance facilitates behavior change. MI is revisited


Sleep Disturbance

in future sessions as additional strategies are introduced.


Sleep and Circadian Education

Education on the circadian system and homeostatic
sleep drive (see the earlier “Sleep and Insomnia” section)
is presented to the client. This underscores the
following two points: (1) Going to bed and waking up
at the same time each day helps the circadian system
adapt to the 24-hour sleep–wake cycle; and (2) daytime
napping disrupts the natural buildup of homeostatic
sleep pressure. Individuals across the age range
may also benefit from education about specific changes
in sleep across the lifespan. In adolescence and young
adulthood, understanding the biological shift toward
later bedtimes and rise times with puberty is helpful for
later intervention. Likewise, explaining to adults that
sleep grows lighter and more fragmented with age, and
that sleep needs change with age, such that 7 hours of
sleep per night may be sufficient, can go a long way to
normalize and lay the foundation for intervention.

Behavioral coMPoNeNts

Sleep Restriction

Sleep restriction, as developed by Spielman and colleagues
(1987), rests on the general premise that time
in bed should be limited to maximize the sleep drive,
and so that the association between the bed and sleeping
is strengthened. This behavioral treatment begins
with a reduction of time spent in bed, so that time in
bed is equivalent to the time the client estimates he/
she spends sleeping. Thus, for instance, if an individual
gets approximately 6 hours of sleep per night (an average
across the week based on sleep diaries), but usually
spends about an additional 2 hours trying to get to
sleep, the sleep restriction therapy would begin by limiting
his/her time spent in bed to 6 hours. This initial
reduction in time spent in bed is intended to heighten
a person’s homeostatic sleep drive (Perlis & Lichstein,
2003) and reduce the association between the bed and
wakefulness. Following this restriction, sleep gradually
becomes more efficient, at which point time spent in
bed is gradually increased.

Practitioners begin sleep restriction by calculating
TST, time in bed, and sleep efficiency based on the
prior week’s sleep diary. “Sleep efficiency” is defined

as TST divided by time in bed, multiplied by 100 to
form a percentage. So, in the previous example, if a client
sleeps an average of 6 hours per night over the week
and spends an average of 8 hours in bed, sleep efficiency
for the week will be (6 ÷ 8) × 100, or 75%. The goal
is to increase sleep efficiency to more than 85–90%.
The therapist would set a “sleep window” equal to the
prior week’s TST (6 hours), choosing a bedtime and
rise time with the client (e.g., 12:00 A.M. to 6:00 A.M.).
Once sleep efficiency reaches 85%, client and therapist
can gradually expand the window (e.g., by 30 minutes
per week) toward an optimal sleep time.

Clients are often hesitant about implementing sleep
restriction. Many individuals with insomnia believe
that they need to spend a great deal of time in bed in
order to “catch” a minimum amount of sleep. Still others
worry about the short-term sleep deprivation that
sleep restriction is likely to impart—after all, clients
are presenting with the desire to get more sleep, and
sleep restriction is a strategy that, in the short term, is
likely to give them less. Explain to the client that his/
her brain and body have developed habits that lead
to time awake in bed and poor sleep efficiency. Sleep
restriction is the most effective way to improve sleep
efficiency by consolidating sleep time. Tell the client
that, although initially he/she may not get more sleep,
his/her sleep quality and sleep efficiency will likely
improve. These are the first steps to remedying sleep
problems. Reassure the client that, as his/her sleep efficiency
improves, you will be expanding the “sleep
window” to allow for more time in bed.

Stimulus Control

The rationale for stimulus control therapy lies in the
notion that insomnia is a result of conditioning that
occurs when the bed becomes associated with inability
to sleep. The bed, bedtime, and bedroom have lost
their properties previously associated with sleep, and
the main therapeutic goal is to reestablish or strengthen
the associations between sleep and the stimulus conditions
under which it typically occurs. As described by
Bootzin, Epstein, and Wood (1991), stimulus control
requires clients to comply with a series of specific behavioral
recommendations. These recommendations,
along with suggestions for introducing them, are outlined
below.

••
Only go to bed when sleepy. To reestablish the
association between the bed and sleep, clients are


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

instructed to go to bed and to stay in bed only when
sleepy and when sleep is imminent. Therapists explain
that “sleepy” is different from “tired,” and that
although an individual may feel tired in the evening,
he/she must wait until he/she feels sleepy before getting
into bed. Note that, if a sleep window has been set as
part of sleep restriction (described earlier), the client is
instructed to remain awake until the start of the sleep
window, even if he/she feels sleepy.

••
Get out of bed if unable to fall asleep. Because
time spent awake in bed can often be associated with
worry, rumination, and arousal, clients are instructed
to leave the bed if they do not fall asleep within 15–20
minutes, returning to bed only when they feel sleepy.
This may be introduced in session as follows:

“If you are unable to fall asleep or return to sleep
within 15–20 minutes, get out of bed, go into another
room, and engage in a quiet activity that you find relaxing.
You can read, listen to music, do a crossword
puzzle, or find something else that is nonarousing.
Return to bed only when sleepy, and repeat this step
as often as necessary throughout the night—so that
anytime you wake up and are awake for more than
20 minutes, you will be getting out of bed and going
to another room. This regimen will help reassociate
your bed/bedroom with falling asleep quickly.”

••
Therapists can brainstorm relaxing activities with
clients and write them down in session, listening carefully
for and discouraging potentially stimulating activities
(Web browsing, watching certain TV programs,
cleaning the house). Emphasize to clients that it will be
difficult to comply with this recommendation. Encourage
clients to put warm clothing by the bed to increase
the desire to get out of bed. Brainstorm with clients
who live in studios or single rooms to find an alternate
place (a chair or pillow on the floor) to go to when getting
out of bed.

••
Keep the bedroom for sleep and sex. Eliminate all
sleep-incompatible activities (upsetting conversations,
studying, watching TV) from the bed and bedroom.
Many individuals get into bed early and read or watch
TV in order to facilitate sleep onset. Remind clients
that this time in bed spent awake, however, dilutes the
association between the bed and sleep.

••
Discourage napping. Explain to clients that napping
can offset homeostatic sleep pressure, making

it more difficult to fall asleep or stay asleep at night.
Often it can be helpful to point to specific examples
in the sleep diaries where a daytime nap led to greater
difficulty falling asleep, or more wakefulness throughout
the night, to illustrate this point. If clients regularly
nap at a certain time, brainstorm activities that can be
scheduled as an alternative. Tell clients that although
naps may feel helpful in the short term, they can disrupt
sleep–wake rhythms and perpetuate insomnia in
the long term.

Sleep Hygiene

Information about sleep and sleep incompatible behaviors,
and the daytime consequences of sleep disturbance,
is often given to inform clients of the basic steps
that they can take to improve their sleep. Interventions
targeting sleep hygiene are behavioral in nature and
target sleep-incompatible routines. Sleep hygiene interventions
typically include the following components
(Morin & Espie, 2003). First, education on the sleepdisrupting
effects of alcohol, tobacco, and caffeine use
are introduced to the client, who is encouraged to avoid
caffeine in the evening and alcohol/tobacco at bedtime.
Clients are encouraged to have a small snack before
bedtime but to avoid heavy meals. Likewise, exercise is
known to enhance sleep continuity and quality, and is
recommended to client; exercising within several hours
of bedtime, however, can delay sleep onset. Finally, the
client is encouraged to keep the bedroom environment
quiet, dark, and cool. Although sleep hygiene education
is typically included as one component of CBT-I, its
use as the sole intervention in treating insomnia has not
been empirically supported (Morin et al., 2006).

Wind Down, Wake Up, and Regularity

Wind-Down Routine

Clients need assistance to devise a “wind down” of
30–60 minutes in which relaxing, sleep-enhancing
activities are introduced in dim lighting conditions. A
regular wind-down routine is beneficial across multiple
domains: It promotes relaxation, increases positive
associations with the bed/bedtime, and, when done
in dim lighting conditions, helps the circadian phase
advance in clients who are evening-types, maintaining
entrainment (Wyatt, Stepanski, & Kirkby, 2006). Activities
that are encouraged in the wind-down routine
include reading, grooming/hygiene, bathing, complet



Sleep Disturbance

ing a light crossword, listening to soft music, and other
relaxing activities of the client’s choosing. A central
issue is the use of interactive electronic media (Internet
browsing, cell phone use, social networking). Though
clients may acknowledge that these activities are stimulating,
they may be reluctant to surrender them in the
period before sleep. MI can often be helpful given
that many clients are socially isolated and rely on prebedtime,
Internet-based social interaction. A behavioral
experiment stretching across the week (e.g., three
nights of bedtime “as usual” followed by three nights
with a “wind-down routine,” with daily ratings of prebedtime
relaxation and SOL) can be helpful to illustrate
the sleep-promoting effects of a good wind-down
routine (Harvey & Talbot, 2012a). Many clients voluntarily
choose an electronics curfew and time at which
the wind down will commence, opting to set an alarm
on a cell phone as a reminder.

Wake-Up Routine

As mentioned earlier, clients benefit from education
about sleep inertia upon waking, and about behaviors
that can increase or decrease sleep inertia. Helpful
behaviors to curb sleep inertia include not hitting
“snooze,” exposure to sunlight upon waking (e.g.,
opening the curtains to let sunlight in, eating breakfast
outside), encouraging morning physical activity,
showering, listening to upbeat music, and encouraging
social contact. Behavioral recommendations may be
introduced to combat the desire to sleep in, including
placing an alarm away from the bed so that it is necessary
to rise to turn it off, and making the bed, so the
incentive to get back in bed is reduced. Encouragement
from family and friends can also help a person to comply
with morning rise times.

Regularizing and Shifting Sleep and Wake Times

Regularizing sleep and wake times across the week can
be a helpful intervention, particularly if schedule variability
appears to be a prominent feature of the sleep
disturbance. Building motivation for the client to wake
at the same time, including on weekends (Crowley &
Carskadon, 2010) is a key focus. This promotes consistent
sleepiness in the evening, particularly when naps
are avoided.

Often it is helpful to frame schedule variability
around the phenomenon of “jet lag” as follows:

tHeraPist: Have you ever experienced jet lag?

client: Yes, I have.

tHeraPist: When was the last time?

client: Oh, I guess the last time was flying out east to
visit relatives.

tHeraPist: What did you notice?

client: Let’s see . . . I felt kind of out of it, like I
couldn’t focus. It was difficult to fall asleep, even
more than it usually is for me!

tHeraPist: And flying out east . . . that’s a 3-hour time
difference from here, correct?

client: Yes.

tHeraPist: Let’s take a look at your sleep diary from
last week. What do you notice from weekday to
weekend?

client: Well . . . I went to bed at 2:00 A.M. on Friday
and Saturday because I went out both nights. And I
guess I slept in as a result.

tHeraPist: And what time did you go to bed on Sunday
and Monday?

client: Looks like I tried to sleep at 11:00 P.M. because
I have to get up for work.

tHeraPist: So you just went from 2:00 A.M. on the
weekend to 11:00 P.M. on the weekday. You just flew
across the country!

client: Huh. I guess I never thought of it that way.

tHeraPist: No wonder you had difficulty falling
asleep on Sunday and Monday. Your body was jet
lagged, and with the “time change” it was hard to
fall asleep.

client: No wonder I have so much trouble on Sunday
nights!

For clients who wish to advance their sleep schedules,
we work to achieve behavioral adjustments to
adapt to earlier bedtimes. We do this in small, systematic
shifts (e.g., by advancing bedtime by 20–30 minutes
each week) to ensure mastery. We encourage exposure
to light upon waking, which will help the circadian
system advance, and work with clients to minimize
variability around wake times. We reassure clients that
any sleep pressure (i.e., sleep loss) accumulated initially
with bedtime advancement will actually help the
sleep schedule align by increasing likelihood of earlier
sleep onset on subsequent nights.


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

coGNitive coMPoNeNts

Worry

It is well established that individuals with chronic insomnia
worry while in bed about a range of topics, including
the failure to fall asleep (Harvey, 2002b; Wicklow
& Espie, 2000). Cognitive models implicating
worry (e.g., Harvey, 2002a) posit that worry activates
the sympathetic nervous system and corresponding
physiological arousal, which hinders sleep onset (Espie,
2002). Therefore, an intervention targeting worry is an
important clinical area in the treatment of insomnia.

Following well-established cognitive therapy approaches
(Beck, 1995; Young, Rygh, Weinberger, &
Beck, Chapter 7, this volume), the first step in addressing
worry involves education on negative automatic
thoughts (NATs) and mistakes in thinking. NATs can
be introduced to clients as follows:

tHeraPist: Imagine there are two people outside of
a movie theater, each waiting for a friend to arrive.
The friend is late, and these two people have been
waiting. Person 1 is thinking, “Gosh, I wonder why
she is late. I hope everything is all right with her! Did
she get into an accident on her way over?” Person 2
is thinking, “Gosh, I can’t believe she is late. She
always does this. She has no respect for my time. She
is not a good friend.” What kinds of emotions do you
think Person 1 is feeling?

client: Probably some fear and concern.

tHeraPist: Right. And what about Person 2?

client: (chuckling) Anger, and maybe resentment.

tHeraPist: Exactly! So two people in the same situation
can have very different emotional responses to
an event based on what they were thinking. In other
words, our thoughts can directly influence our emotions.
Often we have dozens of thoughts, in rapid
succession, and we don’t even realize it. We accept
them at face value without stopping to look at them.
We’re going to look for, and respond to, some sleeprelated
automatic thoughts over the next few weeks.

The therapist then provides further education on automatic
thoughts: (1) They are often a train of thought
that runs parallel with spoken thought; (2) we are often
not fully aware of them; (3) automatic thoughts are extremely
rapid, and sometimes only a few words rather
than sentences; (4) they do not arise as a result of delib


eration but just happen like a reflex; (5) they are often
difficult to turn off; (6) we often accept their validity
without stopping to question them; and (7) they often
precede a powerful emotion. The therapist should underscore
the point that we have hundreds and hundreds
of NATs each day, and it is often helpful to look for
NATs by paying attention to changes in emotion.

The therapist next works with a client to identify a
recent powerful emotion from the previous 2 days, and
use the emotion as the starting place to uncover related
NATs. These are written down on a simple threecolumn
form (Situation–Thoughts–Emotions). The
client is asked to practice identifying additional NATs
over the week by paying attention to changes in emotion
and writing them down on the three-column form,
emphasizing insomnia-related NATs (“I’m exhausted”
or “I won’t be able to cope today”). The therapist also
provides psychoeducation on common cognitive distortions
(black-and-white thinking, catastrophizing, personalizing,
mistaking feelings for facts, etc.) and asks
clients to categorize some of the NATs they spot over
the week.

At the following session, the practitioner reviews the
client’s three-column NAT form and has a brief discussion/
review of NATs and NAT themes. The practitioner
then introduces an extended thought record that guides
the client in evaluating the validity of the thought with
a series of questions, including evidence for–against the
thought; alternative ways of interpreting the thought;
considering the worst that could happen and whether
the client would be able to live through it; the helpfulness
of the thought and the effect of thinking in this
manner; how others might see the situation; how important
the thought will be when the client is 80; and
whether the thought falls into one of the “mistakes in
thinking.” Client and therapist pick a NAT together and
work through the form together in session.

Once the client has fully grasped this procedure, the
therapist assigns as homework completing one extended
record daily or, at the very least, several examples
each week. This is continued for several weeks. The
therapist provides the following rationale for continuing
to fill out the extended record on a daily basis: (1)
By observing, reporting and evaluating NATs, it is
easier to see them objectively and to get some distance
from them; (2) observing, reporting, and evaluating
NATs presents an opportunity to test their reality/logic
and recognize that thoughts can be unreliable; and most
importantly, (3) because it takes a long time to change
thinking habits that have been around for many years,


Sleep Disturbance

reversing the old habits will take practice. Completing
one form daily over a period of weeks will make the
new style of thinking habitual.

Helpful and Unhelpful Worry Strategies

A menu of other worry interventions is offered, so that
the client gets to create a personalized list of helpful and
unhelpful strategies to manage worry. Unhelpful strategies
might include suppression (Harvey, 2003a), positive
beliefs about worry (Harvey, 2003b), and “why”
questions (Watkins & Baracaia, 2001). For suppression,
introduce the adverse consequences of thought
suppression whenever it becomes relevant, sometimes
as early as Session 1. For example, as soon as the client
mentions something along the lines of “I try to suppress
my thoughts” or “I clear my mind,” the therapist can do
an in-session “white bear experiment” (“For the next
minute, let’s close our eyes and think about whatever
we’d like, anything except a big white fluffy bear”) to
illustrate paradoxical effects of thought suppression.
This helps the client become aware that suppression
often leads to “thought rebound” or monitoring for
the suppressed thought, which makes it more likely to
occur. A helpful assessment for suppression and other
thought control strategies is available (Ree, Harvey,
Blake, Tang, & Shawe-Taylor, 2005). Therapists should
also be on the lookout for clients who hold positive beliefs
about the utility of presleep worry. Therapists can
use Socratic questioning to discuss the pros and cons
of presleep worry, or consider doing behavioral experiments
to collect data on whether positive beliefs about
worrying in bed are helpful or not. Finally, “why”
questions are often implicated in the presentation of insomnia.
Many clients ask questions such as “Why am I
awake?” or “Why don’t I sleep as well as my partner?”
Give your client the rationale that experimental studies
suggest that “why” questions block processing and
promote rumination.

After reviewing what not to do to manage worry,
consider alternative, more helpful thought management
strategies with the client. First, suggest the idea of not
controlling or suppressing thoughts. Do the opposite—
let them come. Let them drift in and out. Letting the
thoughts come and go may give the thoughts less
strength and power, and may even move them into the
category of being boring. Another helpful alternative
involves catching the thoughts and evaluating them
with the extended thought record described earlier.
Introducing the importance of a wind-down or buffer

zone to process and disengage from the day can be a
helpful response to worry. Finally, practice “savoring”
to focus on the positives in the client’s life. Savoring
involves attending to, appreciating, and enhancing
positive experiences the client has had during the day.
It can be a small/everyday event like looking out the
window and noticing the lovely trees and flowers, reminiscing
over a favorite vacation, or anticipating a family
reunion or a date with one’s spouse/partner. Encourage
the client to focus on the positive experience, and when
negative thoughts arise, return to the positive experience
and savor it. The rationale is to associate bedtime
with positive thoughts. Work with your client in the session
to identify times in the present, past, and future
that he/she can savor. Practice savoring together in the
session and allow the client to reflect on the experience.

Set one or more of these alternative strategies as
homework, introducing it as a behavioral experiment.
Behavioral experiments, explained in Table 16.1, are
powerful methods used across all of the cognitive components
of CBT-I. (For further reading on behavioral
experiments, see Perlis, Aloia, & Kuhn, 2012; Ree &
Harvey, 2004a.) The goal is to give the client some experience
and practice with each. Feel free to follow-up
with additional experiments in subsequent sessions if
needed.

Attention and Monitoring

As noted earlier, a number of studies have documented
that individuals with insomnia underestimate their
sleep time and overestimate time spent awake at night
(e.g., Harvey & Tang, 2012). Individuals may become
more anxious about their perceived sleep problem, and
with increased vigilance towards the sleep state, may
draw inaccurate conclusions about their prior sleep.
Likewise, individuals may monitor for signs of daytime
fatigue. A helpful measure of sleep-related monitoring
is available (Neitzert Semler & Harvey, 2004). Behavioral
experiments, both in and out of session, can be introduced
to illustrate the effects of attentional bias and
monitoring (Harvey & Talbot, 2012b; Ree & Harvey,
2004a).

To introduce the concept of monitoring, the therapist
may wish to do the following:

tHeraPist: Close your eyes and focus on your knee
joints and the sensations that are there. I’ll do it, too.
Let’s both take 2 minutes to do this. (after 2 minutes)
What did you notice?


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

table 16.1. steps involved in Creating, testing, and Processing behavioral experiments

Steps and description Example
••
Step 1. Identify the thought, belief, behavior, or process Victor is unsure as to whether looking at the clock as he falls asleep
the experiment will target. The rationale for completing the is helpful. He believes that knowing the time, and calculating how
experiment, along with the target or aim, should be clear. much time he has left to sleep, may increase his anxiety at night;
Targets can include challenging an unhelpful belief/behavhowever,
he also feels that not knowing the time could increase
ior or testing a new belief/behavior. The target is written worry and anxiety throughout the night. Victor and his therapist set
down in session. out to test the following: “Is looking at the clock at night helpful or
harmful to my sleep?”
••
Step 2. Collaborate to brainstorm ideas for an experi-Victor and his therapist agree to set up an experiment to test the
ment. Encourage clients to be specific, defining a place and impact of clock watching on sleep. They agree to spend 3 nights
time for the experiment. Get creative and arouse clients’ watching the clock as usual, followed by 3 nights without looking
curiosity. Be open and flexible to ideas the clients have, as at the clock. Victor states that he will be tempted to turn the clock
this may increase motivation to complete the experiment. around on the “no-clock” nights, so he and his therapist collabora-
Clients sometimes enjoy giving their experiments creative tively brainstorm to move the clock across the room to reduce this
titles. temptation.
••
Step 3. Write down predictions about the outcome and Victor has the following prediction: “Not looking at the clock at
devise a method to record the outcome as soon as possible night will increase my anxiety and keep me up longer because I’ll
after the experiment is completed. This is very important: be wondering what time it is all night.” He and his therapist decide
A delay in recording the outcome could lead to vague and to record “last night’s anxiety” on a scale of 1–10 immediately upon
inaccurate memory of the experiment itself. waking and use the sleep diary to look at time it takes to fall asleep.
••
Step 4. Anticipate problems and brainstorm solutions. Ask Victor and his therapist discuss obstacles to completing the experiyour
client what might prevent him/her from completing ment. Victor has a party to attend on one of the nights, which will
this experiment. Identify obstacles and collaborate on how delay his bedtime slightly; he and his therapist decide to skip the
to overcome them. If the experiment centers around a new clock-watching experiment on this “nontypical” night and complete
skill, practice the skill together in session before making it it the other six nights of the week.
a part of the experiment.
••
Step 5. Conduct the experiment. Victor spends 3 nights looking at the clock and 3 nights not looking
at the clock, recording anxiety and standard sleep variables on his
sleep diary.
••
Step 6. Review the experiment. Ask your client to summa-Clock nights:
rize main points he/she has learned from the experiment. Anxiety ratings (on a scale of 1–10): 8, 6, 7
Assist him/her in filling in gaps, and write out conclusions Time to fall asleep (in minutes): 120, 45, 60
together. Remind your client of the conclusions drawn
from each experiment in future sessions. If the outcome is
other than anticipated, ask follow-up questions to review
any factors (mood, behavior, cognitions) that may have
No-clock nights:
Anxiety ratings (on a scale of 1–10): 10, 6, 4
Time to fall asleep (in minutes): 140, 50, 15
influenced the outcome in a manner other than expected.
Typically, via careful questioning, learning can be derived
from an experiment regardless of the outcome.
At first glance, the numbers above do not appear to “solve” the
experiment one way or the other. However, with careful questioning,
a subsequent testable hypothesis is generated. Victor reports that his
anxiety levels and length of time to fall asleep were consistent on the
clock-watching nights. On the no-clock nights, Victor reports that
his anxiety was initially very high as he wondered what time it was;
by the third day, however, he acknowledged hardly thinking about
the time. Victor and his therapist discuss the possibility that he was
experiencing initial anxiety with the new behavioral change, and
speculate that he may need more time in the no-clock condition to
“get used to” the shift.
••
Step 7. Identify follow-up experiments if needed. If the Victor and therapist decide to extend the “no-clock” condition for
experiment was not completed in full, or if the outcome another week, still rating anxiety and time to fall asleep immediwas
ambiguous and/or raised another question, return to ately upon waking.
Step 1 and devise a further experiment.


Sleep Disturbance

client: Hmm .. . some tingling, and pins and needles.
Mild pain maybe.

tHeraPist: Imagine for a moment there was a lot of
research to indicate that the things you mention are
soft signs of a serious immune system disease. If you
believed this were true, how would this impact your
attention for the rest of the day?

client: I’d be paying attention to my knee all day!
tHeraPist: And how would you feel about those sensations?
client: Well, concerned, I guess. Wondering if they
had gotten worse.
tHeraPist: What if your sleep is like that knee? And
the more you look out for symptoms of tiredness or
fatigue, the more they appear?

The therapist can use this dialogue to brainstorm
with the client about the monitoring in which he/she
may engage during the day and night. Then, the therapist
can introduce one or more of the following behavioral
experiments to assess monitoring.

Monitoring for Fatigue

Go for a brief walk together in session. Instruct the client
to spend 5 minutes focusing internally to monitor
how his/her body feels, paying particular attention to
signs of tiredness and fatigue. Ask your client to rate
how tired he/she feels. Then spend 5 minutes focusing
externally on the trees, flowers, and sky. Ask your client
to again rate how tired he/she feels. Go back to your
office to debrief.

Monitoring for Sounds

To instruct the client about monitoring at night it is often
helpful to use the metaphor of a “radar.” One client who
monitored for the garbage truck had her “radar” on all
night for the sound of the garbage truck. She would
wake up to many sounds during the night and think,
“Oh no, it is the garbage truck, it must already be 5:00

A.M. I’m never going to get enough sleep.” This thought
led to anxiety that made it difficult for her to get back
to sleep. We used multiple strategies to address this
monitoring: (1) evaluating whether hearing the garbage
truck was really an indication of wakefulness or whether
the truck could have caused the client to wake from
a light sleep; (2) discussing the pros and cons of having
a “radar” on during the night; and (3) asking the client
to listen to sounds in the room, and further away, in the
adjacent room, and still further away, to sounds on the
road, and to sounds further away yet again, encouraging
habituation to the full range of sounds.

Monitoring Physical Appearance

One client with whom we worked used to complain
about her physical appearance on the days following
poor nights of sleep. She would wake up and immediately
look in the mirror, noticing bags under her eyes.
When asked how bad the bags were on days when she
had not slept poorly, the client admitted she never really
looked for them. We devised a behavioral experiment
whereby she was to look at the bags under her eyes
upon waking every day of the week, regardless of how
she had slept, and rate the appearance of baggy eyes.
The client found that her bags did not really change
from morning to morning, and that she had really just
ignored them on days when her sleep was not poor.

Monitoring the Clock

Paying attention to the clock throughout the night can
increase anxiety and vigilance, interfering with sleep.
Client and therapist can create an experiment whereby
the clock is displayed in full view 3 nights of the week,
then hidden from view (i.e., turned to face the wall or
placed under the bed) for 3 nights. Ask the client to
rate overall anxiety about the prior night’s sleep in the
morning and record it on the sleep diary. The sleep
diary can then be reviewed in the following session to
compare anxiety and wakefulness on clock-watching
nights versus clock-hidden nights.

Unhelpful Beliefs about Sleep

In seminal research on insomnia from the 1990s,
Morin (e.g., 1993) highlighted the role of unhelpful
beliefs about sleep. It has been suggested that these unhelpful
beliefs may exacerbate intrusive and worrisome
thoughts throughout the day and night, contributing to
the development and maintenance of sleep disturbance
(Harvey, 2002a). An unhelpful belief about insomnia
might take the form of an individual believing that he/
she needs to sleep through the night with no awakenings
to feel refreshed. Such a belief is unhelpful in that
awakenings are a natural part of nocturnal sleep (e.g.,
Akerstedt et al., 2002); worry related to this belief


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

might take the form of an individual who, once awakened
at night, believes that this fragmented sleep will
result in impaired work performance the following day.
One large-scale correlational study (Jansson & Linton,
2007) surveyed unhelpful beliefs about sleep, depression,
anxiety, and arousal at two time points spaced 1
year apart. The researchers found that unhelpful beliefs
about sleep—in particular, beliefs about the longterm
negative consequences of insomnia—predicted a
chronic pattern of poor sleep over and above arousal,
depression, anxiety, and beliefs about short-term consequences.
Such research suggests that targeting unhelpful
beliefs about sleep is important for reversing
chronic insomnia.

In addition to thought records, unhelpful beliefs
about sleep can commonly be addressed in two ways:

(1) gentle Socratic questioning to explore an unhelpful
belief, and (2) creation of a survey to collect data
related to the belief (Harvey & Eidelman, 2012). The
following vignette illustrates how the therapist can use
Socratic questioning to guide the client to explore and
correct some unrealistic expectations about sleep needs
and morning energy:
tHeraPist: Some of your responses suggest that you
believe quite strongly about the need for 8 hours of
sleep every night.

client: Well, I’ve always thought that we need 8 hours
of sleep to stay healthy.

tHeraPist: Do all people you know have the same
height?

client: Of course not!

tHeraPist: What is the normal height for an adult?

client: Well, there is no norm that applies to everyone.
It varies.. ..

tHeraPist: It is similar for sleep. There are individual
differences in the amount of sleep we need to feel
rested and function well during the day. Although
most people report about 7 or 8 hours of sleep, some
can get by with less than that and still feel rested in
the morning. It is possible that 6.5 hours of uninterrupted
sleep be more satisfying and refreshing than 8
hours of broken sleep. So, it will be important to experiment
with various sleep durations to determine
what the optimal duration is for you. What do you
think happens if you assume that you need 8 hours
of sleep but you really only need 7?

client: I guess I’m awake an hour .. . and I spend that
hour worrying about why I’m not sleeping!

tHeraPist: Exactly. Pursuing unrealistic goals is
counterproductive and may actually make you anxious
and, as a consequence, perpetuate the underlying
sleep difficulties. I also noted that you are very
concerned when you are not fully rested in the morning.


client: Well, this concerns me because I assume that
if I am not well rested in the morning, it must mean
that I have not slept well the night before.

tHeraPist: This may be a valid assumption. However,
even the best sleepers do not always arise in the
morning feeling well rested and full of energy.

client: So you’re telling me that when I wake up in the
morning feeling tired, it is not necessarily an indication
of poor sleep.

tHeraPist: What I am suggesting is that you need
to be careful with your expectations and interpretations.
Even with good-quality sleep, you simply
cannot expect to always feel refreshed and energetic
during the day. There are day-to-day variations in
how we feel and how energetic we are.

client: I guess I have noted that for myself.

tHeraPist: So, what alternative thoughts should you
have the next time you catch yourself setting standards
that may be unrealistic?

client: That 8 hours of sleep is not necessarily a “gold
standard” that applies to everyone, and that even if
on some days I am not fully rested, I may simply
need to accept that and not jump to the conclusion
that I slept poorly the night before and won’t be able
to function the next day.

tHeraPist: Very good! This should reduce your anxiety
about sleep as well.

As the above vignette illustrates, many clients have
unrealistic expectations about their sleep requirements
and their daytime energy level. An important goal is
to help these clients realize that diminished sleep and
daytime energy are not always pathological, and that
even good sleepers do not always get 8 hours of sleep
or feel completely refreshed every morning. With
gentle Socratic questioning, clients may benefit from
reappraising their expectations regarding both sleep
requirements and daytime energy.


Sleep Disturbance

Surveys can also be designed to evaluate unrealistic
beliefs about sleep. Before the session, the therapist
should have an idea of unrealistic beliefs to target (e.g.,
“Good sleepers get 8 hours of sleep,” “Only people with
insomnia feel tired in the daytime,” or “I am not normal
for waking up four times a night”). The Dysfunctional
Beliefs and Attitude Scale (Morin & Espie, 2003) is a
terrific measure to assess and document change in unhelpful
beliefs about sleep. The therapist can introduce
the survey by saying:

“One of the components of this treatment that we have
found to be very effective is for us to collaborate together
to create and administer a survey. There are a
number of things we get from this: advice from good
sleepers about why they sleep so well; a reminder
as to how well good sleepers really sleep; and data
on our beliefs about sleep. Most of us have developed
our ideas about sleep from magazine articles,
from a parent, or on the basis of our own experience.
What or who has most influenced your ideas about
sleep? [Allow the client to respond.] In order to start
to become more data driven we are going to devise
a survey together and administer it to people in your
age group. This is always an interesting exercise
and an opportunity to learn from others about how
they manage their sleep. We focus on people around
your age given that sleep changes so much across the
lifespan. Here are some questions we have found to
be helpful in the past.”

At this point, the therapist asks questions that pertain
specifically to the client’s unhelpful beliefs about sleep.
Survey questions may include the following:

••
“Are you a good sleeper or someone with insomnia?”
This question can be particularly useful to
illustrate that individuals who regard themselves
as “good sleepers” often feel tired in the morning,
wake up at night, and feel sleepy in the afternoon.


••
“How many hours of sleep per night do you get?”
••
“How long does it take to fall asleep at night?”
••
“How many times do you wake up at night?”
••
“How alert do you feel upon waking, on a 1- to

10-point scale? What have you found helpful to increase
alertness?”
••
“How often do you nap? Does it affect your subsequent
sleep?”

••
“Do you have a bedtime routine? A morning routine?”


••
“Do you feel tired in the daytime? When? What
do you do to increase energy when you feel tired?”
This question often generates many strategies suggested
by others, and only a small proportion of
the strategies involve resting or sleeping. Common
alternatives include changing the environment,
getting fresh air, going for a walk, drinking cold
water, or having a snack. Clients often realize that
energy can be increased by things other than rest
and sleep, and that boredom is a big trigger for
feeling tired.

Be sure to add questions of the client’s choosing as well,
so that the survey is truly collaborative and generates
enthusiasm and interest. Clients are often curious about
dreams, nightmares, or sleep patterns that can be added
as questions to the survey. Also, questions about mood
(“How often do you feel sad?” or “Have you noticed a
relationship between your daytime mood and nighttime
sleep?”) can provide normalizing evidence that sleep
and mood are interrelated, even in good sleepers.

Safety Behaviors

Closely related to unhelpful beliefs are so-called “safety
behaviors,” which are actions taken to avoid feared
outcomes that are maladaptive in two ways: (1) They
prevent disconfirmation of the unhelpful beliefs, and

(2) they increase the likelihood that the feared outcomes
will occur. Individuals with insomnia, in an attempt
to cope with anxiety related to unhelpful beliefs
about sleep, often employ safety behaviors (Salkovskis,
1991). In the previous section, we described an individual
who endorsed the unhelpful belief that only
solid, uninterrupted sleep would allow unimpaired
work performance the next day. To prevent nocturnal
awakenings, this individual might develop a routine
of safety behaviors that include never going out in the
evening, wearing earplugs, and using a sound machine
as she sleeps. Engaging in these behaviors, while understandable
in a general way, will clearly prevent her
from learning that she can get adequate sleep even if
the routine is broken. Paradoxically, these behaviors
may make the feared outcome more likely to occur. Not
going out in the evening increases the chance that she
will become preoccupied with her sleep, and may contribute
to rumination/worry and sad mood. Earplugs

CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

can be effective in certain circumstances, but they can
also contribute to sleep problems if they are uncomfortable,
or if they cause her to strain to try and hear things
in the environment. A sound machine can facilitate
awakenings in the night.

To work with safety behaviors, a helpful assessment
tool is available (Ree & Harvey, 2004b). Behavioral
experiments are designed in which the safety behavior
is selectively adopted and then dropped, providing an
often stunning demonstration of their adverse impact.
For example, if a client avoids going out in the evenings
because of feared impact on sleep, practitioner
and client can set up a behavioral experiment in which
two of the evenings in the week are spent at home (the
“control” condition), and two evenings in the week are
spent outside the home (socializing with others, going
to a movie, etc.; the “experimental” condition). The
practitioner instructs the client to rate not only standard
sleep variables on the weekly diary (SOL, TST,
etc.) but also to add a simple scale to measure evening
satisfaction or mood each night. Often it is helpful
to point out that mood and satisfaction increased on
nights the client left the home, as well as to emphasize
minimal (or inconsistent) changes in sleep as a result
of leaving the home.

Daytime Energy

Individuals with disturbed sleep often monitor themselves
for signs of fatigue upon waking or throughout
the day. Normalizing feelings of grogginess upon waking
(so-called “sleep inertia”), and introducing behavioral
experiments and attention strategies for daytime
monitoring can reduce anxiety and preoccupation
with sleep. Often clients believe the only way they can
feel less tired in the daytime is to sleep more. Hence,
a behavioral experiment is devised to allow the client
to experience the energy-generating effects of activity
(Ree & Harvey, 2004a). This is also an opportunity to
develop a list of energy-generating and energy-sapping
activities that can be used to manage daytime tiredness
and inevitable bouts of occasional sleep deprivation.

Many clients believe that energy progressively drains
away throughout the day, and that the only way to generate
energy is to sleep or rest. Accordingly, many clients
work particularly hard at conserving energy after
a poor night’s sleep. As such, a behavioral experiment
targets the following cognitions: “Energy is increased
only by rest or sleep” and “I don’t have much energy,
so I need to take care to conserve it.” We hope to use

the experiment to illustrate that factors other than sleep
influence energy levels.

To set up this behavioral experiment, client and
therapist begin by using the sleep diary as a basis for
discussing sleep and energy during the day. They note
examples where nighttime sleep was good but energy
levels in the day were poor, or where nighttime sleep
was poor but energy levels during the day were good.
The therapist may wish to say something like: “That is
really interesting. So if sleep isn’t the full account of
how you feel during the day, then there must be other
things that can account for it.” Set up a 2-day experiment
to test energy as follows: On the first day, spend
one 3-hour block conserving energy, then a 3-hour
block using energy. After each 3-hour block, the client
rates his/her energy and mood. The following day,
the client does this in the reverse order. Be careful to
define what conserving energy means for your client.
Examples include avoidance of socializing with colleagues,
setting work tasks at a slow pace, attempting
only mundane tasks, not going out for lunch with work
friends, and not returning phone calls. Also, spend time
in the session brainstorming strategies for using energy.
These might include going for a 10-minute walk, returning
all phone calls, arranging to have a coffee with
a colleague, getting on top of the paperwork, going to
the water cooler to get a drink, or walking to a local
shop to buy a magazine or snack. Ask the client to rate
his/her mood and fatigue on a form developed collaboratively
in the session. The client typically finds that his/
her mood and energy were improved by “using” energy,
and using energy then becomes synonymous with generating
energy. The therapist may comment that energy
levels are like elastic that can be stretched quite easily.

treatMeNt suMMary
aND relaPse PreveNtioN

The final treatment session is oriented around consolidating
skills and preparing for setbacks. Relapse prevention
is designed to build skills to minimize or prevent
the reoccurrence of sleep disturbance in the long
term. At the end of treatment, the therapist guides the
participant in identifying potential high-risk situations
for insomnia in the future and discusses skills to prevent
or cope with these high-risk situations. Client and
therapist together discuss potential obstacles to maintaining
gains, and they problem-solve around areas of
future sleep disturbance. An individualized summary


Sleep Disturbance

of learning and achievements guides relapse prevention
work. Areas needing further intervention are addressed
by setting specific goals and creating plans for achieving
each goal.

In the final session, therapist and client distinguish
between a lapse (an occasional night of insomnia),
which is normal even for good sleepers, and relapse
(return of frequent and chronic insomnia). Discuss
with the client the inevitability of having an occasional
poor night’s sleep and caution against interpreting this
as evidence that chronic insomnia has returned. Identifying
situations that have been problematic in the past,
and reviewing a “new” response to temporary setbacks,
can be critical in maintaining gains.

The therapist can guide the client in imagining a
typical scenario in which insomnia is present for two
or three nights, then follow up by exploring strategies
the client might use to handle this situation in the future.
This is a good opportunity to check, once again,
whether the client has integrated the necessary skills
to cope with such insomnia nights. Discuss how he/she
can avoid falling back in the old patterns of poor sleep.

Clients are strongly urged to review their materials
from treatment and do their own assessment of the
problem and identify the best course of action. Therapists
also encourage clients to continue using tools
after treatment has concluded. They work with clients
to review tools, along with how the tools can be used to
prevent insomnia reemergence. For example, the therapist
can give the client multiple copies of the extended
thought record or materials that the client found particularly
helpful in session.

coMMoN ProBleMs iN treatMeNt

There are at least three common problems practitioners
may encounter in delivering CBT-I for treatment of insomnia:
difficulty regularizing the sleep–wake schedule,
opposition to sleep restriction, and beliefs about
the cause of insomnia that can hinder treatment compliance.
We briefly discuss solutions to each problem
below.

Clients are often reluctant to go to bed and wake up
at the same time every day, including on weekends.
This can be particularly problematic for teenagers or
young adults who often socialize and/or schedule pleasurable
activities in the weekend evening hours. As described
earlier, MI that honestly reviews the pros and
cons of regularizing a sleep schedule can be one way

to clarify ambivalence and prepare clients for change.
Therapists may also find it helpful to guide clients in
some general behavioral activity scheduling (e.g., encouraging
clients to schedule a brunch, hike, or social
visit on weekend mornings instead of weekend evenings,
to enhance motivation). Finally, family members
and friends can be instrumental to encouraging change.
One client found it helpful to have a parent come in and
turn on the overhead bedroom lights every morning, including
weekends; another agreed to have a friend call
at the same time every morning, and to keep her phone
by the bed so that she knew to answer it.

In addition to regularizing sleep schedules, clients
are often resistant to implementing sleep restriction. It
is helpful to allow clients to voice their concerns with
this component of treatment (e.g., fear of reduced sleep),
then follow up with basic education and problem solving
to address specific areas noted. Often it is helpful to
characterize the mild sleep deprivation engendered by
sleep restriction as a “tool” that will allows sleep pressure
to build and the system to get back on track, or as a
short-term side effect on the road to long-term, lasting
gains. Encourage clients to experiment with their sleep.

Finally, clients may have a variety of beliefs about
the cause of their insomnia that may shape treatment
expectations and compliance. Some clients see their
insomnia as purely biological; others recognize psychological
components; and still others attribute emergence
of their insomnia to environmental causes (e.g.,
the birth of a child, or experiencing a trauma). Each
of these may influence motivation to implement components
of CBT-I. The therapist can acknowledge the
client’s beliefs about his/her insomnia while explaining
the Spielman model (see the earlier “Models of Insomnia”
section), highlighting the fact that regardless
of the predisposing/precipitating factors that initiated
insomnia, perpetuating factors (excessive time in bed,
worry, napping) are currently maintaining the insomnia.
These perpetuating factors will be the focus of
CBT-I treatment.

coNclusioN aND future DirectioNs

CBT-I is emerging as an effective treatment option for
insomnia. Administered as a brief, structured outpatient
treatment, CBT-I targets behavioral, cognitive,
and attentional processes that mutually maintain insomnia.
Though it is structured, we wish to underscore
the idea that CBT-I can be adapted flexibly according to


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

the individualized conceptualizations of clients. Clinicians
can use assessment data, sleep diaries, and clinical
intuition to formulate a plan that emphasizes and
addresses particular areas of concern (e.g., erratic sleep
schedules, worry and rumination, or reliance on safety
behaviors). Finally, CBT-I can be adapted for clients
with comorbid conditions and even be used as a platform
for addressing sleep problems such as hypersomnolence
disorder. In this concluding section, we consider
client–therapist variables that predict success or
failure in treatment, issues specific to treating insomnia
in mood disorders, and use of CBT-I principles to treat
hypersomnolence.

Predictors of Clinical Outcome

There is limited research on factors that predict success
or failure with CBT-I, though this represents an exciting
area of future research. Evidence suggests that client
factors predicting dropout from treatment include short
sleep duration and elevated levels of baseline depressive
symptomotolgy (Ong, Kuo, & Manber, 2008), though,
in those who complete treatment, more severe insomnia
and functional impairment at baseline actually predict
clinical improvement (Van Houdenhove, Buyse, Gabriëls,
& Van den Bergh, 2011). Clinical improvement
is also predicted by changes in unhelpful beliefs about
sleep (Edinger, Wohlgemuth, Radtke, Marsh, & Quillian,
2001; Morin, Blais, & Savard, 2002). Therapist
qualities that appear to predict success in group CBT-I
include client perceptions of therapist affiliation and
warmth, while therapists perceived as confrontational
have more client dropout (Constantino et al., 2007). In
our own clinical experience, we have found that fostering
a sense of curiosity and experimentation, and
providing a clear rationale for homework completion,
makes a big difference in client motivation and treatment
outcome.

Treating Insomnia in Mood Disorders

Sleep disturbance is commonly comorbid with other
mood disorders (Armitage, 2007), and CBT-I may be
a particularly useful intervention to stabilize sleep and
circadian rhythms. For example, individuals with bipolar
disorder display night-to-night variability in TST
(Gruber et al., 2009), along with reduced sleep efficiency
and increased nighttime wakefulness (Eidelman,
Talbot, Gruber, Hairston, & Harvey, 2010; Harvey,
Schmidt, Scarna, Semler, & Goodwin, 2005) that may

respond particularly well to sleep restriction and stimulus
control. Preliminary studies suggest that CBT-I
improves unipolar depression when administered in
combination with antidepressants (Manber et al., 2008)
or as a stand-alone treatment (Taylor, Lichstein, Weinstock,
Sanford, & Temple, 2007).

For practitioners who wish to address sleep problems
in the context of depression or bipolar disorder, we
offer the following recommendations. First, routinely
monitor depression, anxiety, and/or mania symptoms,
as applicable, at the start of each session. Negotiate a
safety plan with the client prior to the start of therapy
should his/her mood grow unstable during treatment.
If symptoms of depression or mania emerge, evaluate
changes in TST that may be contributing to decline and
consider modifying or temporarily suspending sleep
restriction or stimulus control if necessary. Finally, we
encourage practitioners to monitor sleepiness regularly,
using an instrument such as the Epworth Sleepiness
Scale (Johns, 1991). When Epworth levels reach clinical
significance (a score of 10), discourage clients from
driving or engaging in other potentially unsafe behaviors
during periods of drowsiness.

Adapting CBT‑I to Treat Hypersomnolence

As with insomnia, several authors have raised the possibility
that psychological mechanisms may contribute
to the maintenance of hypersomnolence, or too much
sleep (Billiard, Dolenc, Aldaz, Ondze, & Besset, 1994;
Jacobson, Martell, & Dimidjian, 2001; Nofzinger et al.,
1991). If these hypotheses are supported empirically,
there may be utility in developing a psychological intervention
for hypersomnolence. We have been developing
a four- to eight-session multicomponent psychological
intervention, briefly described below, though we emphasize
that this approach awaits empirical evaluation.
A number of the components used to treat hypersomnolence
are adaptations or extensions of the interventions
for insomnia reviewed earlier.

As in insomnia treatment, hypersomnolence treatment
begins with a functional analysis and case formulation.
Clinicians probe for the frequency, intensity,
and duration of the hypersomnolence, as well as
its antecedents, behaviors, and consequences. Clients
complete a daily sleep diary, supplementing standard
sleep diary questions with additional probes for energy,
activity levels, and other contextual/psychological data
of note. The first session also involves MI, including
a straightforward review of pros and cons of working


Sleep Disturbance

toward managing the hypersomnolence (Miller & Rollnick,
2002). The practitioner and client then set goals
for treatment. The first and most obvious goal we set
is for sleep (typically reducing sleep to approximately
8 hours per night), though we find it is equally critical
to set goals for life. The latter is based on our clinical
experience that “having nothing to get up for” is a key
contributor to hypersomnolence in clients with mood
disorders. Often the combination of the mood disorder
and the sleep disorder has led to unemployment and
disrupted social networks. Without work to get up for
and family/friends to see, some individuals’ motivation
to reduce sleep seems to waver. After setting the
“sleep” and “life” goals for the treatment, the client
is asked to identify one small step toward these goals
for the coming week. We engage in problem solving to
limit the impact of these obstacles on reaching the goal,
and a method is developed for monitoring the extent to
which the goal is achieved (e.g., activity scheduling).

Clients with hypersomnolence also benefit from education
about a range of issues relating to sleep. Two
domains have been particularly important. The first
involves education about the operation of the circadian
system, the stimulating environmental influences
acting on it (e.g., light), and the tendency, if left unchecked,
to move toward a delayed phase. The second
involves education about sleep inertia described earlier.
Finally, we work with clients to establish a wind-down
period, a “wake-up protocol” (e.g., not hitting “snooze”
on the alarm; making the bed, so that the incentive to
get back in is reduced; heading for the shower; taking
a quick brisk walk; getting sunlight), and to minimize
fluctuation in the sleep–wake schedule across the
nights of the week.

Finally, many of the same behavioral experiments
and surveys described in this chapter appear to effectively
treat the decreased energy and fatigue that we
see in hypersomnolence. For example, clients benefit
from completing an “energy experiment” to experience
how spending energy can be a useful way to generate
energy. Other times, we structure an experiment in
which clients are asked to rate their mood and energy
before and after engaging in a social activity or leaving
the house, to illustrate contextual variables that can
improve mood and sleepiness. Creating a survey that
emphasizes collecting data on what others do to generate
energy, to get out of bed, or to fill their time when
bored can offer helpful strategies. Finally, education
and experiments on monitoring fatigue versus external
stimuli can help to break attentional biases in hyper


somnolence. As always, we conclude with a session on
relapse prevention in which progress is reviewed, gains
are consolidated, and possible setbacks are discussed.
In this manner, many of the treatment principles useful
for insomnia may also be used to treat hypersomnolence.


referenCes

Achermann, P., & Borbely, A. A. (2010). Sleep homeostasis
and models of sleep regulation. In M. H. Kryger, T. Roth,
& W. C. Dement (Eds.), Principles and practice of sleep
medicine (5th ed., pp. 431–444). Philadelphia: Elsevier.

Akerstedt, T., Billiard, M., Bonnet, M., Ficca, G., Garma, L.,
Mariotti, M., et al. (2002). Awakening from sleep. Sleep
Medicine Reviews, 6, 267–286.

American Academy of Sleep Medicine. (2005). International
classification of sleep disorders (ICSD): Diagnostic and
coding manual (2nd ed.). Westchester, IL: Author.

American Psychiatric Association. (2000). Diagnostic and
statistical manual of mental disorders (4th ed., text rev.).
Washington, DC: Author.

American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and
statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.). Arlington,
VA: Author.

Ancoli-Israel, S. (2009). Sleep and its disorders in aging populations.
Sleep Medicine, 10(Suppl. 1), S7–S11.

Armitage, R. (2007). Sleep and circadian rhythms in mood
disorders. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 433(Suppl.),
104–115.

Banks, S., & Dinges, D. F. (2010). Chronic sleep deprivation.
In M. H. Kryger, T. Roth, & W. C. Dement (Eds.), Principles
and practice of sleep medicine (5th ed., pp. 67–75).
Philadelphia: Elsevier/Saunders.

Bastien, C. H., Vallieres, A., & Morin, C. M. (2001). Validation
of the Insomnia Severity Index as an outcome measure
for insomnia research. Sleep Medicine, 2, 297–307.

Beck, J. S. (1995). Cognitive therapy: Basics and beyond.
New York: Guilford Press.

Belleville, G., Guay, C., Guay, B., & Morin, C. M. (2007).
Hypnotic taper with or without self-help treatment of insomnia:
a randomized clinical trial. Journal of Consulting
Clinical Psychology, 75, 325–335.

Besset, A., Villemin, E., Tafti, M., & Billiard, M. (1998).
Homeostatic process and sleep spindles in patients with
sleep-maintenance insomnia: Effect of partial (21 h) sleep
deprivation. Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology,
107(2), 122–132.

Billiard, M., Dolenc, L., Aldaz, C., Ondze, B., & Besset, A.
(1994). Hypersomnia associated with mood disorders: A
new perspective. Journal of Psychosomatic Research,
38(Suppl. 1), 41–47.

Bixler, E. O., Kales, A., Leo, L. A., & Slye, T. A. (1973).


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

A comparison of subjective estimates and objective sleep
laboratory findings in insomnia patients. Sleep Research,
2, 143.

Bootzin, R. R. (1972). Stimulus control treatment for insomnia.
Proceedings of the American Psychological Association,
7, 395–396.

Bootzin, R. R., Epstein, D., & Wood, J. M. (1991). Stimulus
control instructions. In P. J. Hauri (Ed.), Case studies in
insomnia (pp. 19–28). New York: Plenum Press.

Borbely, A. A. (1982). A two process model of sleep regulation.
Human Neurobiology, 1, 195–204.

Borkovec, T. D. (1982). Insomnia. Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 50, 880–895.

Breslau, N., Roth, T., Rosenthal, L., & Andreski, P. (1996).
Sleep disturbance and psychiatric disorders: A longitudinal
epidemiological study of young adults. Biological Psychiatry,
39(6), 411–418.

Buysse, D., Ancoli-Israel, S., Edinger, J. D., Lichstein, K. L.,
& Morin, C. M. (2006). Recommendations for a standard
research assessment of insomnia. Sleep, 29, 1155–1173.

Buysse, D. J., Reynolds, C. F., Monk, T. H., Berman, S. R., &
Kupfer, D. J. (1989). The Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index:
A new instrument for psychiatric practice and research.
Psychiatry Research, 28, 193–213.

Carney, C. E., Buysse, D. J., Ancoli-Israel, S., Edinger, J. D.,
Krystal, A. D., Lichstein, K. L., et al. (2012). The consensus
sleep diary: Standardizing prospective sleep selfmonitoring.
Sleep, 35(2), 287–302.

Carskadon, M. A., Dement, W. C., Mitler, M. M., Guilleminault,
C., Zarcone, V. P., & Spiegel, R. (1976). Selfreports
versus sleep laboratory findings in 122 drug-free
subjects with complaints of chronic insomnia. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 133(12), 1382–1388.

Chambless, D. L., & Hollon, S. D. (1998). Defining empirically
supported theories. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 1, 7–18.

Chesson, A. L., Jr., Anderson, W. M., Littner, M., Davila, D.,
Hartse, K., Johnson, S., et al. (1999). Practice parameters
for the nonpharmacologic treatment of chronic insomnia
(An American Academy of Sleep Medicine report, Standards
of Practice Committee of the American Academy of
Sleep Medicine). Sleep, 22, 1128–1133.

Clark, D. M., Ehlers, A., Hackmann, A., McManus, F., Fennell,
M., Grey, N., et al. (2006). Cognitive therapy versus
exposure and applied relaxation in social phobia: A randomized
controlled trial. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 74, 568–578.

Clark, D. M., Salkovskis, P. M., Hackmann, A., Wells, A.,
Ludgate, J., & Gelder, M. (1999). Brief cognitive therapy
for panic disorder: A randomized controlled trial. Journal
of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 67, 583–589.

Clarke, G., & Harvey, A. G. (2012). The complex role of sleep
in adolescent depression. Child and Adolescent Psychiatric
Clinics of North America, 21(2), 385–400.

Constantino, M. J., Manber, R., Ong, J., Kuo, T. F., Huang, J.,

& Arnow, B. A. (2007). Patient expectations and therapeutic
alliance as predictors of outcome in group cognitivebehavioral
therapy for insomnia. Behavioral Sleep Medicine,
5(3), 210–228.

Crick, F., & Mitchison, G. (1983). The function of dream
sleep. Nature, 304, 111–114.

Crowley, S. J., & Carskadon, M. A. (2010). Modifications
to weekend recovery sleep delay circadian phase in older
adolescents. Chronobiology International, 27, 1469–1492.

Edinger, J. D., Bonnet, M. H., Bootzin, R. R., Doghramji,
K., Dorsey, C. M., Espie, C. A., et al. (2004). Derivation
of research diagnostic criteria for insomnia: Report of
an American Academy of Sleep Medicine Work Group.
Sleep, 27, 1567–1596.

Edinger, J. D., Wohlgemuth, W. K., Radtke, R. A., Marsh, G.
R., & Quillian, R. E. (2001). Does cognitive-behavioral
insomnia therapy alter dysfunctional beliefs about sleep?
Sleep, 24, 591–599.

Edinger, J. D., Wyatt, J. K., Olsen, M. K., Stechuchak, K. M.,
Carney, C. E., Chiang, A., et al. (2009). Reliability and
validity of the Duke Structured Interview for Sleep Disorders
for insomnia screening. Sleep, 32, A265.

Eidelman, P., Talbot, L. S., Gruber, J., Hairston, I., & Harvey,

A. G. (2010). Sleep architecture as correlate and predictor
of symptoms and impairment in inter-episode bipolar
disorder: Taking on the challenge of medication effects.
Journal of Sleep Research, 19(4), 516–524.
Espie, C. A. (2002). Insomnia: Conceptual issues in the development,
persistence, and treatment of sleep disorder in
adults. Annual Review of Psychology, 53, 215–243.

Ford, D. E., & Kamerow, D. B. (1989). Epidemiologic study
of sleep disturbances and psychiatric disorders. An opportunity
for prevention? Journal of the American Medical
Association, 262, 1479–1484.

Gruber, J., Harvey, A. G., Wang, P. W., Brooks, J. O., III,
Thase, M. E., Sachs, G. S., et al. (2009). Sleep functioning
in relation to mood, function, and quality of life at entry to
the Systematic Treatment Enhancement Program for Bipolar
Disorder (STEP-BD). Journal of Affective Disorders,
114(1–3), 41–49.

Harvey, A. G. (2001). Insomnia: Symptom or diagnosis?
Clinical Psychology Review, 21, 1037–1059.

Harvey, A. G. (2002a). A cognitive model of insomnia. Behaviour
Research and Therapy, 40, 869–894.

Harvey, A. G. (2002b). Trouble in bed: The role of pre-sleep
worry and intrusions in the maintenance of insomnia
[Special issue]. Journal of Cognitive Psychotherapy, 16,
161–177.

Harvey, A. G. (2003a). The attempted suppression of presleep
cognitive activity in insomnia. Cognitive Therapy and Research,
27, 593–602.

Harvey, A. G. (2003b). Beliefs about the utility of presleep
worry: An investigation of individuals with insomnia
and good sleepers. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 27,
403–414.


Sleep Disturbance

Harvey, A. G. (2005). A cognitive theory of and therapy for
chronic insomnia. Journal of Cognitive Psychotherapy:
An International Quarterly, 19, 41–60.

Harvey, A. G. (2008). Sleep and circadian rhythms in bipolar
disorder: Seeking synchrony, harmony, and regulation.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 165, 820–829.

Harvey, A. G. (2009). The adverse consequences of sleep
disturbance in pediatric bipolar disorder: Implications for
intervention. Child and Adolescent Psychiatry Clinics of
North America, 18(2), 321–338.

Harvey, A. G., & Eidelman, P. (2012). Intervention to reduce
unhelpful beliefs about sleep. In M. Perlis, M. Aloia, & B.
Kuhn (Eds.), Behavioral sleep medicine treatment protocols
(pp. 79–90). New York: Academic Press.

Harvey, A. G., Schmidt, D. A., Scarna, A., Semler, C. N.,
& Goodwin, G. M. (2005). Sleep-related functioning in
euthymic patients with bipolar disorder, patients with insomnia,
and subjects without sleep problems. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 162, 50–57.

Harvey, A. G., Sharpley, A. L., Ree, M. J., Stinson, K., &
Clark, D. M. (2007). An open trial of cognitive therapy
for chronic insomnia. Behaviour Research and Therapy,
45, 2491–2501.

Harvey, A. G., & Talbot, L. (2012a). Behavioral experiments.
In M. Perlis, M. Aloia, & B. Kuhn (Eds.), Behavioral sleep
medicine treatment protocols (pp. 71–78). New York: Academic
Press.

Harvey, A. G., & Talbot, L. S. (2012b). Intervention to reduce
misperception. In M. Perlis, M. Aloia, & B. Kuhn (Eds.),
Behavioral sleep medicine treatment protocols (pp. 91–
96). New York: Academic Press.

Harvey, A. G., & Tang, N. K. (2012). (Mis)perception of
sleep in insomnia: A puzzle and a resolution. Psychological
Bulletin, 138(1), 77–101.

Harvey, A. G., Tang, N. K. Y., & Browning, L. (2005). Cognitive
approaches to insomnia. Clinical Psychology Review,
25, 593–611.

Hoddes, E., Zarcone, V., Smythe, H., Phillips, R., & Dement,

W. C. (1973). Quantification of sleepiness: A new approach.
Psychophysiology, 10, 431–436.
Hohagen, F., Rink, K., Kappler, C., Schramm, E., Riemann,
D., Weyerer, S., et al. (1993). Prevalence and treatment of
insomnia in general practice: A longitudinal study. European
Archives of Psychiatry and Clinical Neuroscience,
242, 329–336.

Irwin, M. R., Cole, J. C., & Nicassio, P. M. (2006). Comparative
meta-analysis of behavioral interventions for insomnia
and their efficacy in middle-aged adults and in older
adults 55+ years of age. Health Psychology, 25, 3–14.

Jacobson, N., Martell, C., & Dimidjian, S. (2001). Behavioral
activation treatment for depression: Returning to contextual
roots. Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 8,
255–270.

Jansson, M., & Linton, S. J. (2007). Psychological mechanisms
in the maintenance of insomnia: Arousal, distress,

and sleep-related beliefs. Behaviour Research and Therapy,
45(3), 511–521.

Jean-Louis, G., von Gizycki, H., Zizi, F., Spielman, A.,
Hauri, P., & Taub, H. (1997). The actigraph data analysis
software: II. A novel approach to scoring and interpreting
sleep-wake activity. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 85,
219–226.

Jenni, O. G., Achermann, P., & Carskadon, M. A. (2005).
Homeostatic sleep regulation in adolescents. Sleep, 28,
1446–1454.

Johns, M. W. (1991). A new method for measuring daytime
sleepiness: The Epworth sleepiness scale. Sleep, 14, 540–
545.

Karni, A., Tanne, D., Rubenstien, B. S., Askenasy, J. J. M., &
Sagi, D. (1994). Dependence on REM sleep of overnight
improvement of a perceptual skill. Science, 265, 679–682.

Klerman, E. B., & Dijk, D. J. (2008). Age-related reduction in
the maximal capacity for sleep—implications for insomnia.
Current Biology, 18(15), 1118–1123.

Kryger, M. H., Roth, T., & Dement, W. C. (2010). Principles
and practice of sleep medicine (5th ed.). Philadelphia:
Saunders.

Lack, L. C., & Bootzin, R. R. (2003). Circadian rhythm factors
in insomnia and their treatment. In M. Perlis & K.
Lichstein (Eds.), Treatment of sleep disorders: Principles
and practice of behavioral sleep medicine (pp. 305–343).
New York: Wiley.

Lichstein, K. (2000). Secondary insomnia. In K. Lichstein &

C. Morin (Eds.), Treatment of late-life insomnia (pp. 297–
319). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Lichstein, K. L., Durrence, H. H., Taylor, D. J., Bush, A. J.,
& Riedel, B. W. (2003). Quantitative criteria for insomnia.
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 41, 427–445.

Lichstein, K. L., Peterson, B. A., Riedel, B. W., Means, M.
K., Epperson, M. T., & Aguillard, R. N. (1999). Relaxation
to assist sleep medication withdrawal. Behavior Modification,
23(3), 379–402.

Lichstein, K. L., & Rosenthal, T. L. (1980). Insomniacs’
perceptions of cognitive versus somatic determinants of
sleep disturbance. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 89,
105–107.

Lichstein, K. L., Stone, K. C., Donaldson, J., Nau, S. D.,
Soeffing, J. P., Murray, D., et al. (2006). Actigraphy validation
with insomnia. Sleep, 29, 232–239.

Manber, R., Edinger, J. D., Gress, J. L., San Pedro-Salcedo,

M. G., Kuo, T. F., & Kalista, T. (2008). Cognitive behavioral
therapy for insomnia enhances depression outcome
in patients with comorbid major depressive disorder and
insomnia. Sleep, 31(4), 489–495.
Miller, W. R., & Rollnick, S. (2002). Motivational interviewing:
Preparing people for change (2nd ed.). New York:
Guilford Press.

Montgomery, P., & Dennis, J. (2003). Cognitive behavioural
interventions for sleep problems in adults aged 60+. Cochrane
Database of Systematic Reviews, 1, CD003161.


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

Morgenthaler, T., Alessi, C., Friedman, L., Owens, J., Kapur,
V., Boehlecke, B., et al. (2007). Practice parameters for
the use of actigraphy in the assessment of sleep and sleep
disorders: An update for 2007. Sleep, 30(4), 519–529.

Morin, C. M. (1993). Insomnia: Psychological assessment
and management. New York: Guilford Press.

Morin, C. M., Blais, F., & Savard, J. (2002). Are changes in
beliefs and attitudes about sleep related to sleep improvements
in the treatment of insomnia? Behaviour Research
and Therapy, 40, 741–752.

Morin, C. M., Bootzin, R. R., Buysse, D. J., Edinger, J., D.,
Espie, C. A., & Lichstein, K. L. (2006). Psychological and
behavioral treatment of insomnia: An update of recent evidence
(1998–2004). Sleep, 29, 1396–1406.

Morin, C. M., Culbert, J. P., & Schwartz, S. M. (1994). Nonpharmacological
interventions for insomnia: A metaanalysis
of treatment efficacy. American Journal of Psychiatry,
151, 1172–1180.

Morin, C. M., & Espie, C. A. (2003). Insomnia: A clinical
guide to assessment and treatment. New York: Kluwer
Academic/Plenum Press.

Morin, C. M., Gaulier, B., Barry, T., & Kowatch, R. A. (1992).
Patients’ acceptance of psychological and pharmacological
therapies for insomnia. Sleep, 15, 302–305.

Morin, C. M., Hauri, P. J., Espie, C. A., Spielman, A. J.,
Buysse, D. J., & Bootzin, R. R. (1999). Nonpharmacologic
treatment of chronic insomnia: An American Academy of
Sleep Medicine review. Sleep, 22, 1134–1156.

Morin, C. M., Koetter, U., Bastien, C., Ware, J. C., & Wooten,
V. (2005). Valerian–hops combination and diphenhydramine
for treating insomnia: A randomized placebocontrolled
clinical trial. Sleep, 28(11), 1465–1471.

Morin, C. M., Vallieres, A., Guay, B., Ivers, H., Savard, J.,
Merette, C., et al. (2009). Cognitive behavioral therapy,
singly and combined with medication, for persistent insomnia:
A randomized controlled trial. Journal of the
American Medical Association, 301(19), 2005–2015.

Murtagh, D. R., & Greenwood, K. M. (1995). Identifying
effective psychological treatments for insomnia: A metaanalysis.
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,
63, 79–89.

Neitzert Semler, C., & Harvey, A. G. (2004). Monitoring for
sleep-related threat: A pilot study of the sleep associated
monitoring index (SAMI). Psychosomatic Medicine, 66,
242–250.

National Institutes of Health. (2005). National Institutes of
Health State of the Science Conference Statement: Manifestations
and management of chronic insomnia in adults,
Sleep, 28, 1049–1057.

Nofzinger, E. A., Thase, M. E., Reynolds, C. F., III, Himmelhoch,
J. M., Mallinger, A., Houck, P., et al. (1991).
Hypersomnia in bipolar depression: A comparison with
narcolepsy using the multiple sleep latency test. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 148(9), 1177–1181.

Ohayon, M. M. (2002). Epidemiology of insomnia: What we
know and what we still need to learn. Sleep Medicine Reviews,
6, 97–111.

Ong, J. C., Kuo, T. F., & Manber, R. (2008). Who is at risk
for dropout from group cognitive-behavioral theapy for
insomnia? Journal of Psychosomatic Research, 64(4),
419–425.

Paquet, J., Kawinska, A., & Carrier, J. (2007). Wake detection
capacity of actigraphy during sleep. Sleep, 30(10),
1362–1369.

Perlis, M., Aloia, M., & Kuhn, B. (Eds.). (2012). Behavioral
sleep medicine treatment protocols. New York: Academic
Press.

Perlis, M., & Lichstein, K. (Eds.). (2003). Treating sleep disorders:
Principles and practice of behavioral sleep medicine.
New York: Wiley.

Perlis, M. L., Smith, M. T., & Pigeon, W. R. (2005). Etiology
and pathophysiology of insomnia. In M. H. Kryger, T.
Roth, & W. C. Dement (Eds.), Principles and practice of
sleep medicine (4th ed., pp. 714–725). Philadelphia: Elsevier/
Saunders.

Ree, M., & Harvey, A. G. (2004a). Insomnia. In J. Bennett-
Levy, G. Butler, M. Fennell, A. Hackman, M. Mueller, &

D. Westbrook (Eds.), Oxford guide to behavioural experiments
in cognitive therapy (pp. 287–305). Oxford, UK:
Oxford University Press.
Ree, M., & Harvey, A. G. (2004b). Investigating safety behaviours
in insomnia: The development of the Sleep-
Related Behaviours Questionnaire (SRBQ). Behaviour
Change, 21, 26–36.

Ree, M. J., Harvey, A. G., Blake, R., Tang, N. K., &
Shawe-Taylor, M. (2005). Attempts to control unwanted
thoughts in the night: Development of the thought control
questionnaire-insomnia revised (TCQI-R). Behaviour Research
and Therapy, 43, 985–998.

Reite, M., Buysse, D., Reynolds, C., & Mendelson, W. (1995).
The use of polysomnography in the evaluation of insomnia.
Sleep, 18, 58–70.

Roth, T., Coulouvrat, C., Hajak, G., Lakoma, M. D., Sampson,
N. A., Shahly, V., et al. (2011). Prevalence and
perceived health associated with insomnia based on
DSM-IV-TR; International Statistical Classification of
Diseases and related health problems, Tenth Revision; and
Research Diagnostic Criteria/International Classification
of Sleep Disorders, Second Edition criteria: Results from
the America Insomnia Survey. Biological Psychiatry, 69,
592–600.

Rybarczyk, B., Lopez, M., Schelble, K., & Stepanski, E.
(2005). Home-based video CBT for comorbid geriatric
insomnia: A pilot study using secondary data analyses.
Behavioral Sleep Medicine, 3, 158–175.

Salkovskis, P. M. (1991). The importance of behaviour in the
maintenance of anxiety and panic: A cognitive account.
Behavioural Psychotherapy, 19, 6–19.


Sleep Disturbance

Sivertsen, B., Omvik, S., Pallesen, S., Bjorvatn, B., Havik, O.
E., Kvale, G., et al. (2006). Cognitive behavioral therapy
vs zopiclone for treatment of chronic primary insomnia in
older adults: A randomized controlled trial. Journal of the
American Medical Association, 295, 2851–2858.

Smith, L. J., Nowakowski, S., Soeffing, J. P., Orff, H. J., &
Perlis, M. L. (2003). The measurement of sleep. In M. L.
Perlis & K. L. Lichstein (Eds.), Treating sleep disorders:
Principles and practice of behavioral sleep medicine
(pp. 29–73). New York: Wiley.

Smith, M. T., Huang, M. I., & Manber, R. (2005). Cognitive
behavior therapy for chronic insomnia occurring within
the context of medical and psychiatric disorders. Clinical
Psychology Review, 25, 559–592.

Spielman, A. J., Caruso, L. S., & Glovinsky, P. B. (1987). A
behavioral perspective on insomnia treatment. Psychiatric
Clinics of North America, 10, 541–553.

Spielman, A. J., Saskin, P., & Thorpy, M. J. (1987). Treatment
of chronic insomnia by restriction of time in bed. Sleep,
10, 45–56.

Stepanski, E. J., Zorick, F., Roehrs, T., & Roth, T. (2000). Effects
of sleep deprivation on daytime sleepiness in primary
insomnia. Sleep, 23, 215–219.

Taylor, D. J., Lichstein, K. L., Weinstock, J., Sanford, S., &
Temple, J. R. (2007). A pilot study of cognitive-behavioral
therapy of insomnia in people with mild depression. Behavior
Therapy, 38(1), 49–57.

Vallieres, A., & Morin, C. M. (2003). Actigraphy in the assessment
of insomnia. Sleep, 26, 902–906.

Van Houdenhove, L., Buyse, B., Gabriëls, L. & Van den

Bergh, O. (2011). Treating primary insomnia: Clinical
effectiveness and predictors of outcomes on sleep, daytime
function and health-related quality of life. Journal
of Clinical Psychology in Medical Settings, 18(3), 312–
321.

Van Someren, E. J. (2000). Circadian rhythms and sleep in
human aging. Chronobiology International, 17, 233–243.

Walker, M. P., & Stickgold, R. (2006). Sleep, memory, and
plasticity. Annual Review of Psychology, 57, 139–166.

Watkins, E., & Baracaia, S. (2001). Why do people ruminate
in dysphoric moods? Personality and Individual Differences,
30, 723–734.

Watts, F. N., Coyle, K., & East, M. P. (1994). The contribution
of worry to insomnia. British Journal of Clinical Psychology,
33, 211–220.

Wicklow, A., & Espie, C. A. (2000). Intrusive thoughts and
their relationship to actigraphic measurement of sleep: Towards
a cognitive model of insomnia. Behaviour Research
and Therapy, 38(7), 679–693.

Wyatt, J. K., Stepanski, E. J., & Kirkby, J. (2006). Circadian
phase in delayed sleep phase syndrome: Predictors and
temporal stability across multiple assessments. Sleep, 29,
1075–1080.

Yoo, S. S., Gujar, N., Hu, P., Jolesz, F. A., & Walker, M. P.
(2007). The human emotional brain without sleep—a prefrontal
amygdala disconnect. Current Biology, 17, R877–
R878.

Zee, P. C., & Turek, F. W. (2006). Sleep and health: Everywhere
and in both directions. Archives of Internal Medicine,
166, 1686–1688.


CHaPter 17

eating Disorders

A Transdiagnostic Protocol

christoPher G. fairBurN
zafra cooPer

The fifth edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DsM‑5) clearly
defines and separates anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa, and recognizes for the
first time binge‑eating disorder as a specific diagnosis. But many people with serious
eating disorders do not quite fit these diagnostic criteria and would be lumped into an
“other specified feeding or eating disorder” category. it is also the case that individuals
with eating disorders change from one category to another over time. The authors of this
chapter, involved over the years in the creation of the DsM eating disorder categories, are
also among the originators of the most successful treatment yet devised for these disorders.
Thus, it is significant that fairburn and colleagues have moved ahead of the curve
and created a “transdiagnostic” unified theory and treatment protocol applicable to all
eating disorders, including those falling into the “other specified” category. (for a similar
approach to emotional disorders, see Payne, ellard, farchione, fairholme, & Barlow,
Chapter 6, this volume.) in this chapter fairburn and Cooper describe this state‑of‑theart
treatment. in what to some readers may be a surprising departure, the authors’ note
that the central problem requiring intervention is not necessarily dieting, bingeing, low
weight, or purging, but rather the culturally reinforced abnormal attitudes and beliefs
regarding shape and weight. The recommendation for applying various treatment components
in a “modular” fashion speaks to the art of administering this treatment. The
detailed explication of cognitive‑behavioral therapy as applied to eating disorders should
be extraordinarily useful to clinicians working with these difficult problems.—D. H. B.

Clinical eating disorders such as anorexia nervosa,
bulimia nervosa, and binge-eating disorder are a cause
of substantial physical and psychosocial morbidity
among adolescent girls and young adult women. They
are much less common among men. They typically
begin in adolescence and may run a chronic course.
Their effect is pervasive, since they interfere with

psychological, physical, and social functioning. Once
established, they are difficult to treat and impose a significant
burden on health services. In this chapter we
describe the psychopathology of the eating disorders
and the mechanisms that cause them to persist. We then
describe a transdiagnostic cognitive-behavioral treatment
designed to disrupt these mechanisms.

670


Eating Disorders

classificatioN aND DiaGNosis

The DSM‑5 Scheme

The DSM-5 scheme for classifying and diagnosing
eating disorders recognizes three specific disorders:
anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa, and binge-eating
disorder. In addition, there are two residual categories
termed “other specified feeding or eating disorder” and
“unspecified feeding or eating disorder,” respectively
(American Psychiatric Association, 2013).

In essence, three features needed to be present to
make a diagnosis of anorexia nervosa:

1. The overevaluation of shape and weight; that is,
judging self-worth largely, or even exclusively, in
terms of shape and weight.
2. This is often expressed as a strong desire to be
thin, combined with an intense fear of gaining
weight and becoming fat.
3. The active maintenance of an unduly low body
weight (e.g., maintaining a body weight less than
85% of that expected or a body mass index ≤
17.51).
Amenorrhea (in postpubertal females), another requirement
for the diagnosis of anorexia nervosa in the
previous DSM edition, has been removed due to its
questionable validity; that is, the majority of female
patients who meet the other diagnostic criteria are also
amenorrheic, and those who are not closely resemble
those who are.

Three features also need to be present to make a diagnosis
of bulimia nervosa:

1. The overevaluation of shape and weight, as in anorexia
nervosa.
2. Recurrent binge eating. A “binge” is an episode
of eating during which an objectively large
amount of food is eaten, and there is a sense of
loss of control at the time.
3. Extreme weight-control behavior, such as strict
dietary restriction, recurrent self-induced vomiting,
or marked laxative misuse.
In addition, to diagnose bulimia nervosa, there is an exclusionary
criterion, namely, that the diagnostic criteria
for anorexia nervosa not be met. This criterion ensures
that it is not possible for patients receiving both diagnoses
at one time.

Binge-eating disorder, which was a provisional diagnosis
in DSM-IV, is now recognized as a full disorder
in DSM-5. It is designed to denote an eating problem
characterized by recurrent binge eating in the absence
of the extreme weight control behavior seen in bulimia
nervosa and anorexia nervosa.

No diagnostic criteria are specified for the two residual
eating disorder diagnoses.

cliNical features

Anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa, and most cases
of other specified eating disorders, share a distinctive
“core psychopathology” that is essentially the same in
females and males, adults and adolescents. This is the
overevaluation of shape and weight. Whereas most people
evaluate themselves on the basis of their perceived
performance in a variety of life domains (e.g., the quality
of their relationships; their work performance; their
sporting prowess), people with eating disorders judge
their self-worth largely, or even exclusively, in terms
of their shape and weight, and their ability to control
them. This psychopathology is peculiar to the eating
disorders (and to body dysmorphic disorder) and
is rarely seen in the general population. It should be
distinguished from “body shape dissatisfaction,” which
refers to dislike of aspects of one’s appearance. Some
degree of body shape dissatisfaction is widespread and
its presence is sometimes referred to as “normative discontent.”


The overevaluation of shape and weight results in the
pursuit of weight loss—note that it is usually weight
loss that is sought, not a specific weight—and an intense
fear of weight gain and fatness. Most other features
of these disorders are secondary to this core psychopathology
and its consequences (e.g., undereating;
becoming severely underweight). Thus, in anorexia
nervosa there is a sustained and successful pursuit of
weight loss that results in patients becoming severely
underweight. This pursuit is not seen as a problem:
Rather, it is valued and, as a consequence, patients
have little desire to change. For this reason it is often
other people who are responsible for these patients’
entry into treatment. In bulimia nervosa, equivalent attempts
to restrict food intake are disrupted by repeated
episodes of loss of control over eating (binges). Generally
these binges are aversive and a source of distress,
and they lead patients to seek help. Consequently those
with bulimia nervosa are easier to engage in treatment,


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

although because of the accompanying shame and secrecy,
there is typically a delay of many years before
they divulge their eating problem and enter treatment.

The core psychopathology of anorexia nervosa and
bulimia nervosa has other expressions, too. Many patients
mislabel adverse physical and emotional states as
“feeling fat” and equate this with actually being fat. In
addition, many repeatedly scrutinize their bodies, focusing
on parts that they dislike. This may contribute
to patients’ overestimation of their size. Others actively
avoid seeing their bodies, assuming that they look fat
and disgusting. Equivalent behavior is seen with respect
to weighing (weight checking), with many patients
weighing themselves frequently. As a result these
patients become preoccupied with trivial, day-to-day
fluctuations, whereas others actively avoid knowing
their weight but nevertheless remain highly concerned
about it.

Anorexia Nervosa

In anorexia nervosa, the pursuit of weight loss leads patients
to engage in a severe and selective restriction of
food intake, avoiding foods viewed as fattening. Generally
there is no true “anorexia” (loss of appetite) as
such. The undereating may also be an expression of
other motives, including asceticism, competitiveness,
and a desire to attract the attention of others. In the
early stages of the disorder, undereating may be a goal
in its own right, with the patient valuing the sense of
self-control that it confers. Some patients also engage
in a driven type of exercising that contributes to their
weight loss. This is characterized by a strong drive to
exercise, a tendency to overexercise, and giving exercise
precedence over other aspects of life. Self-induced
vomiting and other extreme forms of weight control
(e.g., the misuse of laxatives or diuretics) are practiced
by a subgroup of these patients, and patients in an overlapping
group have episodes of loss of control over
eating, although the amount eaten may not be objectively
large (“subjective binge eating”). Depressive and
anxiety features, irritability, lability of mood, impaired
concentration, loss of sexual appetite, and obsessional
features are also frequently present. Typically these
features get worse as weight is lost and improve with
weight regain. Interest in the outside world also wanes
as patients become underweight, with the result that
most become socially withdrawn and isolated. This,
too, tends to reverse with weight regain.

Bulimia Nervosa

The eating habits of those with bulimia nervosa resemble
those seen in anorexia nervosa. The main distinguishing
feature is that the attempts to restrict food intake
are disrupted by repeated episodes of binge eating.
The frequency of these episodes ranges from once a
week (the DSM-5 diagnostic threshold) to several times
a day, and the amount eaten per episode varies but is
typically between 1,000 and 2,000 kilocalories (kcal).
In most cases, each binge is followed by compensatory,
self-induced vomiting or laxative misuse but there is a
subgroup of patients who do not “purge.” The weight
of most patients with bulimia nervosa is in the healthy
range (BMI between 18.5 and 25.0) due to the effects
of undereating and overeating balancing each other. As
a result, these patients do not experience the secondary
psychosocial and physical effects of maintaining a
very low weight. Depressive and anxiety features are
prominent in bulimia nervosa—indeed, more than in
anorexia nervosa—and there is a subgroup of patients
who engage in substance misuse or self-injury, or both.
This subgroup, which is also present in some anorexia
nervosa patients who binge-eat, tends to attract the diagnosis
of borderline personality disorder.

Binge‑Eating Disorder

Patients with binge-eating disorder report recurrent
binge eating, much as in bulimia nervosa, but their
eating habits outside the binges are quite different. As
noted earlier, in bulimia nervosa there is a high level of
dietary restraint, with most patients attempting to adhere
to a highly restricted diet when not binge eating.
In contrast, in binge-eating disorder there is a tendency
to overeat outside the binges. Indeed, the eating habits
of patients with binge-eating disorder resemble those of
people with obesity, albeit with binges superimposed.
Thus, self-induced vomiting and laxative misuse are
not present, nor is there any tendency to overexercise.
Most people who seek treatment for binge-eating disorder
are overweight or meet criteria for obesity (BMI
≥ 30.0).

Other Specified and Unspecified
Eating Disorders

The psychopathology of the “other specified” and “unspecified”
eating disorders in DSM-5, referred to as


Eating Disorders

eating disorder NOS in DSM-IV, closely resembles
that seen in anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa, and
binge-eating disorder. It is also of comparable duration
and severity (Fairburn et al., 2007). Conceptually, it is
helpful to distinguish two subgroups within these categories,
although there is no sharp boundary between
them. The first comprises cases that closely resemble
anorexia nervosa or bulimia nervosa but just fail to
meet their diagnostic criteria; for example, body weight
may be marginally above the threshold for anorexia
nervosa or the frequency of binge eating may be just
too low for a diagnosis of bulimia nervosa. These cases
belong to the “other specified feeding or eating disorder”
category. The second and larger subgroup comprises
cases in which the clinical features of anorexia
nervosa and bulimia nervosa are combined in a manner
that is different than that seen in the two prototypical
disorders. Such states may be described as “mixed” in
character and they belong to the “unspecified feeding
and eating disorder” category. Cases of this type are
common (Fairburn & Cooper, 2011).

Readers may come across references to so-called
“purging disorder,” a term that refers to a state characterized
by recurrent purging in the absence of binge
eating. In DSM-5 these cases are placed in the “other
specified feeding or eating disorder” category. In our
experience, the great majority of people who meet these
criteria experience subjective binges and are therefore
best viewed as having a variant of bulimia nervosa.

Last, patients who describe overeating that is confined
to the late evening or night are referred to as
having “night eating syndrome,” a relatively neglected
state, and one that is outside the scope of this chapter.
For information on night eating syndrome and its treatment
readers are referred to the book by Lundgren, Allison,
and Stunkard (2012).

DeveloPMeNt aND suBsequeNt course

Anorexia nervosa typically starts in adolescence with
the onset of dietary restriction that becomes progressively
more extreme and inflexible. In its early stages the
disorder may be self-limiting and treatment-responsive,
but if it persists, it tends to become entrenched and requires
more intensive treatment. In 10–20% of cases,
it proves intractable and unremitting. Even in patients
who recover, residual features are common, particularly
some degree of overconcern about shape, weight,

and eating. A frequent occurrence is the development
of binge eating and, in about half the cases, progression
on to full bulimia nervosa. Most prominent among the
favorable prognostic factors are early age of onset and
short history, whereas unfavorable prognostic factors
include a long history, severe weight loss, binge eating,
and vomiting. Anorexia nervosa is the one eating
disorder to be associated with a raised mortality rate,
with the standardized mortality ratio over the first 10
years from presentation being about 10. The majority
of deaths are either a direct result of medical complications
or due to suicide.

Bulimia nervosa has a slightly later age of onset,
typically in late adolescence or early adulthood. It
usually starts in much the same way as anorexia
nervosa—indeed, in about one-fourth of cases the
diagnostic criteria for anorexia nervosa are met for
a time. Eventually, however, episodes of binge eating
interrupt the dietary restriction and, as a result,
body weight rises to normal or near normal levels. The
disorder is extremely self-perpetuating. Thus, patients
often present with an unremitting history of 8 years
or more of disturbed eating. No consistent predictors
of outcome have been identified, although there is
evidence that childhood obesity, low self-esteem, and
signs of personality disturbance are associated with a
worse prognosis.

Binge-eating disorder has a rather different age of
presentation and course. Most of these patients are
middle-aged and one-third or more are male. This is
quite unlike patients with anorexia nervosa, bulimia
nervosa, and the two groups of residual eating disorders,
who are generally female (about 10% are male)
and are adolescents or young adults. Clinical experience
suggests that binge-eating disorder also differs in
its course, in that it tends to be phasic rather than persistent,
with most patients describing sustained periods
lasting many months free from binge eating. Throughout,
these patients have a general tendency to overeat
and gain weight. Few report a history of either anorexia
nervosa or bulimia nervosa.

Little is known about the development and course
of the residual eating disorders. Most patients present
in their adolescence or 20s, as in bulimia nervosa, and
with a comparable length of history (Fairburn et al.,
2007). Because between one-fourth and one-third of
patients have had anorexia nervosa or bulimia nervosa
in the past, their present state is simply the latest expression
of an evolving eating disorder.


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

the “traNsDiaGNostic” PersPective

The DSM-5 scheme for classifying eating disorders encourages
the view that anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa,
and binge-eating disorder are distinct clinical states,
each requiring its own form of treatment. It should be
clear from consideration of their clinical features and
course over time that the evidence does not support this
(Fairburn & Harrison, 2003). With the possible exception
of binge-eating disorder, the eating disorders have
many features in common, most of which are not seen
in other psychiatric disorders. Studies of their course
indicate that patients migrate between these diagnoses
over time: Indeed, temporal migration is the norm
rather than the exception. This temporal movement, together
with the fact that the disorders share the same
distinctive psychopathology, suggests that common
“transdiagnostic” mechanisms are involved in the persistence
of eating disorder psychopathology (Fairburn,
Cooper, & Shafran, 2003). If correct, this implies that
treatments capable of successfully addressing these
maintaining mechanisms should be effective with all
forms of eating disorder rather than just one.

the coGNitive‑Behavioral theory

Bulimia Nervosa

In common with most evidence-based cognitivebehavioral
treatments, the theory that underpins the
cognitive-behavioral treatment for bulimia nervosa
(CBT-BN) is primarily concerned with the processes
that maintain the disorder rather than those responsible
for its development. According to the theory, these patients’
dysfunctional scheme for self-evaluation is central
to the maintenance of the disorder. As noted earlier,
whereas most people evaluate themselves on the basis
of their perceived performance in a variety of life domains,
people with eating disorders judge themselves
largely, or even exclusively, in terms of their shape and
weight, and their ability to control them. As a result,
their lives become focused on shape, weight, and eating,
with dietary control, thinness, and weight loss
being actively pursued, while overeating, “fatness,” and
weight gain are assiduously avoided. Most of the other
features of bulimia nervosa can be understood as stemming
directly from this “core psychopathology,” including
the weight control behavior, the various forms
of body checking and avoidance, and the preoccupation

with thoughts about shape, weight, and eating. Figure

17.1 provides a schematic representation (or “formulation”)
of the main processes involved.
The only feature of bulimia nervosa that is obviously
not a direct expression of the core psychopathology
is these patients’ binge eating. The cognitivebehavioral
theory proposes that the binge eating is
largely a product of the particular way that these patients
attempt to restrict their eating (i.e., their form
of dietary restraint), irrespective of whether they actually
undereat. Rather than adopting general guidelines
about how they should eat, these patients try to adhere
to multiple extreme, and highly specific, dietary rules.
An accompanying tendency—one that involves reacting
in an extreme and negative fashion to the frequent
and almost inevitable breaking of these rules—leads
to interpreting even minor dietary slips as evidence
of lack of self-control. The result is that patients respond
by temporarily abandoning their attempts to restrict
their eating and instead give in to the urge to eat.
This produces a highly distinctive pattern of eating in
which attempts to restrict eating are repeatedly interrupted
by episodes of binge eating. The binge eating
maintains the core psychopathology by intensifying
patients’ concerns about their ability to control their
eating, shape, and weight, and it encourages yet greater

Binge eating
Compensatory
vomiting/laxative
misuse
Events and
associated
mood change
Overevaluation of shape and
weight and their control
Strict dieting;
noncompensatory
weight-control behavior
figUre 17.1. The cognitive-behavioral theory of the
maintenance of bulimia nervosa. From Fairburn (2008,

p. 19). Copyright 2008 by The Guilford Press. Reprinted
by permission. This figure may be downloaded from www.
credo-oxford.com.

Eating Disorders

dietary restraint, thereby increasing the risk of further
episodes of binge eating.

It should be noted that these patients’ dietary slips
and binges do not come out of the blue; rather, they are
particularly likely to occur in response to life difficulties
and any associated mood change, in part because
binge eating temporarily ameliorates negative mood
states, and in part because it distracts patients from
thinking about their difficulties.

A further process maintains binge eating in those
patients who practice compensatory “purging” (i.e.,
those who induce vomiting or take laxatives in response
to specific episodes of binge eating). Patients’
mistaken belief in the effectiveness of purging in preventing
calorie (i.e., energy) absorption undermines a
major deterrent against binge eating. They do not realize
that vomiting only retrieves part of what has been
eaten, and laxatives have little or no effect on energy
absorption (Fairburn, 2013).

This well-established cognitive-behavioral account
of the maintenance of bulimia nervosa has clear implications
for treatment. It suggests that if treatment is
to have a lasting impact on binge eating and purging,
then it also needs to address these patients’ extreme attempts
to restrict their eating, their overevaluation of
shape and weight, and their tendency to eat in response
to adverse events and negative moods.

Anorexia Nervosa and Other Specified
Eating Disorders

The cognitive-behavioral account of the maintenance
of bulimia nervosa can be extended to all eating disorders.
As noted earlier, the “transdiagnostic” theory
highlights the fact that anorexia nervosa and bulimia
nervosa have much in common (Fairburn et al., 2003).
They share essentially the same core psychopathology
with both groups of patients who overevaluate
shape and weight, and their control, and express this
psychopathology in similar attitudes and behavior.2
Thus, patients with anorexia nervosa restrict their
food intake in the same rigid and extreme way as patients
with bulimia nervosa, and they, too, may vomit,
misuse laxatives or diuretics, and overexercise. Binge
eating does not distinguish the two disorders because
there is a subgroup of patients with anorexia nervosa
who binge-eat (with or without compensatory purging).
The major difference between the two disorders lies in
the relative balance of the undereating and overeating,
and its effect on body weight. In bulimia nervosa, body

weight is usually unremarkable, whereas in anorexia
nervosa, undereating predominates, resulting in body
weight that is extremely low and features of starvation
contributing to the clinical picture and its maintenance.
Particularly important in this regard is the pronounced
social withdrawal seen in starvation, since this encourages
self-absorption while isolating patients from external
influences that might diminish their overconcern
with eating, shape and weight. Figure 17.2 shows the
cognitive-behavioral formulation of the classic “restricting”
form of anorexia nervosa.

The processes that maintain bulimia nervosa and
anorexia nervosa also appear to maintain the clinical
presentations seen in other specified eating disorders.
Figure 17.3 shows a composite transdiagnostic formulation.
It is essentially a combination of the bulimia nervosa
and restricting anorexia nervosa formulations. In
our experience, this composite formulation represents
the core processes that maintain any eating disorder,
whatever its exact form. The specific processes operating
in any individual patient depend on the nature of
the eating disorder psychopathology present. In some
cases, only a limited number of these processes are ac-

Overevaluation of shape and
weight and their control


Strict dieting;
noncompensatory
weight-control behavior


Significantly low weight

•
preoccupation with eating
•
social withdrawal
•
heightened fullness
•
heightened obsessionality
figUre 17.2. The cognitive-behavioral theory of the
maintenance of anorexia nervosa. From Fairburn (2008,

p. 21). Copyright 2008 by The Guilford Press. Reprinted
by permission. This figure may be downloaded from www.
credo-oxford.com.

CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

Strict dieting;
noncompensatory
weight-control behavior
Binge eating
Compensatory
vomiting/laxative
misuse
Significantly
low weight
Events and
associated
mood change
Overevaluation of shape and
weight and their control
figUre 17.3. The “transdiagnostic” cognitivebehavioral
theory of eating disorders. From Fairburn
(2008, p. 21). Copyright 2008 by The Guilford Press. Reprinted
by permission. This figure may be downloaded
from www.credo-oxford.com.

tive (as in most cases of binge-eating disorder), whereas
in others (e.g., cases of anorexia nervosa in which there
is binge eating and purging) most of the processes are
operating. In common with the cognitive-behavioral
account of the maintenance of bulimia nervosa, this
transdiagnostic account highlights the processes that
need to be addressed in treatment, thereby helping the
clinician design a bespoke treatment to fit the individual
patient’s psychopathology.

the research oN treatMeNt

Consistent with the current way of classifying eating
disorders, the research on their treatment has focused
on the particular disorders in isolation. This research
has been reviewed by Hay and Claudino (2010), and an
authoritative meta-analysis has been conducted by the

U.K. National Institute for Clinical Excellence (NICE;
2004). The majority of the randomized controlled trials
have focused on adults with bulimia nervosa, with
the treatment of adolescents receiving far less attention.
The findings indicate that there is a clear leading treatment,
a specific form of cognitive behavior therapy for
bulimia nervosa (CBT-BN). However, this treatment
is far from being a panacea: At best, half the patients
who start treatment make a full and lasting response.
Interpersonal psychotherapy (IPT) is a potential alternative
to CBT-BN, but it takes 8 to 12 months longer
to achieve a comparable effect. Antidepressant medication
(especially fluoxetine at a dose of 60 mg in the
morning) also has a beneficial effect, but this is not as
great as that obtained with CBT-BN, and the limited
evidence available suggests it is often not sustained.
Combining CBT-BN with antidepressant medication
conveys little, if any, advantage over CBT-BN alone.

There has been much less research on the treatment
of anorexia nervosa, with no treatment supported
by robust research evidence. In this case, most of the
work has focused on adolescents, and much of it has
been concerned with a highly specific form of familybased
treatment (FBT; Lock, le Grange, Agras, & Dare,
2001). Despite widespread enthusiasm for FBT (often
described as the “Maudsley method” because it was
devised at the Maudsley Hospital in London), it is not
without its limitations (Lock, 2011; Lock et al., 2010):
The treatment is not acceptable to some families and
patients; it renders some patients unable to eat without
the encouragement of their parents; and fewer than half
the patients make a full treatment response.

There is a growing body of research on the treatment
of binge-eating disorder. Various psychological
treatments seem reasonably effective and more so than
when they are used to treat bulimia nervosa or anorexia
nervosa (Wilson, Grilo, & Vitousek, 2007). Three
treatments have the greatest support, an adaptation of
CBT-BN, IPT, and a simplified version of CBT-BN
termed “guided self-help.” The effects of CBT-BN and
IPT on binge-eating disorder are remarkably similar,
both in their extent and time course, which is quite unlike
the response seen in bulimia nervosa. Overall, it
appears that binge-eating disorder is more treatmentresponsive
than the other eating disorders, and that
shared “nonspecific” psychotherapeutic processes may
have a potent influence. Perhaps most remarkable is the
effect of guided self-help (Wilson & Zandberg, 2012).
This brief intervention (typically 8–10, 20-minute sessions
delivered by a nonspecialist “facilitator”) has
been shown to be as effective as 20, 50-minute sessions
of IPT both at the end of treatment and at 2-year followup
(Wilson, Wilfley, Agras, & Bryson, 2010). There is
no drug treatment for binge-eating disorder. Finally,
it should be noted that none of these treatments has a
significant effect on comorbid obesity. This is not altogether
surprising given that much of these patients’ excess
calorie intake comes from overeating outside their
binges rather than the binges themselves.


Eating Disorders

There has been just one study of the treatment of
the residual eating disorders, a remarkable omission
given their prevalence. The findings of this study are
discussed below.

The Research on Enhanced Cognitive
Behavior Therapy

Relatively recently a transdiagnostic form of cognitive
behavior therapy has been developed that is designed
for the full range of clinical eating disorders seen in
adults, including other specified eating disorders (Fairburn,
2008; Fairburn et al., 2003). It is based on the
transdiagnostic theory outlined earlier and was derived
from CBT-BN. The treatment—enhanced cognitive behavior
therapy (CBT-E) —is described as “enhanced”
because it uses a variety of new strategies and procedures
intended to improve treatment adherence and
outcome. In addition, it has modules designed to address
certain obstacles to change that are “external” to
the core eating disorder, namely, clinical perfectionism,
low self-esteem, and interpersonal difficulties. Thus,
there are two forms of CBT-E, a focused form that focuses
exclusively on the eating disorder psychopathology,
and a broad form that also addresses the three external
obstacles to change.3 The treatment also exists in
two lengths, a 20-week version for patients who are not
significantly underweight, defined as having a BMI of

18.5 or more, and a version that can be up to double this
length for patients with a BMI below 18.5.
CBT-E, primarily an outpatient treatment, is designed
to be delivered on an individual rather than a
group basis, although day patient and inpatient versions
have been developed (Dalle Grave, 2012). It has also
been adapted for adolescents (Cooper & Stewart, 2008;
Dalle Grave, Calugi, Doll, & Fairburn, 2013).

Research on CBT-E is still at a relatively early stage.
In the first study of its kind, Fairburn and colleagues
(2009) recruited from two community-based National
Health Service centers in the United Kingdom a transdiagnostic
sample of patients with eating disorders, all of
whom had a BMI over 17.5 (i.e., in DSM-IV terms, they
either had bulimia nervosa or eating disorder NOS).
The patients were randomized to a waiting-list control
condition, or to either the focused or the broad form of
CBT-E, and they then entered a closed, 60-week period
of follow-up. There were two main findings:

1. The two forms of CBT-E were equally effective
overall. The size of treatment response suggested
that CBT-E was more effective than its predecessor,
CBT-BN, especially in light of the use of few
trial exclusion criteria (Crow & Peterson, 2009).

2. There was no difference in treatment response
between the patients with bulimia nervosa and
those with eating disorder NOS.
A second (unpublished) study from Oxford has replicated
these findings. In addition, an open transdiagnostic
study from Australia obtained very similar results,
at least among treatment completers (Byrne, Fursland,
Allen, & Watson, 2011). Unfortunately, the therapists
in this study were not trained or supervised by anyone
expert in CBT-E, so it is difficult to have complete confidence
in its findings.

The original U.K. study also included a planned
moderator analysis (Fairburn et al., 2009). Its findings
suggested that the broad version of the treatment was
more effective with patients who had extreme external
psychopathology of the type it was designed to target,
whereas the focused version was more effective with
the remaining patients.

One other study is worth mentioning. It involved a
remarkable comparison of CBT-E (focused form, 20
sessions over 20 weeks) with a longer-term psychoanalytic
treatment (about 100 sessions over 2 years) in the
treatment of bulimia nervosa (Poulsen et al., in press).
Two sets of therapists were used, and each was well
trained and supervised. The findings were striking in
that CBT-E was found to be far superior to the psychoanalytic
treatment both after 20 weeks (the end of
CBT-E) and at 2 years (the end of the psychoanalytic
treatment). This was despite the marked discrepancy
in the number of sessions received and the duration of
treatment; moreover, it was contrary to any allegiance
effect because the principal investigators were psychoanalysts.
The finding is one of the clearest refutations
of the so-called “dodo bird verdict,” which concludes
that all psychotherapies are equivalent in their effects
(Luborsky, Singer, & Luborsky, 1975).

Until recently, the major outstanding question about
CBT-E was whether it could be used to treat underweight
patients (i.e., those with anorexia nervosa or
underweight forms of other specified eating disorders).
It is now clear that it can. Thus, it has been shown to
be associated with a good outcome in three cohorts of
patients with the disorder, two adult cohorts (total N =

99) (Fairburn, Cooper, Doll, Palmer, & Dalle Grave,
2013), and one adolescent cohort (N = 49) (Dalle Grave
et al., 2013), all of whom were seriously underweight.

CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

To conclude, there are three main points to note from
the research on CBT-E:

1. CBT-E can be used to treat all forms of eating
disorder in adults. Thus, CBT-E is truly transdiagnostic
in its scope. This applies to no other
evidence-based treatment for the eating disorders.
Therefore, the availability of CBT-E renders
redundant the need to learn different treatments
for the different eating disorders (Fairburn
& Wilson, 2013).
2. It needs emphasizing that there are good data on
the use of CBT-E to treat adults with anorexia
nervosa given that this is sometimes questioned.
Indeed, there are more data on this application of
CBT-E than on any other treatment.
3. CBT-E can also be used to treat adolescents with
anorexia nervosa. This makes it a potential alternative
to FBT. A comparison of the two approaches
is definitely indicated (Dalle Grave et
al., 2013).
The remainder of this chapter is devoted to a description
of the main form of CBT-E, the focused version.
This is the core version of the treatment, and it forms
the basis of the variants of CBT-E. It is the version used
to treat the great majority of adults with an eating disorder,
so long as they can be managed on an outpatient
basis. A full description of the focused treatment is provided
in the complete treatment guide (Fairburn, 2008;
Fairburn, Cooper, Shafran, et al., 2008b) together with
details of the broad version (Fairburn, Cooper, Shafran,
Bohn, & Hawker, 2008). A book by Dalle Grave (2012)
describes how CBT-E may be modified to make it suitable
for inpatient, day patient, and intensive outpatient
settings, and there are two descriptions of the modifications
needed for adolescents (Cooper & Stewart, 2008;
Dalle Grave et al., 2013).

the coNtext of treatMeNt

The Patient

CBT-E is a treatment for patients with an eating disorder
of clinical severity (i.e., the eating disorder psychopathology
is persistent and significantly interferes
with the patient’s psychosocial functioning or physical
health). It is designed for patients age 18 years or more,
and it is equally suitable for men or women. Because

it is an outpatient-based treatment, it is essential that it
be safe for the patient to be managed this way, both in
physical terms and from the psychiatric point of view.
In practice this means that the patient’s physical state
must be stable and that he/she must not be at risk of
suicide. The treatment is designed for patients with a
BMI between 15 and 40. Although some patients with
a BMI below 15 can be treated using outpatient CBT-
E, this is probably best left to experienced therapists.
The management of such patients is discussed by Dalle
Grave (2012). The book edited by Mitchell and de
Zwaan (2012) addresses the management of patients
with a BMI over 40.

The Therapist

There are no specific professional qualifications needed
to practice CBT-E, but certain background knowledge
and experience are desirable. First, ideally, the therapist
should be well informed about psychopathology in
general and about eating disorder psychopathology in
particular, and he/she should have experience working
with patients with eating disorders. Second, therapists
should also be aware of the medical complications of
eating disorders and be able to manage them appropriately
(Fairburn, Cooper, & Waller, 2008b). Third,
therapists should be happy to implement a short-term,
psychopathology-focused, treatment and, preferably,
should have some experience working this way.

In contrast with many other applications of CBT,
the gender of the therapist is of some relevance to the
treatment of patients with eating disorders. Most of
these patients are female; as a result, female therapists
may have certain advantages. They may be viewed by
patients as being more likely to understand their difficulties
and, in addition, may serve as a role model in
terms of the acceptance of shape and weight. These
considerations are minor, however, in comparison with
being competent at delivering the treatment. Our experience
indicates that both women and men are capable
of being excellent CBT-E therapists.

assessiNG PatieNts aND PrePariNG
theM for treatMeNt

The Initial Evaluation Interview(s)

The initial assessment interview has three interrelated
goals. The first is to put the patient at ease and begin to


Eating Disorders

forge a positive therapeutic relationship. This is important
for a number of reasons. First, many patients with
an eating disorder are highly ambivalent about treatment
because of the “ego-syntonic” nature of their psychopathology
(especially true of underweight patients),
because of shame (especially true of those who are
binge eating), or because they have had adverse treatment
experiences in the past. The assessing clinician
needs to be sensitive to the patient’s attitude to the assessment
interview and ask directly about it. The goal
is that it be a collaborative enterprise ending with the
clinician being able to give the patient an expert opinion
as to the nature of his/her problems and, if indicated,
the treatment options.

The second goal is to establish the diagnosis. An apparent
eating disorder may, for example, turn out to be
an anxiety disorder (e.g., difficulty eating with others
due to a social phobia), a presentation of a mood disorder
(e.g., severe weight loss resulting from a clinical
depression), or simple overeating (in cases of obesity).
It is therefore critical to diagnose the problem or problems
(if there is comorbidity) accurately and evaluate
their severity in order to decide on the most appropriate
next step.

The third goal is to ensure that the patient is safe to
manage on an outpatient basis. This requires checking
that there are no reasons to be concerned about the patient’s
physical health or the risk of suicide. Guidance
for doing so is provided in the complete treatment guide
(Fairburn, Cooper, Shafran, et al., 2008b; Fairburn,
Cooper, & Waller, 2008b).

Patients are invited to bring others to the appointment
if they wish. They may simply provide moral
support (and stay in the waiting area) or also serve as
informants. The informant’s view is of interest, since
it can provide a different perspective on the patient’s
difficulties. Problems may be described that were not
disclosed by the patient (e.g., that the patient takes an
inordinate time to eat meals or has extremely small
portions). However, it is not appropriate to insist that
informants attend given that some adult patients will
have kept their eating problem hidden from others and
would not attend if disclosure were required. The situation
is different with younger patients when involvement
of the parents is generally essential.

Toward the end of the first interview, we weigh patients
and measure their height. This is an extremely
sensitive matter for most patients, and some are resistant
to it. As the patient must be weighed for the
assessment to be complete, we explain this. We do

not regard it as appropriate to rely on patients’ selfreported
weight or height, which can be inaccurate.
In our experience, patients expect their weight to be
measured, although many prefer that this not happen.
At this stage we do not insist on patients knowing their
weight if they do not wish to, but we like to tell them
their BMI when discussing the outcome of the assessment.


We are not in favor of lengthy assessment appointments
because they are exhausting for the patient. On
the other hand, we routinely see patients twice as part
of the assessment process, since we find that a second
appointment, a week or two later, often adds new information
of value. On the second occasion patients are
more relaxed; they sometimes disclose material previously
withheld; and there is an opportunity to pursue
matters that require particularly careful exploration
(e.g., the nature and extent of any comorbid depressive
features). The second appointment is also a good time
to discuss treatment options.

We routinely ask patients to complete certain questionnaires
prior to the initial appointment. This is useful,
since it gives us standardized information on the
nature and severity of patients’ eating problems. The
two questionnaires we favor are the Eating Disorder
Examination Questionnaire (EDE-Q; Fairburn & Beglin,
2008) and the Clinical Impairment Assessment
(CIA; Bohn & Fairburn, 2008). The EDE-Q provides a
measure of the severity of current eating disorder features,
and the CIA assesses the impact of this psychopathology
on psychosocial functioning. Both questionnaires
are short and easy to fill in, and both focus on
the previous 28 days and are sensitive to change. In addition,
we include one of the well-established measures
of general psychiatric features.

Outcome of the Evaluation

By the end of the second appointment it should be possible
to decide on the best course of action. Generally
there are five possible next steps:

1. Do “nothing.” This is appropriate with minor eating
problems that are likely to be self-limiting.
2. Observe. This is appropriate if the nature or severity
of the problem is not clear; for example, if
it seems to be remitting.
3. Recommend outpatient-based CBT-E. This is
appropriate for the vast majority of patients. We
recommend CBT-E for virtually all patients with

CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

an eating disorder who have a BMI between 15.0
and 40.0.

4. Recommend more intensive treatment. We recommend
more intensive treatment (mainly day
patient or inpatient treatment) for patients whose
BMI is below 15.0 and for those whose physical
state is not stable. This can be followed by
outpatient-based CBT-E. We may also recommend
more intensive treatment when CBT-E
fails to be of benefit.
5. Recommend referral elsewhere. This is appropriate
when the problem is not an eating disorder
(e.g., an anxiety or mood disorder).
If patients have not benefited from CBT in the past,
it merits thought whether it is appropriate to offer them
the same treatment a second time. On the other hand,
it is possible that a patient’s circumstances may now
be more conducive to a good outcome than in the past,
or the patient may be more motivated than before. It is
important to note that while patients may report having
had CBT before, it often emerges that it was quite
different in character from CBT-E. It is always worth
finding out exactly what the prior treatment involved.

Contraindications to Starting CBT‑E
Immediately

There are certain contraindications to embarking upon
CBT-E straightaway. Most of these apply to any psychological
treatment for an eating disorder. The main
contraindications are as follows:

Comorbid Clinical Depression

Most patients with an eating disorder have secondary
depressive features but a sizable subgroup has an independent,
but interacting, clinical depression. The identification
and management of clinical depression in patients
with eating disorders is discussed in detail in the
complete treatment guide (Fairburn, Cooper, & Waller,
2008a). The presence of a clinical depression interferes
with psychological treatment in a number of ways. Depressive
thinking results in patients being unduly negative
about the possibility of change and the reduction
in drive has a similar effect. Concentration impairment
is also a problem, since it results in information not
being retained. Once the depression has been treated,
however, CBT-E can start and such patients are often
particularly highly motivated.

It is important to add that other, co-occurring forms
of psychopathology (e.g., anxiety disorders, personality
disorders) are not contraindications to CBT-E. Thus,
the research on CBT-BN has typically included patients
with comorbid Axis I and Axis II disorders, neither of
which has been shown to be consistent predictors of
outcome.

Significant Substance Misuse

Intoxication in treatment sessions renders the sessions
virtually worthless, and persistent intoxication outside
sessions severely undermines the patient’s ability to
utilize CBT-E. Once the substance misuse has been addressed
CBT-E can start.

Major Life Difficulties or Crises

These are distractions that interfere with treatment. It is
often best to delay treatment until the crisis has passed.

Inability to Attend Regularly

A central feature of CBT-E is establishing and maintaining
“therapeutic momentum.” This requires that
appointments be frequent (especially in the early stages)
and regular. We ask patients to guarantee that there
will be no breaks in their attendance in the first 6 weeks
and no breaks of longer than two consecutive weeks
throughout the rest of treatment. If this is impossible,
say, because of a prebooked vacation, we prefer to defer
starting treatment. Patients generally understand and
respect the rationale behind this stance. They can see
that we are taking their treatment seriously and do not
want them to have a “false start.”

Therapist Absence

The need to establish and maintain therapeutic momentum
also places an obligation on the therapist. If
the therapist is going to be away in the first 6 weeks
of treatment, it is best to delay its start. Ways of minimizing
the impact of therapist absence are discussed
in the treatment guide (Fairburn, Cooper, Shafran, et
al., 2008b).

Describing CBT‑E to the Patient

If CBT-E is to be recommended, it is important that it
be accurately portrayed. Once this has been done, pos



Eating Disorders

sibly with the aid of an information sheet (obtainable
from www.credo-oxford.com), and patients have had
an opportunity to ask questions, it is our practice to ask
them to think over what has been proposed and let us
know within a week what they have decided. In our experience,
virtually all of them say that they would like
to proceed with the treatment.

overview of the treatMeNt

Length of Treatment

CBT-E is a short-term, time-limited, highly individualized
psychological treatment, which is why it is best delivered
on a one-to-one basis. For patients who are not
significantly underweight (which may be defined in this
context as having a BMI above 18.54) an initial assessment
appointment followed by 20 fifty-minute treatment
sessions over 20 weeks is generally sufficient. For
patients below this weight, treatment needs to be longer,
often involving about 40 sessions over 40 weeks.
In this chapter, we describe the 20-week treatment first,
then the adaptations needed for underweight patients.

The fact that CBT-E is usually time-limited might be
thought to be inconsistent with the claim that it is individualized.
To an extent this is true, but our experience
is that the recommended number of treatment sessions
is sufficient, but not excessive, for the great majority
of patients. There are major advantages to working
within a fixed time frame, and in our view these
outweigh the potential disadvantage of standardizing
the length of treatment. The main advantage is that a
fixed time frame concentrates the minds of both patient
and therapist. It encourages the establishment of the
therapeutic momentum that is needed early on, and it
helps to ensure that therapist and patient keep working
hard to help the patient change. It also makes it much
more likely that treatment will have a formal ending
rather than fizzling out, as sometimes happens when
treatment is open-ended. Having a definite endpoint is
important, as it ensures that important future-oriented
topics (e.g., how to minimize the risk of relapse) are
covered in the final part of treatment.

There are circumstances under which it is appropriate
to adjust the length of treatment. It rarely needs to
be shortened, although this does apply in occasional
cases in which change is so profound and rapid that
there is little or no remaining psychopathology to address.
Somewhat more often there is a case for extend


ing treatment. The indications for doing this are described
briefly towards the end of the chapter.

Structure of the Treatment

The 20-week version of the treatment has four stages:

••
Stage 1. This is most important. The aims are to
engage the patient in treatment and change, jointly
create a formulation of the processes maintaining
the eating disorder, provide education, address
weight concerns, and introduce a pattern of regular
eating. Following the initial preparatory session,
the appointments are twice weekly for 4 weeks.

••
Stage 2. The aims of this stage is to take stock, review
progress, identify barriers to change, modify
the formulation as needed, and plan Stage 3. This
stage generally comprises two appointments, each
a week apart.

••
Stage 3. This is the main body of treatment. The
aim is to address the key mechanisms that are
maintaining the patient’s eating disorder. There
are eight weekly appointments.

••
Stage 4. This is the final stage of treatment, and
the focus is on the future. There are two aims: The
first is to ensure that the changes made in treatment
are maintained over the following months,
and the second is to minimize the risk of relapse
in the long term. Typically there are three appointments,
each 2 weeks apart.

In addition, there is a single review appointment 20
weeks after treatment has finished.

The Implementation of CBT‑E

CBT-E is designed to be a complete treatment in its
own right. In our view it should not be combined with
other forms of therapy, nor should it coexist with them.
Both can detract from the treatment.

CBT-E should remain focused on the eating disorder,
more or less, whatever happens. If the patient experiences
a crisis during treatment that cannot be ignored—
for example, the parents of one of our younger patients
disappeared unexpectedly, leaving the patient at a loss
as to what to do—we arrange one or more “crisis sessions”
in addition to the CBT-E sessions to address the
problem in question. This rarely happens, however.
Very occasionally we suspend CBT-E for a few weeks
if continuing seems inappropriate.


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

We have observed that some therapists are tempted
to change therapeutic tack if progress is slow or difficult.
We think that this is rarely appropriate. Although it
might be tempting to switch over to another therapeutic
modality, or add or try to “integrate” other techniques,
we recommend that the therapist continues to work within
the framework of CBT-E while trying to understand
the basis of the relative lack of progress. Indeed, this is
the strategy that led to the development of CBT-E and
its broad form in particular (Cooper & Fairburn, 2011).

the treatMeNt Protocol

Stage 1: Starting Well

This is the initial intensive stage of treatment. There
are a number of interrelated goals, all of which apply,
regardless of the exact nature of the patient’s eating
problem.

The Initial Preparatory Session

The initial session is typically up to two hours long and
has four major goals.

engAging THe PATienT in TreATMenT
AnD THe ProsPeCT of CHAnge

A particular challenge in working with patients with
eating disorders is engaging them in treatment. Many
come to treatment with misgivings and varying degrees
of reluctance. It is essential that the therapist understand
this and be sensitive at all times to the patient’s
likely ambivalence.

The initial session is especially important in this
regard. The patient is evaluating the therapist just as
much as the therapist is evaluating the patient. Some
clinicians advocate an initial phase of “motivational
enhancement.” We agree that engagement in treatment,
and more especially, in change, is crucial, but contend
that competently administered CBT-E enhances
motivation for change and overlaps significantly with
the strategies of motivational interviewing (Wilson &
Schlam, 2004). We do not view special non-CBT procedures
as being required.

Integral to engaging patients is explaining what
treatment will involve. With this in mind, it is important
that patients be fully informed about the treatment
on which they are embarking. Various topics need to
be covered:

1. The nature and style of the treatment. Clearly,
patients need to be told the name, nature, and
style of the treatment.
2. Treatment practicalities. They should also be
told the number, duration, and frequency of the
treatment sessions.
3. In-session weighing. Patients need to be forewarned
about the in-session weighing that is an
element of treatment from Sessions 1 or 2 onward.
The rationale needs to be explained (see
“Establishing Collaborative Weighing”). We are
often asked whether patients ever refuse to be
weighed. The answer is that the occasional patient
is very reluctant, but in the context of an
“engaging” initial session and the rationale being
well explained, we find that refusal is not a problem.
Our experience is that if one accedes to the
patient’s fear of in-session weighing, it is difficult
to introduce the procedure later.
4. Instillation of “ownership,” enthusiasm, and
hope. The notion that it is the patient’s treatment,
not the therapist’s, also needs to be stated.
Throughout treatment, patients should feel clear
about what is happening and why. While many
patients are keen to overcome their eating problem
and eager for treatment to start, it is important
to maximize enthusiasm and hope. Part of
this involves conveying that one is knowledgeable
about eating disorders in general and the
patient’s type of eating problem in particular.
Not infrequently we come across patients who have
been told that they will never overcome their eating
disorder. Rarely have we felt that such a statement was
warranted. Saying something like this sets up a selffulfilling
prophecy because it undermines any hope of
recovery that the patient might have had. Research has
not generated reliable predictors of treatment outcome,
and our experience over the years has taught us not to
trust our clinical judgement in this regard. We are continually
surprised (usually favorably) at our patients’
response to treatment.

Assessing THe nATUre AnD seVeriTy
of THe PsyCHoPATHology PresenT

Depending on the context within which one works, the
person who conducts the initial evaluation interview(s)
may or may not be the person who subsequently treats
the patient. In our context, the therapist is often seeing


Eating Disorders

the patient for the first time. This means that a second
assessment of the eating disorder needs to take place,
so that the therapist is fully in the picture. Inevitably,
this assessment overlaps to an extent with the initial
one. This cannot be avoided.

This particular assessment is treatment-oriented
rather than diagnostic, so it differs somewhat from the
one conducted when the patient was first seen. While a
broad range of topics is covered, the main focus should
be on the patient’s present state. Mainly, an informationgathering
style of interviewing is used, but the therapist
remaining aware of the patient’s likely sensitivity to certain
topics (e.g., binge eating, self-induced vomiting).

JoinTly CreATing THe forMUlATion

The next step is the creation of the “formulation,” that
is, a personalized visual representation (i.e., a diagram)
of the processes that appear to be maintaining the patient’s
eating problem. This is done in the initial session
unless the patient is significantly underweight (see
below) or the eating disorder is unusual and difficult
to understand, in which case it is best delayed until the
next session, so that the therapist has ample time to
think over its likely form.

The creation of the formulation has a number of
purposes: It helps to engage the patient in treatment;
it involves “decentering,” which is central to helping
patients change; it conveys the notion that eating problems
are understandable and maintained by a variety
of interacting self-perpetuating mechanisms; and by
highlighting the maintaining mechanisms, it provides a
guide to what needs to be targeted in treatment.

A composite transdiagnostic formulation was shown
in Figure 17.3. This should be used by the therapist as a
template from which the personalized formulation can
be derived, one that matches the particular clinical features
present. The more familiar the therapist becomes
with the template formulation, the easier it is to create
an individualized one. We have not encountered any
patients whose eating problems cannot be formulated
in this way.

The formulation should focus on the main mechanisms
that appear likely to be maintaining the patient’s
eating problem. It does not need to be comprehensive
(as this risks the formulation being over-detailed and
confusing), and it is not concerned with the origins of
the problem.

The formulation, usually referred to as the “diagram”
or “picture,” should be drawn out, step by step,

in an unhurried manner, with the therapist taking the
lead but with the patient’s active involvement. It is best
to start with something that the patient wants to change
(e.g., binge eating) or something that is clearly a problem
(e.g., very low weight). Whenever possible and appropriate,
the patient’s own terms should be used. Since
the formulation is based on information only just obtained,
the therapist should make clear that it is provisional
and will be modified as needed during treatment.
It is important that patients accept the formulation as a
credible explanation of their eating problem. Most resonate
with it.

Once the formulation has been created, the therapist
should discuss its implications for treatment. The
points to be made are that to overcome the eating disorder,
the patient will need to address not only the things
that he/she would like to change (e.g., loss of control
over eating) but also the mechanisms responsible for
maintaining them (the “vicious circles”). Thus, for
example, with patients who binge-eat, treatment commonly
needs to focus on more than simply stopping
binge eating; instead, it may also need to address the
patient’s various forms of dieting, his/her ability to deal
with adverse events and moods without binge eating,
and his/her concerns about shape and weight. Not addressing
the range of maintaining processes markedly
increases the likelihood of relapse.

esTABlisHing reAl‑TiMe self‑MoniToring

The final task in the initial session is to establish real-
time self-monitoring. This is the ongoing, “in-themoment”
recording of relevant behavior, thoughts,
feelings, and events. It needs to be initiated from the
outset of treatment and fine-tuned in Session 1. It continues
throughout treatment and is central to it. It has
two main purposes: First, it helps the patient identify
precisely what is happening on a day-to-day basis;
second, by gaining such awareness of their thoughts,
feelings, and behavior at the time it happens, patients
learn that they have choices, and that many things they
thought were automatic and beyond their control can
be changed.

The monitoring record that we employ is simple for
patients to complete and to use. Exactly what is recorded
evolves during treatment. At the beginning, the
emphasis is largely on the patient’s eating habits. When
describing how to monitor eating habits, it is our practice
to go over an example (created for this purpose)
that roughly matches in form the eating habits of the


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

patient in question. Table 17.1 shows our instructions especially in Session 1, when the patient brings them
for monitoring, and Figure 17.4 shows a completed back for the first time. Reviewing the records should
monitoring record. be a joint process, with the patient taking the therapist

We do not recommend using smartphone apps for through each day’s record in turn. There are two asrecording.
In our experience they provide a far less pects to the review in Session 1: assessing the quality of
rich source of information and as a result they impede monitoring and assessing the information gained about
therapy. the patient’s eating habits. In subsequent sessions, the

Fundamental to establishing accurate real-time re-focus is largely on what has been recorded, although the
cording is going over the patient’s records in detail, therapist should intermittently ask the patient about the

table 17.1. instructions for self-Monitoring

During treatment, it is important that you record everything that you eat or drink, and what is going on
at the time. We call this “self-monitoring.” Its purpose is twofold: First, it provides a detailed picture
of how you eat, thereby bringing to your attention and that of your therapist the exact nature of your
eating problem; and second, by making you more aware of what you are doing at the very time that you
are doing it, self-monitoring helps you change behavior that may previously have seemed automatic and
beyond your control. Accurate “real-time” monitoring is central to treatment. It will help you change.

At first, writing down everything that you eat may be irritating and inconvenient, but soon it will become
second nature and of obvious value. We have yet to encounter anyone whose lifestyle made it truly
impossible to monitor. Regard it as a challenge.

Look at the sample monitoring record to see how to monitor. A new record (or records) should be started
each day.

••
The first column is for noting the time when you eat or drink anything, and the second is for recording
the nature of the food and drink consumed. Calories should not be recorded: Instead, you should write
down a simple (nontechnical) description of what you ate or drank. Each item should be written down
as soon as possible after it is consumed. Recalling what you ate or drank some hours afterwards will
not work, since it will not help you change your behavior at the time. Obviously, if you are to record in
this way, you need to carry your monitoring sheets with you. It does not matter if your records become
messy or if the writing or spelling is not good. The important thing is that you record everything you
eat or drink, as soon as possible afterwards.

••
Episodes of eating that you view as meals should be identified with brackets. Snacks and other episodes
of eating should not be bracketed.
••
The third column should specify where the food or drink was consumed. If this was in your home, the
room should be specified.

••
Asterisks should be placed in the fourth column, adjacent to any episodes of eating or drinking that you
felt (at the time) were excessive. This is your judgment, regardless of what anyone else might think. It
is essential to record all the food that you eat during “binges.”

••
The fifth column is for recording when you vomit (write “V”) or take laxatives (write “L” and the
number taken) or diuretics (water tablets; write “D” and the number taken).

••
The last column is used in various ways during treatment. For the moment it should be used as a diary
to record events and feelings that have influenced your eating: For example, if an argument precipitated
a binge or led you not to eat, you should write that down. Try to write a brief comment every time you
eat, recording your thoughts and feelings about what you ate. You may want to record other important
events or circumstances in this column, even if they had no effect on your eating. The last column
should also be used to record your weight (and your thoughts about it) each time you weigh yourself.

Every treatment session will include a detailed review of your latest monitoring sheets. You must
therefore remember to bring them with you!

Note. From Fairburn (2008, p. 61). Copyright 2008 by The Guilford Press. Reprinted by permission. This table may be
downloaded from www.credo-oxford.com.


Eating Disorders

Day
......Thursday...........
Date
.....March
21...........


Time
Food
and
drink
consumed
Place
*
p
Context
and
comments
7.30
8:10
10:35
11:45
6:40
to
7:30
9:30
Glass
water
Whole
cinnamon
raisin
bagel
Light
cream
cheese
Black
coffee
Half
banana
Black
coffee
Smoked
turkey
on
wheat
bread
Light
mayo
Diet
coke
Piece
of
apple
pie
1/2
gallon
ice
cream
4
slices
of
toast
with
peanut
butter
Diet
coke
Raisin
bagel
2
slices
of
toast
with
peanut
butter
Diet
coke
Peanut
butter
from
jar
Raisin
bagel
Snickers
bar
Diet
coke—large
Rice
cake
with
fat-free
cheese
Diet
coke
Kitchen
Cafe
Work—at
desk
Cafe
Kitchen
Kitchen
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
V
V
[118
pounds—really
gross]
Thirsty
after
yesterday
Should
have
only
had
half
the
bagel.
Must
not
binge
today.
Better—on
track
Usual
lunch
Help—I
can’t
stop
eating.
I’m
completely
out
of
control.
I
hate
myself.
I
am
disgusting.
Why
do
I
do
this?
I
started
as
soon
as
I
got
in.
I’ve
ruined
another
day.
Really
lonely.
Feel
fat
and
unattractive.
Feel
like
giving
up.


figUre 17.4. A completed self-monitoring record. V, vomiting. A blank monitoring record may be downloaded from
www.credo-oxford.com.

process of recording and the accuracy of the records.
In these subsequent sessions the review of the records
generally takes no longer than 10 minutes. Therapists
need to remember not to address identified problems
while doing this, but to acknowledge the problems and
put them on the session agenda.

The Main Body of Stage 1

Following the initial preparatory session, there are
eight twice-weekly appointments. We find that twiceweekly
appointments are needed in order to build up
therapeutic momentum and to begin making inroads

into the patient’s disturbed way of eating. Once-weekly
sessions are simply not sufficient for most patients.
Stage 1 has four distinct elements.

esTABlisHing CollABorATiVe WeigHing

The collaborative weighing intervention has a number
of purposes. First, as the patients’ eating habits will
be changing in treatment they are likely to be anxious
about any resulting change in their weight. In-session
weighing provides good, week-by-week data on their
weight. Second, regular in-session weighing provides
an opportunity for the therapist to help patients inter



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

pret the number on the scale, which they otherwise are
prone to misinterpret. Third, collaborative weighing
addresses one form of body checking, namely, weight
checking. Many patients with eating disorders weigh
themselves at frequent intervals, sometimes many
times a day. As a result they become concerned with
day-to-day weight fluctuations that would otherwise
pass unnoticed. Others actively avoid knowing their
weight but remain highly concerned about it. Generally
these patients weighed themselves frequently in
the past but switched to avoidance when they found
frequent weight checking too aversive. Avoidance of
weighing is as problematic as frequent weighing, since
it results in patients having no data to confirm or disconfirm
their fears about weight gain.

Patients need to learn how to assess and interpret
their weight. They should be informed that body weight
fluctuates throughout the day and from day-to-day according
to their state of hydration, the state of their bowels
and bladder, their point in the menstrual cycle, and
other factors, too. (All this information may be found in
the second edition of Overcoming Binge Eating [Fairburn,
2013]; see the next section.) Frequent weighing
results in preoccupation with inconsequential weight
fluctuations that tend to be misinterpreted. This leads
many patients to restrict their eating, whatever the reading
on the scales. This important maintaining process
is disrupted by the collaborative weighing intervention.

Collaborative weighing involves the therapist and
patient together checking the patient’s weight at the
outset of the session. This is done once a week (for
underweight patients, see below). Therapist and patient
then plot the latest data point on an individualized
weight graph and jointly interpret the emerging pattern,
placing particular emphasis on trends over the past 4
weeks rather than focusing on the latest reading. A crucial
element of the intervention is that patients do not
weigh themselves outside these times.

Patients are also educated about the BMI. They are
told their BMI and its significance from a health point
of view. They are advised against having an exact desired
weight, since this does not allow for natural, dayto-
day fluctuations. Instead they are advised to accept
a weight range of approximately 6 lb (or 3 kg) in magnitude.


Almost all patients are anxious about the effects of
treatment on their weight. Patients with bulimia nervosa
or other specified eating disorders (who are not
underweight) generally do not change much in weight.
Patients should be told that the aim of treatment is to
give them control over their eating, and thus they will

have as much control over their weight as possible. It
is best that patients postpone deciding upon a specific
goal weight range until near the end of treatment,
when their eating habits should have stabilized and they
should be less sensitive about their weight and shape.
Later in treatment patients are advised against having
a goal weight (range) that necessitates anything more
than slight dietary restraint, since dietary restraint will
maintain preoccupation with food and eating and increase
their risk of binge eating.

eDUCATing THe PATienT
ABoUT eATing ProBleMs

Myths abound about eating and weight control, and
some serve to maintain many patients’ eating problem.
To ensure that they have a reliable source of information,
we recommend that they read one of the authoritative
books on eating disorders. We use Overcoming
Binge Eating because it provides all the information
needed and it is popular with patients.5 In addition, it
has a CBT-E orientation and so is highly compatible
with the treatment—indeed, some therapists use it as
a workbook for patients as they progress through CBT-

E. It should be noted that Overcoming Binge Eating is
relevant to all patients with eating disorders, whether or
not they binge-eat because it discusses and addresses
all eating disorder psychopathology and not just binge
eating.
It is our practice to provide the patient with a copy
of the book; this way we can ensure that they have it at
exactly the right point in treatment (generally Week 2).
We ask patients to annotate the book in the margins,
putting ticks by sections that particularly apply to them,
crosses by sections that do not, and question marks by
sections that they do not understand or would like to
discuss. We term this procedure “guided reading.” It
allows patients to be educated in an efficient, thorough,
and personalized way.

esTABlisHing “regUlAr eATing”

Regular eating is fundamental to successful treatment,
whatever the form of the eating disorder. For patients
who binge-eat, it reliably results in a rapid decrease in
frequency. For patients who have a high level of dietary
restraint, it addresses an important type of dieting, socalled
“delayed eating,” that is, putting off eating during
the day. And for patients who are underweight, it
introduces regular meals and snacks that can be subsequently
increased in size (see below).


Eating Disorders

Regular eating is introduced around Session 3. It is
the first time that patients are asked to change the way
that they eat. There are two aspects to the intervention:
First, the patient should eat at regular intervals through
the day (usually three planned meals each day, plus
two planned snacks); second, patients’ eating should be
largely confined to these meals and snacks. A number
of points about the intervention need to be stressed:

1. Patients should be allowed to choose what they
eat in their planned meals and snacks. The only
condition is that the meals and snacks must not
be followed by vomiting, laxative misuse, or any
other compensatory behavior.
2. Patients should not be put under pressure to
change what, or how much, they eat at this point
in treatment, since doing so tends to result in
being unable to adopt the pattern of regular eating.
3. If patients seek advice on what to eat, they should
be told that the priority is their pattern of eating
and not what they eat. Nevertheless, if patients
want guidance, they should be told that it would
be ideal if they adopted a varied diet with the
minimum number of avoided foods.
4. While the new eating pattern should be adhered
to whatever the patients’ circumstances or appetite,
it should be adjusted to suit patients’ day-today
commitments.
5. Patients should plan ahead. They should always
know when they are going to have their next meal
or snack, and there should rarely be more than a
4-hour interval between the meals and snacks. If
the day is going to be unpredictable, they should
plan ahead as far as possible and identify a time
when they can take stock and if necessary replan
the rest of the day.
6. Patients whose eating habits are either chaotic
or highly restrictive may need to introduce this
pattern in stages. Patients should be told that
their sensations of appetite, hunger, and fullness
are all likely to be disturbed at present and for
the time being should not be used to determine
what they eat. Instead, they should adhere to the
agreed pattern of eating.
Two rather different strategies may help patients resist
eating between the planned meals and snacks. The
first is to help them identify activities that are incompatible
with eating or make it less likely. They should
try to predict when difficulties are likely to arise and

intervene early by arranging activities that are likely to
help them adhere to the regular eating pattern. Advice
on how to do this is contained in Overcoming Binge
Eating. The other strategy is very different. It involves
asking patients to focus on the urge to eat, recognize
that it is a temporary phenomenon, and that one does
not have to give in to it. In this way patients can learn
to decenter from the urge and simply observe it rather
than try to eliminate it. As with feelings of fullness,
they will find that the urge dissipates over time. This
latter strategy is a difficult one for most patients, especially
in the early stages of treatment. If it is to be used
at all, it is best left until later on in treatment, when
urges to eat between meals and snacks are intermittent
and less overwhelming.

inVolVing signifiCAnT oTHers

CBT-E was developed as an individual treatment for
adults; hence, it does not actively involve others. Despite
this, it is our practice to see “significant others”
if this is likely to facilitate treatment and the patient
is willing for this to happen. We do this with the aim
of creating the optimum environment for the patient to
change. There are two specific indications for involving
others:

1. If others can be of help to the patient in making
changes.
2. If others are making it difficult for the patient to
change, for example, by commenting adversely
on his/her appearance or eating.
Typically the sessions with others last about 45
minutes and take place immediately after a routine
session. We hold up to three such sessions with about
three-fourths of our patients (with underweight patients
there may be more such sessions, as we discuss below).
Topics other than the eating disorder are not usually
addressed. With adolescent patients there is far greater
involvement of others (Cooper & Stewart, 2008; Dalle
Grave et al., 2013).

Stage 2: Taking Stock

Stage 2 is a transitional stage in treatment. It has three
aims:

1. To conduct a joint review of progress.
2. To revise the formulation, if need be.
3. To design Stage 3.

CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

At the same time the therapist continues to implement
the procedures introduced in Stage 1. The sessions are
now held once weekly.

The reason for conducting this formal review of
progress is that there is strong evidence across a variety
of psychiatric disorders (Wilson, 1999), including bulimia
nervosa (Fairburn, Agras, Walsh, Wilson, & Stice,
2004) and binge-eating disorder (Masheb & Grilo,
2007), that the degree of change during the first few
weeks of treatment is a potent predictor of outcome.
Thus, if progress is limited, this needs to be recognized
early on, and its explanation sought, so that treatment
can be adjusted as needed.

Conducting a Joint Review of Progress

The review of progress is best done systematically, with
the patient completing once again the EDE-Q, the CIA,
and the measure of general psychiatric features. In this
way patient and therapist can both review the extent of
change. Reviewing the patient’s monitoring records can
also be helpful. In addition, patient and therapist should
consider the degree to which the patient has been complying
with the various elements of treatment.

Generally patients’ views on their progress are unduly
negative. An important task for the therapist is therefore
to help the patient arrive at a balanced appraisal
of what has changed and what has not. Typically there
will have been a decrease in the frequency of any binge
eating and compensatory purging, and an improvement
in the pattern of eating, whereas concerns about shape
will not have changed (to a large extent because they
have not been addressed).

One important, and sometimes overlooked, reason
for progress not being as great as might be expected
is the presence of a clinical depression. Ideally, such
depressions should be detected and treated before treatment
but inevitably some are missed and others develop
afresh. If there appears to be a clinical depression, it is
our practice to treat it with antidepressant medication
(Fairburn, Cooper, & Waller, 2008a) and consider suspending
CBT until the patient has responded.

Revising the Formulation

It is important to review the formulation in light of what
has been learned during Stage 1. Often no change is indicated,
but sometimes problems and processes are detected
that were not obvious when the formulation was
originally created. For example, it may have emerged

that overexercising is a far greater problem than had
been thought. If so, the formulation may need to be revised.
Also, if the patient is receiving the “broad” form
of CBT-E, it is at this point that the contribution of clinical
perfectionism, core low self-esteem, and interpersonal
difficulties is considered (see Fairburn, Cooper,
Shafran, Bohn, & Hawker, 2008a).

Designing Stage 3

Last, Stage 2 is the time when Stage 3 should be designed.
It is at this stage the treatment becomes highly
individualized. The therapist has to decide which elements
of Stage 3 will be of most relevance to the patient
and in what order they should be implemented (see
below).

Stage 3: Addressing the Key
Maintaining Mechanisms

This is the main part of treatment. The focus is on addressing
the key mechanisms that are maintaining the
patient’s eating problem. These may be categorized
under six headings:

1. Overevaluation of shape and weight
2. Overevaluation of control over eating
3. Dietary restraint
4. Event- and mood-related changes in eating
5. Dietary restriction
6. Being underweight
The relative contributions of these mechanisms
vary from individual to individual. Only a few of the
mechanisms operate in those with binge-eating disorder,
whereas most operate in cases of anorexia nervosa
in which there is binge eating and purging. The first
four are considered here. Dietary restriction and being
underweight are addressed separately, when we discuss
the adaptations required for those who are underweight.
The order in which these mechanisms are addressed
depends on their relative importance in maintaining
the patient’s psychopathology and the length of time it
takes to address them. Generally it is best to start by addressing
the concerns about shape and weight because
this is the most complex mechanism, and it takes the
longest.

At the same time the therapist needs to continue
implementing the procedures introduced in Stage 1. If
the patient is receiving the broad form of CBT-E, one


Eating Disorders

or more of the additional treatment modules will also
be employed (Fairburn, Cooper, Shafran, et al., 2008a).

Addressing the Overevaluation of Shape
and Weight

At the heart of most eating disorders is the distinctive
“core psychopathology,” the overevaluation of shape
and weight, that is, the judging of self-worth largely,
or even exclusively, in terms of shape and weight, and
the ability to control them. As described earlier, most
of the other features of these disorders are secondary
to this psychopathology and its consequences. This
psychopathology occupies a central place in most patients’
formulation and is a major target of treatment.
Clinical experience and research evidence suggest that
unless this psychopathology is successfully addressed,
patients are at substantial risk of relapse. There are five
aspects to this process:

1. Identifying the overevaluation and its consequences
2. Developing marginalized self-evaluative domains
3. Addressing body checking
4. Addressing body avoidance
5. Addressing “feeling fat”
Other than the initial aspect, they are not necessarily
introduced in this order. In addition, towards the end
of Stage 3 it is important to develop patients’ skills at
dealing with setbacks.


iDenTifying THe oVereVAlUATion
AnD iTs ConseqUenCes

The starting point is educating the patient about the
notion of self-evaluation. The therapist then helps the
patient identify his/her scheme for self-evaluation. Finally,
the implications of this scheme are discussed and
a plan for addressing the expressions of the overevaluation
is devised. Because therapists are often unsure how
to broach the subject of self-evaluation, the complete
treatment guide provides a detailed dialogue demonstrating
how to explain this to patients.

Briefly the therapist starts by explaining that most
people tend to judge themselves on the basis of meeting
personal standards in the areas of life they value. The
patient is then helped to generate a list of areas in his/
her life that make an important contribution to his/her
self-evaluation. Almost invariably this will include appearance
and perhaps also controlling eating. The therapist
then goes on to explore the relative importance of
these domains of self-evaluation; the clue to their relative
importance is the magnitude (in terms of intensity
and duration) of the patient’s response to things going
badly in the area. In this way the various areas of life
that have been listed can be ranked and represented by
means of a pie chart, which the therapist and patient
draw together. The pie chart of someone without an eating
disorder is shown in Figure 17.5 and this may be
contrasted with one typical of someone with an eating
problem (Figure 17.6), in which there is a large “slice”
representing the overevaluation of shape and weight.


Family
Work
Shape, weight,

and eating
Other
Friends
Sport
Music

figUre 17.5. The pie chart of a young woman without an eating problem. From Fairburn (2008, p. 99). Copyright
2008 by The Guilford Press. Reprinted by permission.


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers


Family

Work

Shape, weight
and eating
Other

figUre 17.6. The pie chart of a young woman with an eating problem. From Fairburn (2008, p. 98). Copyright 2008
by The Guilford Press. Reprinted by permission.

It is useful for the patient to review his/her pie chart
on several occasions before the next session, so that it
can be discussed further and adjusted as needed. Generally,
any revision takes the form of expanding the size
of the slice representing the importance of shape and
weight.

The next step is to ask the patient to consider the
implications of his/her scheme for self-evaluation (as
represented by the pie chart) and reflect on whether
there might be any problems inherent to it. This discussion
generally leads to the identification of three main
problems:

1. Having a pie chart with a dominant slice is
“risky.” A dominant slice makes people particularly
vulnerable should anything threaten their
ability to meet their personal standards in the
area concerned.
2. Judging oneself largely on the basis of appearance
is particularly problematic because this
aspect of life is only controllable to a limited extent.
It therefore results in the person feeling like
a failure at times.
3. Placing great importance on shape and weight
drives people to diet, and in the patient’s case,
this maintains his/her eating problem.
This discussion naturally leads to the final step in
the examination of self-evaluation, namely, the creation
of a formulation that includes the consequences of the
overevaluation (the “extended formulation”). The ther


apist starts by asking the patient what he/she does, or
experiences, as a result of the importance placed on
shape and appearance. The goal is to derive a figure
resembling that in Figure 17.7, with the therapist adding
the upward feedback arrows and explaining that these
consequences of the overevaluation also serve to maintain
the overevaluation.

Having done this, the therapist needs to devise with
the patient a plan to address the concerns about shape
and weight, with two overarching strategies:

1. To develop new domains for self-evaluation.
2. To reduce the importance attached to shape and
weight.
Both are important and they complement one another.

DeVeloPing MArginAlizeD DoMAins
for self‑eVAlUATion

Tackling expressions of the overevaluation of shape and
weight gradually reduces the extent of the overevaluation:
The shape and weight-related “slice” of the pie
chart begins to shrivel. But, at the same time, it is most
important to increase the number and importance of
other domains for self-evaluation to diminish the relative
importance of shape and weight. To achieve this,
patients need help to begin to get actively involved with
other aspects of life. There are six steps to this process,
which needs to be a running theme throughout the rest
of the treatment:


Eating Disorders


Overevaluation of shape and weight and their control


Dietary
restraint


Shape and weight
checking and/or
avoidance


Preoccupation
with thoughts
about shape
and weight

Mislabeling
adverse states
as “feeling fat”
Marginalization
of other areas of
life

figUre 17.7. The overevaluation of shape and weight: an “extended” formulation. From Fairburn (2008, p. 101).
Copyright 2008 by The Guilford Press. Reprinted by permission. This figure may be downloaded from www.credooxford.
com.

1. Explaining the rationale for developing new domains
for self-evaluation.
2. Helping the patient identify new activities that
might be engaging.
3. Agreeing on one, or possibly two, activities that
the patient can try.
4. Ensuring that the patient actually does try the
activity identified, often using a problem-solving
approach (described later in the chapter).
5. Reviewing progress each week, with the therapist
being encouraging and facilitative.
6. Simultaneously, directly targeting the patient’s
overevaluation of shape and weight, usually
starting with body checking, which is often of
central importance in maintaining the patient’s
concerns.
ADDressing BoDy CHeCking

The importance of body checking and avoidance has
only recently been appreciated. The reason is quite
simple: Few clinicians know about it. This is because
patients do not disclose the behavior unless asked, and
many are not even aware of it.

The first step in addressing body checking is to provide
information about body checking, body avoidance,
and their consequences, stressing the following
two points:

1. Everyone checks his/her body to some extent
but many people with eating problems repeatedly
check their bodies and often in a way that
is unusual. Such checking can become “second
nature,” so that patients may not be aware they
are doing it. In people with eating problems this
checking can maintain dissatisfaction with appearance.
2. Some people with eating problems avoid seeing
their bodies and dislike other people seeing
them too. Usually these people engaged in body
checking in the past but switched over to avoidance
because the repeated checking became
intolerable. Body avoidance is problematic because
it allows concerns and fears about shape
and appearance to persist in the absence of any
accurate information. Therefore it too needs to
be tackled.
Next, the therapist needs to find out what checking and
avoidance the patient engages in. A specific monitoring
record may be used for this purpose (see www.credooxford.
com). Since recording body checking is highly
distressing for some patients, it is best to ask patients
to do it for only two 24-hour periods, one on a working
day and the other on a day off work. It may be useful to
forewarn patients that although it might be distressing,
it will yield information that is helpful in overcoming


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

their eating disorder. It is common for patients to be
taken aback by how often they check their shape.

Having identified patients’ various forms of body
checking, they are then best divided into two groups,
according to whether they are “normative.”

Unusual Forms of Body Checking. Unusual forms
of body checking are best stopped altogether. Examples
include measuring the dimensions of certain body parts
and photographing oneself. Patients can usually do this
if the rationale is well explained and they are provided
with support. There are two points to emphasize:

1. Body checking usually involves focusing on aspects
of one’s appearance that one dislikes, and it
generally has adverse effects.
2. Stopping unusual forms of checking is generally
experienced (after a week or so) as a relief.
Addressing More Normative Forms of Body Checking.
A different strategy needs to be adopted with more
normative forms of body checking. Here the problem is
the frequency of checking, the way that it is done, and
patients’ interpretations of what they find. The therapist
needs to help patients consider the following questions
each time that they are about to check themselves:

••
What are they trying to find out?
••
Can checking in this way produce the information
they are seeking?
••
Might there be adverse effects from such checking?
••
Is there a better alternative?

Mirror use deserves particular attention because
mirrors have the potential to provide misleading, but
highly credible, information and as a result they are
likely to play an important role in the maintenance of
many patients’ body dissatisfaction. Education about
mirrors and mirror use is therefore of importance. One
point to stress is that apparent flaws that would normally
go unnoticed become the focus of attention when
people study in detail aspects of their appearance that
they dislike. Another is that scrutiny is prone to magnify
apparent defects. Patients therefore need to question
their use of mirrors as they are the main way that we
determine how we look. Mirrors are useful for applying
makeup, brushing/styling hair, shaving, and so forth.
Full-length mirrors are helpful to see whether clothes
go well together. But the therapist should ask patients
whether there is ever a case for looking at themselves

naked in a full-length mirror. If they are already dissatisfied
with their appearance, doing so is likely to risk
increasing their dislike of their shape through the magnification
process mentioned earlier. This is not to say
that total avoidance of mirrors is recommended; rather,
the advice is (for the time being) to restrict the use of
mirrors to the purposes listed earlier.

Another form of body checking that actively maintains
dissatisfaction with shape involves comparing
oneself with other people. The nature of these comparisons
generally results in the patient concluding that his/
her body is unattractive relative to those of others. As
noted earlier, the patient’s appraisal of his/her shape
often involves scrutiny and selective attention to body
parts that are disliked. The scrutiny is liable to result
in the magnification of perceived defects, and the selective
attention increases overall dissatisfaction with
shape. In contrast patients’ assessment of others is very
different. They tend to make superficial and often uncritical
judgements about other people. Furthermore,
when making these comparisons, they tend to choose
a biased reference group, generally people who are thin
and attractive.

The steps involved in addressing comparisonmaking
are as follows:

1. The therapist helps patients identify when and
how the patient makes comparisons.
2. Once this information has been collected, the
therapist helps the patient consider whether the
comparison was inherently biased in terms of the
person chosen and how their shape was evaluated.
Two points are worth highlighting:
••
Body checking provides patients with a perspective
on their bodies that is difficult, if not
impossible, to get on someone else’s body. For
example what they see when looking at themselves
in the mirror is quite unlike what they
see when looking at someone else.

••
Comparing themselves with people portrayed
in the media (models, film stars, and other celebrities)
is problematic since they are an unrepresentative
subgroup and images of them
may well have been manipulated.

3. Certain homework tasks usefully complement
these discussions; for example, patients may be
asked to be more scientific when choosing someone
to compare themselves with. Instead of selecting
thin people, the therapist may ask them
to select every third person (of their age and
gender) they walk past in a busy street. They can

Eating Disorders

also experiment with scrutinizing other people’s
bodies. One way of doing this is for the patient
to go to a changing room (e.g., of a swimming
pool or gym), select someone nearby of about the
same age and gender who seems at first glance
attractive, then unobtrusively scrutinize their
body, focusing exclusively on the parts that the
patient is personally most sensitive about. What
patients discover is that even attractive people
have apparent flaws when scrutinized.

4. Assuming the patient’s comparison-making
is biased (as it almost invariably is), the therapist
should explore the implications of this bias
in terms of the validity of the patient’s views
relative to his/her appearance. The goal is that
patients become aware that their checking and
making comparisons has yielded misleading information
about other peoples’ bodies and their
own.
ADDressing BoDy AVoiDAnCe

“Exposure” in its technical and literal sense is the strategy
here. Therapists need to help patients get used to
the sight and feel of their bodies and to learn to make
even-handed comparisons of their own bodies with
those of others. They need to get used to seeing their
own bodies and letting others see them, too. Dressing
and undressing in the dark needs to be phased out,
and patients should gradually abandon wearing baggy,
shape-disguising clothes. Participation in activities that
involve a degree of body exposure can be helpful (e.g.,
swimming). Depending on the extent of the problem,
tackling body avoidance may take many successive sessions.
As there is a risk of a patient returning to repeated
body checking, the therapist needs to help the patient
adopt normative and risk-free forms of checking.

ADDressing “feeling fAT”

“Feeling fat” is an experience reported by many women,
but the intensity and frequency of this feeling appears
to be far greater among people with eating disorders.
It is an important target for treatment, since it tends to
be equated with being fat, whatever the patient’s actual
weight or shape. Hence, feeling fat is not only an expression
of overconcern with shape and weight but it
also maintains it.

There has been almost no research on feeling fat,
and little has been written about it. What is striking
is that it tends to fluctuate markedly from day-to-day

and even within a single day. This is quite unlike many
other aspects of these patients’ core psychopathology,
which is relatively stable. It is our impression that in
people with eating disorders, feeling fat is a result of
the mislabeling of certain emotions and bodily experiences.
It is important to stress that “feeling fat” and
“being fat” are quite different, but they can co-occur.
Many people with obesity are not troubled by feeling
fat, despite being dissatisfied with their shape, but some
are dissatisfied, and in the same way as people with
an eating disorder. Since feeling fat contributes to the
maintenance of their body dissatisfaction, it is essential
that this be addressed in these patients, too.

In general it is best to focus on feeling fat once one
has begun to make inroads into body checking and
avoidance, but this is not invariably the case. In patients
in whom feeling fat is a particularly prominent feature,
it is advisable to address it before tackling body checking
and avoidance.

There are five steps in addressing “feeling fat”:

1. The therapist should first explain that “feeling
fat” should not be equated with “being fat,” and
that feeling fat may mask other feelings or sensations
occurring at the same time.
2. Patients should be asked to record times when
they have particularly intense feelings of fatness.
This can be done as part of the normal recording
process, using the right-hand column of the recording
sheet for this purpose. This requires accurate
real-time recording. When patients record
feeling fat, they should also think (and record)
what else they are feeling at the time.
3. Once patients have mastered this, they should
ask themselves two questions each time they feel
fat:
••
What has happened in the last hour that might
have triggered this feeling?
••
What else am I feeling just now?

4. It usually emerges that the patient’s experiences
of feeling fat are triggered either by the occurrence
of certain negative mood states or physical
sensations that heighten body awareness. Examples
of these two types of stimulus include the
following:
••
Feeling bored, depressed, lonely, or tired.

••
Feeling full, bloated, or sweaty; feeling one’s
body wobble or one’s thighs rubbing together;
clothing that feels tight.

5. Over subsequent weeks patients should continue
to do this whenever they have strong feelings

CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

of fatness. In addition, they should address any
masked problem (e.g., feeling bored) using the
problem-solving approach (described later in
this chapter). In some patients, problem solving
will already have been taught in the context of
addressing event-triggered changes in eating. In
others, the approach needs to be introduced at
this point. With regard to tackling patients’ response
to heightened body awareness, therapists
should help them appreciate that the problem is
their negative interpretation of these sensations
rather than the sensations themselves.

Addressing feeling fat typically takes many weeks
and will be a recurring item on the session agenda.
What generally happens is that the frequency and intensity
of feeling fat progressively decline, and patients’
“relationship” to the experience changes, such that it is
no longer equated with being fat. This metacognitive
change is important, since once it happens, feeling fat
ceases to maintain body dissatisfaction.

Addressing Dietary Restraint and Food Avoidance

Dieting is one of the most prominent features of patients
with eating disorders. A major goal of treatment is to
reduce, if not eliminate altogether, the strong tendency
of these patients to diet. As noted earlier, attempts to
restrict eating (“dietary restraint”) may or may not be
successful. Thus, it is far from inevitable that they result
in true undereating in physiological terms (“dietary
restriction”) and weight loss. In this section we focus on
addressing dietary restraint and dietary rules. The tackling
of dietary restriction is addressed in a later section
on treatment of those who are underweight.

The dietary restraint of patients with eating disorders
is both extreme in intensity and rigid in form.
These patients set themselves multiple demanding dietary
rules. These may concern when they eat (e.g., not
before 6:00 P.M.), how much they should eat (e.g., less
than 600 kcal per day) and, most especially, what they
should eat, with most patients having a large number
of foods that they are attempting to avoid (“food avoidance”).
Many have all three types of dietary rule. As
a result of these rules, patients’ eating is inflexible and
restricted in nature. Despite this, dietary restraint is
valued, and patients tend to be oblivious to its adverse
effects.

When addressing dietary restraint, an important first
step is for the therapist to help patients to see that their

dieting is indeed a problem. This can be done with reference
to their formulation, which in most cases shows
that dieting plays a central role in the maintenance of
their eating problem. If this is the case, it will need to
be addressed to overcome the problem. Second their
dieting may well have many adverse effects on their
day-to-day life. These may be uncovered using the CIA
(Bohn & Fairburn, 2008); for example, it may preclude
eating out; it may result in tension about mealtimes;
and it may cause preoccupation with thoughts about
food and eating.

Once it has been agreed that dietary restraint is a
problem, therapist and patient need to identify the various
dietary rules present. Many will be evident by this
stage in treatment. The principles that underlie addressing
these rules are as follows:

1. Identifying a specific rule and what is motivating
it.
2. Exploring with the patient the likely consequences
of breaking the rule. The patient may believe
that breaking the rule will lead to weight gain or
invariably result in binge eating.
3. Devising a plan with the patient for breaking
the rule in question in order to explore the consequences
of doing so, and helping the patient
implement this plan.
4. Analyzing the implications of the planned rulebreaking.
5. Planning further occasions of breaking the same
rule, until the rule ceases to have significance.
With patients who binge-eat it is important to pay
particular attention to food avoidance. The first step
is to identify any foods being avoided. A good way of
doing this is to ask patients to visit a local supermarket
and write down all foods they would be reluctant
to eat because of their possible effect on their shape
or weight, or because they fear that eating them might
trigger a binge. The patient and therapist should rank
these foods (often comprising 40 or more items) according
to the difficulty the patient would experience
eating them. Patients should be helped to introduce
these foods progressively into their diet, starting with
the easiest and gradually moving on to the most difficult.
The amount eaten is not important, although the
eventual goal is that the patient should be capable of
eating normal quantities with impunity. The systematic
introduction of avoided foods should continue until patients
are no longer anxious about eating them. Often


Eating Disorders

this will take the remainder of treatment and sometime
beyond it.

Other dietary rules should be tackled in a similar
fashion, with a focus on both the belief that is maintaining
the rule and breaking the rule itself. It is especially
important to address rules that interfere with
social eating.

Addressing Event- and Mood-Related Changes
in Eating

In patients with eating disorders, eating habits may
change in response to outside events and moods. This
is particularly true of binge eating. The variety of different
mechanisms involved include the following:

••
Binge eating or vomiting, or both, to cope with
negative events or adverse moods. Binge eating
has two relevant properties: It is distracting and
may take the patient’s mind off aversive thoughts,
and it has a direct mood-modulatory effect, in that
it dampens strong mood states. The latter property
is also true of vomiting and intense exercising.

••
Eating less or stopping eating to gain a sense of
personal control when external events feel outside
the patient’s control. This is seen most often in underweight
patients.

••
Eating less to influence others; for example, it may
be a way of exhibiting feelings of distress or anger,
or it may be an act of defiance.

If in Stage 3 events and moods appear to contribute
to the maintenance of the eating disorder, this contribution
needs to be assessed and in all likelihood addressed,
with the goal of helping patients deal with
events and moods directly and effectively, without
influencing patients’ eating. With most patients, the
first step is to identify such changes in eating through
real-time recording, and in the following session go
over in detail one or more examples in an attempt to
identify the triggers involved. Then, the patient should
be trained in a variant of standard cognitive-behavioral
technique of problem solving, termed “proactive problem
solving.” The distinctive feature of this approach is
its emphasis on spotting problems early. It is described
in detail in the complete treatment guide and it is also
covered from the patient’s perspective in Overcoming
Binge Eating. The approach, if well taught, is remarkably
effective in most cases. The exception is those patients
who have difficulty tolerating mood states that

involve arousal. These patients (who tend to attract the
diagnosis of borderline personality disorder) have what
we term “mood intolerance.” They benefit from proactive
problem solving, but they also need more direct
help coping with their moods. To this end we use an
approach that overlaps with elements of dialectical behavior
therapy (Linehan, 1993) and is described in the
treatment guide.

Setbacks and Mindsets

The core psychopathology of eating disorders may be
viewed as a “mindset” or frame of mind. While normally
one’s “mind-in-place” varies with changing circumstances,
in people with eating disorders it tends to
get locked in, and patients’ thinking becomes persistently
dominated by eating disorder thoughts. It leads
patients to filter both internal and external stimuli in a
distinctive way; it leads to the forms of behavior characteristic
of eating disorders; and it results in the mislabeling
of various physical and emotional experiences
as “feeling fat.”

The cognitive-behavioral strategies used in CBT-E
are designed to address both the key features of the eating
disorders and, most importantly, the processes that
are maintaining them. In patients who are making good
progress these mechanisms gradually erode during
Stage 3, with the result that healthier and situationally
more appropriate mindsets start to move into place, albeit
temporarily at first. Such shifts in mindset usually
become evident during the last third of treatment. They
are reported by patients with surprise, using statements
such as “On Sunday evening I forgot I had an eating
disorder!” At first, the eating disorder mindset is prone
to come back into place with even minor provocations
(e.g., a friend discussing a diet she has just started) and
with it returns the patient’s eating disorder behavior,
thoughts, and feelings. These “setbacks” can readily
escalate into full-blown relapse unless they are promptly
nipped in the bud. It is therefore import to raise the
topic of mindsets at this stage in treatment so that patients
can learn to spot their eating disorder mindset
coming into place by detecting the characteristic early
changes in their behavior. Once patients can do this,
they can then go on to learn how to “eject” the mindset,
thereby preventing the setback from becoming established.
Practice spotting the mindset coming back into
place and dealing with it effectively is of great value,
as this skill—intervening very early at the beginnings
of a setback—may account for the low relapse rate fol



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

lowing CBT-E. It is therefore helpful if patients experience
occasional setbacks later in treatment because this
gives them the opportunity to utilize these strategies
and procedures while still in treatment. Full details of
how to help patients manipulate their mindset and address
setbacks are provided in the treatment guide.

Stage 4: Ending Well

This is the final stage in treatment. With patients who
are receiving 20 sessions of treatment, it comprises
three sessions over 5 weeks (i.e., the sessions are 2
weeks apart). It has two broad aims:

1. To ensure that the changes made in treatment are
maintained and built upon
2. To minimize the risk of relapse in the future
At the same time, patients discontinue self-monitoring
and transfer from in-session weighing to weighing
themselves at home.

Ensuring that the Changes Made in Treatment
Are Maintained

The first step in doing this is to review in detail the
patient’s progress and what problems remain. This can
be done in much the same way as in Stage 2, using the
EDE-Q and CIA as a guide. Then, depending on what
problems remain, therapist and patient jointly devise a
specific short-term plan for the patient to follow until
the posttreatment review appointment in 5 months’
time. Typically, this includes further work on body
checking and food avoidance, as well as encouraging
the patient to maintain efforts to develop new interests
and activities.

Minimizing the Risk of Relapse in the Future

Relapses are not all-or-nothing phenomena. They occur
in degrees and may start as a “slip” or setback that then
becomes established. Commonly, the slip comprises the
resumption of dietary restraint, often triggered by an
adverse, shape-related event (e.g., a critical comment,
clothes feeling tighter than usual). In patients who were
previously prone to binge-eat, this return of dietary restraint
may lead to an episode of binge eating through
the mechanisms described earlier, which in turn will
encourage yet greater dietary restraint, thereby increasing
the risk of further episodes of binge eating. Within

days, most aspects of the eating disorder may have returned.
The patient’s reaction to this sequence of events
is crucial in determining what happens. If it is detected
early on, as discussed earlier, it is relatively easy to intervene,
but if it is not, it becomes progressively more
difficult to deal with the setback.

To minimize the risk of relapse in the long term, the
therapist needs to do the following:

1. Educate the patient about the risk of relapse,
highlighting common triggers and the likely sequence
of events in the patient’s case. There is in some patients
a tendency to hope that they will never have an eating
problem again. This is especially common in those
who have ceased to binge-eat, but it is seen in other
patients, too. Without casting a negative light on patients’
hopes for the future, therapists need to ensure
that patients’ expectations are realistic; otherwise there
is a risk that patients will not take seriously the need
to devise a “maintenance plan.” Also, they will be vulnerable
to react negatively to any emerging setback.
Patients should learn to view their eating disorder as
their Achilles’ heel: that is, their responses to stress in
general and to certain triggers.
2. Stress the importance of detecting problems
early, before they become entrenched. With this in
mind, therapist and patient should identify likely early
warning signs of an impending relapse. For patients
who are prone to binge or purge, these forms of behavior
occur early on in the course of any setback and
are readily noticeable. Patients whose eating disorder is
primarily characterized by dietary restriction may need
help to spot ominous signs.
3. Construct with the patient a plan of action (a
written personalized “long-term maintenance plan”)
for use in the future should problems arise. There are
two important elements: focusing on the emerging eating
problem and correcting it, and addressing the trigger
of the setback. In general the former is achieved by
doing what was learned in treatment (doing the right
thing), possibly following the guidance in Overcoming
Binge Eating, while the latter is achieved using problem
solving.
4. Discuss when the patient should seek further
help. It is important that patients seek further help if it
is needed. The strategy described earlier should get patients
back on track within a few weeks. If, after some
weeks of trying to correct matters, the problem has

Eating Disorders

not substantially resolved, we suggest that the patient
should seek outside help.

Ending or Extending Treatment

It is unusual not to end CBT-E as planned. So long as
patients have got to the point where the central maintaining
mechanisms have been disrupted, treatment
can and should finish. Otherwise, patients (and therapists)
are at risk of ascribing continued improvement
to the ongoing therapy rather than natural resolution
of the eating disorder. In practice, this means that it is
acceptable to end treatment with patients who are still
dieting to an extent, perhaps binge eating and vomiting
on occasions, and having residual concerns about shape
and weight.

At times there are grounds for extending treatment.
In our view, the main indication for doing this is the
presence of eating disorder features that continue to interfere
significantly with the patient’s functioning and
are unlikely to resolve of their own accord. Another
reason to extend treatment is to compensate for the deleterious
impact of disruptions to treatment, generally
due to the emergence of a clinical depression or the occurrence
of a life crisis.

The occasional patient benefits little from CBT-E. It
is our practice to refer such patients for day patient or
inpatient treatment.

The Posttreatment Review Appointment

We routinely hold a posttreatment review appointment
about 20 weeks after the completion of treatment. During
the intervening period, patients do not receive any
further therapeutic input. The review session has several
purposes:

1. To reassess the patient’s state and need for further
treatment. If residual eating disorder features
are significantly interfering with the patient’s
functioning, then further treatment should
be considered. If there has been a setback, a few
brief sessions may be needed to get the patient
back on track.
2. To review the patient’s implementation of the
short-term maintenance plan. The therapist
should review the plan with the aim of identifying
residual eating disorder features that the patient
needs to continue to address.
3. To discuss how any setbacks have been handled.
The patient’s ability to detect and address setbacks
should be reviewed in detail.

4. To review the long-term maintenance plan.
cBt‑e for uNDerweiGht PatieNts

The great majority of patients with an eating disorder
undereat at some stage and many may become underweight
for a time. Generally this does not last, and they
regain the lost weight, but a minority maintain strict
control over their eating and stay underweight. A proportion
of these patients meet current diagnostic criteria
for anorexia nervosa, whereas others are eligible
for one or other of the two residual eating disorder diagnoses.


CBT-E for underweight patients does not require
major modifications because the core psychopathology
and behavior of these patients is very similar to
that of the majority of patients with an eating disorder.
However, it does need to be adjusted to accommodate
three problems seen in this group, but not necessarily
confined to it:

1. Limited motivation to change
2. Being underweight
3. Undereating (“dietary restriction”).
To do this, CBT-E needs to be extended in length because
it takes time to engender motivation to change
and even more time to regain weight. Hence, as mentioned
earlier, for those with a BMI between 15.0 and
18.5, treatment generally takes up to 40 weeks, with
sessions generally held twice weekly until the patient
is consistently gaining weight. Once this is happening,
sessions are weekly; then, toward the end of treatment,
they are every 2–3 weeks.

Patients’ health and safety are always of paramount
importance, and this is especially true of patients who
are underweight because their physical health is invariably
compromised. Therapists need to be aware of potential
physical complications, and those who are not
medically qualified should have good access to a physician
who can advise on the management of medical
problems.

Overview

The four stages of the 20-week version of CBT-E do not
neatly map onto the version for underweight patients.


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

Treatment for these patients may be thought of as having
three phases:

••
Phase I. This lasts up to 8 weeks and the focus is
on engaging patients and helping them arrive at the
decision that they need to regain weight.

••
Phase II. This is the weight-gain phase. The goal is
that patients gain weight at the rate of about 0.5 kg
per week. Therefore, the length of this phase is determined
by the amount of weight to be regained.
During this phase the patient’s eating disorder psychopathology
is addressed.

••
Phase III. This is the weight-maintenance phase,
in which patients practice maintaining their new
healthy weight. It lasts about 8 weeks.

As a result of the particular emphases of these phases,
patients’ weight graphs generally have a distinct threephase
pattern to them, as shown in Figure 17.8.

Phase I

The first two treatment sessions are similar to those
of the 20-week treatment, although there are certain
modifications to accommodate education about the ef


170
160
150
140

Weight
(lbs) 130
120
110
100

fects of being underweight and to incorporate this information
in the formulation. In practice this involves
the following:

••
Inquiring carefully in the initial assessment about
the features that are likely to being underweight.
This inquiry should be embedded within the usual
assessment.

••
Providing personalized education about the effects
of being underweight before jointly creating
the formulation. This involves delaying the formulation
to the second treatment session rather than
creating it in the initial session as in the 20-week
version.

••
Jointly creating a formulation that highlights the
likely contribution of being underweight to the
maintenance of the patient’s eating problem (e.g.,
preoccupation with food and eating, increased
need for routines and predictability, indecisiveness,
heightened feelings of fullness, low mood,
social withdrawal). A patient-oriented description
of these features is provided in the second edition
of Overcoming Binge Eating (Fairburn, 2013).

••
Discussing the implications of the formulation for
treatment. The major point is that almost all of the

Weeks

BMI 20.0 (126 lbs)
BMI 25.0 (157 lbs)
BMI 19.0 (120 lbs)
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40


figUre 17.8. The weight graph of a patient with anorexia nervosa. From Fairburn (2008, p. 180). Copyright 2008 by
The Guilford Press. Adapted by permission.


Eating Disorders

effects identified will resolve if the patient regains
weight, and at the same time patients will discover
their true personality, which has been masked by
being underweight. Simultaneously it is emphasized
that treatment will involve much more than
mere weight regain.

The emphasis then moves on to helping patients
decide to change. The goal is that patients make this
decision themselves rather than having the decision imposed
on them. The aim is to interest the patient in the
benefits of change and the possibility of a “fresh start.”
There are five steps in this process:

1. Creating a “Current Pros and Cons of Change”
table.
2. Creating a “Future Pros and Cons of Change”
table.
3. Creating a “Conclusions” table. An example is
shown in Table 17.2.
4. Helping the patient identify and accept the implications
of these conclusions.
5. Helping the patient decide to act and “take the
plunge.”
At the same time, collaborative weighing and regular
eating are also introduced, much as in the 20-week
treatment. One difference is that weighing takes place
every session because patients’ low weight is a significant
health problem and a major target of treatment.
Another is that the pattern of regular eating should
include three meals and three snacks; that is, patients
should have six episodes of eating rather than five, as in
the 20-week treatment.

If the patient decides to regain weight, then Phase II
begins. If, however, the patient never reaches this decision
despite extensive nondirective exploration of the
topic (over at least 8 weeks), then CBT-E has failed and
other treatment options should be considered. This applies
in about one in five cases.

Phase II

In Phase Two the focus is on weight regain while at
the same time addressing the patient’s eating disorder
psychopathology in much the same way as described
earlier. Thus, there will be emphasis on modifying the
overevaluation of shape and weight, dietary restraint,
and event- and mood-related changes in eating.

table 17.2. Pros and Cons of Change:
a Patient’s “Conclusions”

I want to get better and regain weight because . . .

••
I will be able to have a full-life not one that is
just about eating and weight.

••
I will be healthier: my bones and heart will be
stronger; I won’t be cold and faint and will be
able to sleep properly. I won’t be ill!

••
I will be able to have good relationships with
other people and hopefully a partner and
children who I can be a good role model to.

••
I will be able to enjoy my job and be successful
at it.

••
At the moment the eating problem stops me
from being able to do things well. When I am
better I won’t need an excuse.

••
Regaining weight will mean that I will become
slim and healthy. It does not mean that I will
become fat.

••
Getting better won’t be giving in. Not getting
better would be giving in. Getting better is
about choosing to give myself a life.

••
I want to show how strong I can be by eating as
right now not eating is the easy thing.
••
Eating enough food to be a healthy weight isn’t
greedy. It is being normal.

••
Being a healthy weight and eating enough will
help to give me true control over my eating. I
will be able to make choices about what I eat.
At the moment the eating problem has control
over me. Becoming well will protect me from
out-of-control eating and uncontrolled weight
gain.

••
Being well will enable me to develop my talents
as a person and to discover my true self.

••
Getting better will give me choices in life. The
eating problem has been holding me back.
Change can only be good.

Note. From Fairburn (2008, p. 167). Copyright 2008 by The Guilford
Press. Reprinted by permission.

Weight regain is very difficult for these patients. It
is a long and laborious process. It requires that patients
maintain an energy surplus each day of about 500 kcal
if they are to regain weight at a rate of about 0.5 kg per
week.

It is our practice to have as a goal a BMI over 19.0.
This figure ensures that the great majority of patients
are free from the psychobiological effects of being underweight,
while still being slim. It is important not to
compromise on this figure. Many female patients want


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

to stop regaining weight when their BMI is in the 17.0–

18.0 range, possibly because this is when their shape
begins to become more feminine. This is a serious mistake
because they are still experiencing the adverse effects
of being underweight and have experienced few
of the advantages of the weight regain. Patients with a
BMI at this level also tend to go on to lose weight.
Full details of how to help patients regain weight are
provided in the complete treatment guide.

Phase III

The goal of this phase is to help patients maintain a
weight, such that their BMI fluctuates between 19.0 and

20.0. Patients and therapists have opposite concerns at
this point. While patients are afraid that their weight
will continue to rise, therapists fear that it will fall. The
therapists’ fears are usually the more realistic ones. The
risks and dangers of weight loss should be discussed
openly with patients.
This phase of treatment usually runs smoothly, and
certainly so in comparison with Phase II. Therapists
should encourage patients to live life fully now that
they are free from the debilitating effects of being underweight.
Patients should be helped to flourish, take
risks, and enjoy themselves, while not forgetting the
importance of maintaining their new healthy weight.

The final few sessions need to cover the same topics
as those covered in the 20-week version. Thus, they address
(along the same lines):

1. Mindsets and setbacks.
2. Ensuring that achieved changes achieved are
maintained.
3. Procedures for minimizing the risk of relapse in
the future.
coNcluDiNG reMarks

Myths and misconceptions concerning CBT abound.
Two are particularly prevalent. The first is that treatment
is diagnosis-driven; that is, the form of the treatment
is almost exclusively determined by the patient’s
DSM diagnosis. The second is that the treatment is
rigidly structured. We hope that it is clear that neither
criticism applies to CBT-E. In CBT-E, the form of the
patient’s treatment is dictated by a highly personalized
formulation that is diagnosis-independent. It is based
on patients’ eating disorder psychopathology, not their

DSM diagnosis. Moreover, this formulation is modified
and further personalized as treatment progresses and
the patient’s psychopathology evolves. What happens in
Session 10 with Patient A may bear little relation to what
happens in Session 10 with Patient B. What is specified
in CBT-E are the strategies and substrategies used, and
the procedures employed to bring about change, but
how and when they are applied varies markedly from
case to case. As a result, CBT-E is more of a challenge
to learn than more prescriptive treatments, but the compensation
is that it is more rewarding to implement, not
least because of its effectiveness.6

aCknowledgMents

We are grateful to the Wellcome Trust for its support: Christopher
G. Fairburn is supported by a Principal Research
Fellowship (046386), and Zafra Cooper is supported by a
strategic award (094585). Our research on eating disorders
is supported by a programme grant from the Wellcome Trust
(046386). Sarah Collins provided valuable feedback on the
manuscript.

notes

1. Body mass index (BMI) is a widely used way of representing
weight adjusted for height. It is weight in kilograms
divided by height in meters squared [i.e., wt/(ht)2]. The
BMI applies to adults of both sexes between the ages of 18
and 60. The healthy range is 18.5–25.0.
2. If there is a difference in their core psychopathology, it
is that some patients with anorexia nervosa are primarily
concerned with controlling their eating per se, rather than
their shape and weight. This is especially true of younger
cases of short duration.
3. Originally, the broad version of the treatment addressed
a fourth obstacle to change, termed “mood intolerance.”
This has subsequently been incorporated into the focused
form of CBT-E.
4. Our research on the 20-week version of CBT-E has included
patients with a BMI over 17.5, but our clinical experience
suggests that patients who are somewhat underweight
do better with a longer treatment. We are therefore recommending
a lower BMI threshold of 18.5.
5. C. G. F. acknowledges the obvious conflict of interest.
6. The website www.credo-oxford.com provides up-to-date
information on the empirical status of CBT-E and opportunities
to obtain training. All the materials needed to
implement CBT-E may be downloaded free of charge from
this website.

Eating Disorders

referenCes

American Psychiatric Association. (1994). Diagnostic and
statistical manual of mental disorders (4th ed.). Washington,
DC: Author.

American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and
statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.). Arlington,
VA: Author.

Bohn, K., & Fairburn, C. G. (2008). The Clinical Impairment
Assessment Questionnaire (CIA 3.0). In C. G. Fairburn,
Cognitive behavior therapy and eating disorders
(pp. 315–317). New York: Guilford Press.

Byrne, S. M., Fursland, A., Allen, K. L., & Watson, H. (2011).
The effectiveness of enhanced cognitive behavioural
therapy for eating disorders: An open trial. Behaviour Research
and Therapy, 49, 219–226.

Cooper, Z., & Fairburn, C. G. (2011). The evolution of “enhanced”
cognitive behavior therapy for eating disorders:
Learning from treatment non-response. Cognitive and Behavioral
Practice, 18, 394–402.

Cooper, Z., & Stewart, A. (2008). CBT-E and the younger
patient. In C. G. Fairburn, Cognitive behavior therapy and
eating disorders (pp. 221–230). New York: Guilford Press.

Crow, S., & Peterson, C. B. (2009). Refining treatments for
eating disorders. American Journal of Psychiatry, 166,
266–267.

Dalle Grave, R. (2012). Intensive cognitive behavior therapy
for eating disorders. New York: Nova Science.

Dalle Grave, R., Calugi, S., Doll, H. A., & Fairburn, C.

G. (2013). Enhanced cognitive behaviour therapy for
adolescents with anorexia nervosa: An alternative to family
therapy? Behaviour Research and Therapy, 51, R9–
R12.
Fairburn, C. G. (2005). Evidence-based treatment of anorexia
nervosa. International Journal of Eating Disorders, 37,
S26–S30.

Fairburn, C. G. (2008). Cognitive behavior therapy and eating
disorders. New York: Guilford Press.

Fairburn, C. G. (2013). Overcoming binge eating (2nd ed.).
New York: Guilford Press.

Fairburn, C. G., Agras, W. S., Walsh, B. T., Wilson, G. T., &
Stice, E. (2004). Early change in treatment predicts outcome
in bulimia nervosa. American Journal of Psychiatry,
161, 2322–2324.

Fairburn, C. G., & Beglin, S. J. (2008). Eating Disorder
Examination Questionnaire (EDE-Q 6.0). In C. G. Fairburn,
Cognitive behavior therapy and eating disorders
(pp. 309–313). New York: Guilford Press.

Fairburn, C. G., & Bohn, K. (2005). Eating disorder NOS
(EDNOS): An example of the troublesome “not otherwise
specified” (NOS) category in DSM-IV. Behaviour Research
and Therapy, 43, 691–701.

Fairburn, C. G., & Cooper, Z. (2011). Eating disorders,
DSM-5 and clinical reality. British Journal of Psychiatry,
198, 8–10.

Fairburn, C. G., Cooper, Z., Bohn, K., O’Connor, M. E., Doll,

H. A., & Palmer, R. L. (2007). The severity and status of
eating disorder NOS: Implications for DSM-V. Behaviour
Research and Therapy, 45, 1705–1715.
Fairburn, C. G., Cooper, Z., Doll, H. A., O’Connor, M. E.,
Bohn, K., Hawker, D. M., et al. (2009). Transdiagnostic
cognitive-behavioral therapy for patients with eating disorders:
A two-site trial with 60-week follow-up. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 166, 311–319.

Fairburn, C. G., Cooper, Z., Doll, H. A., Palmer, R. L., &
Dalle Grave, R. (2013). Enhanced cognitive behaviour
therapy for adults with anorexia nervosa: A UK–Italy
study. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 51, R2–R8.

Fairburn, C. G., Cooper, Z., & Shafran, R. (2003). Cognitive
behaviour therapy for eating disorders: A “transdiagnostic”
theory and treatment. Behaviour Research and
Therapy, 41, 509–528.

Fairburn, C. G., Cooper, Z., & Shafran, R. (2008). Enhanced
cognitive behavior therapy for eating disorders (“CBT-
E”): An overview. In C. G. Fairburn, Cognitive behavior
therapy and eating disorders (pp. 23–34). New York:
Guilford Press.

Fairburn, C. G., Cooper, Z., Shafran, R., Bohn, K., &
Hawker, D. M. (2008a). Clinical perfectionism, core low
self-esteem and interpersonal problems. In C. G. Fairburn,
Cognitive behavior therapy and eating disorders
(pp. 197–220). New York: Guilford Press.

Fairburn, C. G., Cooper, Z., Shafran, R., Bohn, K., Hawker,

D. M., Murphy, R., et al. (2008b). Enhanced cognitive
behavior therapy for eating disorders: The core protocol.
In C. G. Fairburn, Cognitive behavior therapy and eating
disorders (pp. 47–193). New York: Guilford Press.
Fairburn, C. G., Cooper, Z., & Waller, D. (2008a). “Complex
cases” and comorbidity. In C. G. Fairburn, Cognitive behavior
therapy and eating disorders (pp. 245–258). New
York: Guilford Press.

Fairburn, C. G., Cooper, Z., & Waller, D. (2008b). The patients:
Their assessment, preparation for treatment and
medical management. In C. G. Fairburn, Cognitive behavior
therapy and eating disorders (pp. 35–44). New York:
Guilford Press.

Fairburn, C. G., & Harrison, P. J. (2003). Eating disorders.
Lancet, 361, 407–416.

Fairburn, C. G., & Wilson, G. T. (2013). The dissemination
and implementation of psychological treatments: Problems
and solutions. International Journal of Eating Disorders,
46, 516–521.

Hay, P. J., & Claudino, A. M. (2010). Evidence-based treatment
for the eating disorders. In W. S. Agras (Ed.), The
Oxford handbook of eating disorders (pp. 452–479). Oxford,
UK: Oxford University Press.

Linehan, M. M. (1993). Cognitive behavioral treatment of
borderline personality disorder. New York: Guilford
Press.

Lock, J. (2011). Evaluation of family treatment models for


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

eating disorders. Current Opinion in Psychiatry, 24, 274–
279.

Lock, J., le Grange, D., Agras, W. S., & Dare, C. (2001).
Treatment manual for anorexia nervosa: A family-based
approach. New York: Guilford Press.

Lock, J., le Grange, D., Agras, S., Moye, A., Bryson, S. W.,
& Jo, B. (2010). Randomized clinical trial comparing
family-based treatment with adolescent-focused individual
therapy for adolescents with anorexia nervosa. Archives
of General Psychiatry, 67, 1025–1032.

Luborsky, L., Singer, B., & Luborsky, L. (1975). Comparative
studies of psychotherapies. Archives of General Psychiatry,
32, 995–1008.

Lundgren, J. D., Allison, K. C., & Stunkard, A. J. (Eds.).
(2012). Night eating syndrome: Research, assessment,
and treatment. New York: Guilford Press.

Masheb, R. M., & Grilo, C. M. (2007). Rapid response predicts
treatment outcomes in binge eating disorder: Implications
for stepped care. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 75, 639–644.

Mitchell, J. E., & de Zwaan, M. (2012). Psychosocial evaluation
and treatment in bariatric surgery. New York: Routledge.


National Institute for Clinical Excellence. (2004). Eating dis


orders: Core interventions in the treatment and management
of anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa and related
eating disorders. London: Author.

Poulsen, S., Lunn, S., Daniel, S. I. F., Folke, S., Mathiesen,

B. B., Katznelson, H., et al. (in press). A randomized controlled
trial of psychoanalytic psychotherapy versus cognitive
behavior therapy for bulimia nervosa. American Journal
of Psychiatry.
Wilson, G. T. (1999). Rapid response to cognitive behavior
therapy. Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 6,
289–292.

Wilson, G. T., Grilo, C. M., & Vitousek, K. M. (2007). Psychological
treatment of eating disorders. American Psychologist,
62, 199–216.

Wilson, G. T., & Schlam, T. R. (2004). The transtheoretical
model and motivational interviewing in the treatment of
eating and weight disorders. Clinical Psychology Review,
24, 361–378.

Wilson, G. T., Wilfley, D. E., Agras, W. S., & Bryson, S. W.
(2010). Psychological treatments of binge eating disorder.
Archives of General Psychiatry, 67, 94–101.

Wilson, G. T., & Zandberg, L. (2012). Cognitive-behavioral
guided self-help for eating disorders: Effectiveness and
scalability. Clinical Psychology Review, 32, 343–357.


C H a P t e rC H a P t e r
1 8
Couple Distress

aNDrew christeNseN
JeNNifer G. wheeler
BriaN D. Doss
Neil s. JacoBsoN

The second edition of this book presented, for the first time, a substantially different approach
to couple therapy—different both in conceptualization and in treatment strategies.
it was noted that these changes in technique and conceptualization were profound
enough to warrant a new name for the approach: “integrative behavioral couple therapy”
(iBCT). As described in this fifth edition, iBCT has matured into a sophisticated and
intuitively appealing set of strategies. These strategies are very nicely illustrated in this
chapter in the context of the comprehensive treatment of one couple in substantial distress.
Because these strategies require considerable clinical skill and talent, beginning
therapists in particular should learn much from the case descriptions presented in this
very readable and engaging chapter.—D. H. B.

Unlike other chapters in this Handbook, the term
“couple distress” does not refer to a specific clinical or
personality disorder. In DSM-5, couple distress is handled
as it was in DSM-IV-TR: not considered a “mental
disorder” but relegated to the category of “other conditions
that may be a focus of clinical attention” and assigned
a lesser “V code” of “relationship distress with
spouse or intimate partner.” Yet it is certainly arguable
that couple distress creates as much psychological and
physical pain as many, if not most, of the DSM disorders
(e.g., Beach et al., 2006). Furthermore, couple
distress can initiate, exacerbate, and complicate DSM
disorders such as depression, or trigger their relapse
(Whisman, 2007; Whisman & Bruce, 1999). Additionally,
couple distress can have a major impact on children,
and can trigger or exacerbate externalizing and
internalizing disorders (Buehler et al., 1997). Indeed,
there was a push to give relationship processes such as
couple distress greater attention in DSM-5, and perhaps

include some relationship problems as disorders; however,
such efforts seem to have faltered (American Psychiatric
Association, 2013; Beach et al., 2006). Whatever
the merits and outcome of these efforts, there is
no doubt that couple distress has serious psychological
consequences and is deserving of therapeutic attention.

In this chapter we describe one promising approach
to the treatment of couple distress called integrative behavioral
couple therapy (IBCT; Christensen & Jacobson,
2000; Christensen, Jacobson, & Babcock, 1995;
Jacobson & Christensen, 1998). We briefly review the
development of this approach from its origins in traditional
behavioral couple therapy, followed by a description
of IBCT theories and techniques. Then we
describe the application of IBCT, including the stages
of therapy and the use of specific interventions. Finally,
we discuss the empirical evidence in support of IBCT
and provide a case example to demonstrate the application
of IBCT to the treatment of couple distress.

703


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

traDitioNal Behavioral
couPle theraPy

The term “couple therapy” (as opposed to “individual”
or “group” therapy) refers to clinical approaches for improving
the functioning of two individuals within the
context of their romantic relationship to one another.1
Although couple therapy is unique in its emphasis on
a specific dyad, by its very definition, it is a contextual
approach to the treatment of two individuals. Accordingly,
successful treatments for couple distress have
emphasized the assessment and modification of each
individual’s contribution and response to specific interactions
in their relationship (e.g., Baucom & Hoffman,
1986; Gurman, Knickerson, & Pinsof, 1986;
Holtzworth-Munroe & Jacobson, 1991; Jacobson,
1978a, 1984; Jacobson & Holtzworth-Munroe, 1986;
Jacobson & Margolin, 1979; Stuart, 1980; Weiss, Hops,
& Patterson, 1973).

For over three decades, the “gold standard” for the
treatment of couple distress has been behavioral couple
therapy (for reviews of couple therapies, see Baucom,
Shoham, Kim, Daiuto, & Stickle, 1998; Christensen &
Heavey, 1999; Jacobson & Addis, 1993; Snyder, Castellani,
& Whisman, 2006). First applied to couple
distress by Stuart (1969) and Weiss and colleagues
(1973), traditional behavioral couple therapy (TBCT)
uses basic behavioral principles of reinforcement, modeling,
and behavioral rehearsal to facilitate collaboration
and compromise between partners. With an eye
toward facilitating changes in the partners’ behavior,
TBCT teaches them how to increase or decrease target
behaviors (behavior exchange), to communicate more
effectively (communication training), and to assess and
solve problems (problem solving) to improve overall
relationship satisfaction. The monograph by Jacobson
and Margolin (1979) is a commonly used treatment
manual for TBCT.

In early studies, TBCT demonstrated significant empirical
success (Jacobson 1977, 1978b) and soon became
the focus of numerous treatment manuals, programs,
and publications supporting the application of behavioral
techniques to the treatment of couple distress (e.g.,
Floyd & Markman, 1983; Gottman, Notarius, Gonso,
& Markman, 1976; Jacobson & Margolin, 1979; Knox,
1971; Liberman, 1970; Liberman, Wheeler, deVisser,
Kuehnel, & Kuehnel, 1981; Stuart, 1980). Subsequent
outcome research has consistently supported the efficacy
of behavioral approaches for the treatment of
couple distress (Baucom & Hoffman, 1986; Gurman

et al., 1986; Jacobson, 1984; Jacobson, Schmaling, &
Holtzworth-Munroe, 1987). Research has even shown
the positive impact of TBCT for couples in which one
partner has an individual disorder, such as depression
(Gupta, Coyne, & Beach, 2003), alcoholism (O’Farrell
& Fals-Stewart, 2000), and/or anxiety (Baucom et al.,
1998).

Despite the apparent success of TBCT, however,
outcome research also revealed some limitations in its
efficacy and generalizability. For example, approximately
one-third of couples failed to show measurable
improvement in relationship quality following treatment
with TBCT (Jacobson et al., 1987). Furthermore,
many couples who initially responded to treatment relapsed
within 1 or 2 years after therapy (Jacobson et al.,
1984, 1987). Four years after therapy, Snyder, Wills,
and Grady-Fletcher (1991) found a divorce rate of 37%
in couples treated with TBCT.

Findings about the limited effectiveness of TBCT
encouraged the development of additional therapeutic
approaches. Various modifications and enhancements
have been made to TBCT in an effort to improve its
effectiveness (e.g., Baucom & Epstein, 1990; Baucom,
Epstein, & Rankin, 1995; Epstein & Baucom, 2002;
Floyd, Markman, Kelly, Blumberg, & Stanley, 1995;
Halford, 2001), yet the existing comparative treatment
studies have failed to demonstrate any incremental efficacy
in various enhancements to TBCT. For example,
the addition of cognitive strategies created a treatment
that was as good as but not better than TBCT (e.g., Baucom
et al., 1998).

In addition to examining treatment outcome, couple
therapy research aimed at understanding how “treatment
successes” differ from “treatment failures.” Early
research on treatment response identified several factors
that appear to affect the success of TBCT. Compared
to couples who responded positively to TBCT,
couples who were regarded as “treatment failures” or
“difficult to treat” were generally older, more emotionally
disengaged, more polarized on basic issues, and
more severely distressed (Baucom & Hoffman, 1986;
Hahlweg, Schindler, Revenstorf, & Brengelmann,
1984; Jacobson, Follette, & Pagel, 1986; see Jacobson
& Christensen, 1998, for a review). Despite the fact that
these couples arguably had the greatest need for effective
treatment, each of these factors has an obvious deleterious
effect on their ability to collaborate, compromise,
and facilitate behavioral change. Older couples,
for example, have had more time than younger couples
to become “stuck” in their destructive behavioral pat



Couple Distress 705

terns; couples who are more polarized on fundamental
issues (e.g., how traditional they are with respect to
their gender roles) may never be able to reach a mutually
satisfying compromise; and extremely disengaged
couples may be unable to collaborate. Each of these
factors is likely to be associated with long-standing,
deeply entrenched, and seemingly “unchangeable” behavioral
patterns. Thus, it should come as no surprise
that the change-oriented techniques of TBCT are ineffective
for these couples.

aN “iNteGrative” theraPy

These findings served as the impetus for the development
of IBCT. Evidence on the limited success of
TBCT, particularly during follow-up, spurred an effort
to find a treatment with more enduring effects. Evidence
on TBCT’s failures spurred efforts to find treatments
that would be applicable even to these difficult
cases. Three developments in IBCT are directed toward
making treatment more enduring and more broadly applicable:
(1) a focus on the couple’s relational “themes”
rather than on specific target behaviors; (2) an emphasis
on “contingency-shaped” versus “rule-governed”
behavior; and (3) a focus on emotional acceptance.

The first aspect that is intended to make IBCT’s effectiveness
more broadly applicable and more enduring
is its focus on a couple’s relational “themes,” that is,
their long-standing patterns of disparate yet functionally
similar behaviors. Although this focus is similar to
TBCT in that it requires a comprehensive assessment of
the couple’s behavioral patterns, it differs from TBCT
in that multiple and complex behavioral interactions—
and not just specific behavioral targets—are considered
for therapeutic intervention.

A highlight of all behavioral approaches, and certainly
of TBCT, is an assessment process that transforms
broad, global complaints into specific, observable
behaviors. For example, a wife may come into
therapy complaining that her husband does not love her,
while her husband complains that his wife does not believe
in him. The TBCT therapist would assist the wife
in defining her general complaint into specific behavioral
targets for her husband, such as kissing and hugging
her more often. The therapist would also assist the
husband in defining his general complaint into specific
behavioral targets for his wife, such as complimenting
his achievements more often. However, IBCT suggests
that valuable information may be lost in the transfor


mation of a global complaint into a specific behavioral
target. By quickly narrowing down global complaints
into specific behavioral targets, TBCT inadvertently
limits the means by which partners may satisfy each
other. For example, if “feeling loved” is defined solely
in terms of physical affection and the husband has difficulty
in increasing and/or sustaining a higher level of
physical affection, then his wife’s desires to feel loved
will not be satisfied. Indeed, the husband could perform
a variety of other behaviors in addition to physical affection
that function to make his wife feel loved, such
as calling her during work to see how she is doing, listening
to her troubles with her family, or noticing that
the air in her car tires is dangerously low. She may not
be able to articulate many behaviors that might function
in ways to make her feel loved, either because she
is not aware of the desired behaviors or perhaps she
feels too vulnerable to express this need. Without more
elaborate exploration of and functional analysis of the
wife’s and husband’s thoughts, feelings, and behaviors,
such important opportunities for facilitating therapeutic
change may be lost. Furthermore, these very specific
behavioral definitions may have iatrogenic effects. In
the previous example, the wife may begin to define her
husband’s love more and more in terms of his limited
ability to be affectionate because this is how “love” was
operationalized in the context of the TBCT intervention.
If the husband is unable to make her feel “loved”
via physical affection alone, then her anger and sense
of loss could be heightened rather than ameliorated by
the treatment.

In contrast to TBCT’s emphasis on specific behavioral
targets, IBCT focuses on broader “themes” in the
couple’s history, that is, developing a shared understanding
of the many circumstances in which the wife
has felt loved and unloved, and in which the husband
has felt that his wife believed or did not believe in him.
Certainly this shared understanding includes some
specific behavioral examples illustrating what makes
the wife feel unloved and what would make her feel
loved, and what makes the husband feel that his wife
does not believe in him and what would make him feel
that she does. However, IBCT tries to keep open all
possibilities of behaviors that function to provide each
spouse with his/her desired emotional state. Thus, if
one partner has difficulty performing a particular behavior
(e.g., physical affection), he/she may still be able
to perform other, perhaps less obvious behaviors that
serve the same function (e.g., calling one’s wife from
work). By focusing on the broader emotional “theme”


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

(her history of feeling unloved, his history of feeling
not believed in), rather than attempting to operationalize
that theme completely into one or more specific
behaviors, IBCT maintains its functional roots, while
increasing the chances that each partner is able to meet
the other’s needs.

A second development that is designed to make
IBCT applicable to more couples and to create more
enduring change is based on the distinction between
“rule-governed” versus “contingency-shaped” behavior
(Skinner, 1966). In the former, an individual is
provided with a rule to guide his/her behavior and is
then reinforced when he/she follows the rule. Using
the previous example, a therapist could develop a list
of possible affectionate behaviors for the husband, such
as giving his wife a kiss when he leaves for work and
when he returns, then encourage the husband to implement
these behaviors. Upon implementing them, the
husband would be reinforced by both his wife and the
therapist. TBCT is largely based on employing “rulegoverned”
strategies to create positive change. Not only
is behavioral exchange a “rule-governed” strategy, but
even more importantly, the TBCT strategies of communication
training and problem-solving training are
also dominated by “rule-governed” strategies. In both,
the TBCT therapist teaches the partners certain rules
of good communication or good problem solving to use
during their discussions of problems. The guidelines to
use “I statements” and to “define the problem clearly
before proposing solutions” are examples.

With “contingency-shaped” behavior, naturally occurring
events in the situation serve to elicit and reinforce
the desired behavior. For example, the husband
would be affectionate with his wife when something
in their interaction triggered a desire for him to hug or
kiss her; the experience of closeness or physical contact
in the affectionate gesture itself, or his wife’s response
to his gesture, would serve to reinforce his affectionate
behavior. In contrast to TBCT, IBCT engages in
“contingency-shaped” behavior change. IBCT therapists
try to discover the events that function to trigger
desired experiences in each partner, then attempt to
orchestrate these events. For example, IBCT therapists
might hypothesize that a wife’s criticisms push her husband
away, but that her expressions of loneliness could
bring him toward her. The IBCT therapist listens to her
criticisms (e.g., that her husband ignores her), suggests
that she may be lonely (as a result of feeling “ignored”),
and, if she acknowledges such a feeling, encourages her
to talk about it. The therapeutic goal is that this “shift”

in her conversation (from criticism to self-disclosure)
might also “shift” her husband’s typically defensive
posture in listening to (or ignoring) his wife. Although
such a strategy of emphasizing “contingency-shaped”
behavior makes intervention more complicated and
less straightforward than a purely “rule-governed” approach,
IBCT suggests that a “contingency-shaped” approach
leads to more profound and enduring changes in
the couple’s relational patterns.

A third development in IBCT that is designed to
make it applicable to more couples and to create more
enduring change is its focus on emotional acceptance.
In TBCT, the approach to solving couple problems is to
create positive change. If the husband in the couple we
discussed could be more physically affectionate, and
the wife more verbally complimentary, then the couple’s
problems would presumably be solved. However,
if the husband is unable or unwilling to be more physically
affectionate, and if the wife is unable or unwilling
to be more complimentary, then the case will be a treatment
failure. If the husband and wife are able to make
these changes initially but are unable to maintain them
over the long run, then the case becomes a temporary
success followed by relapse.

In contrast to TBCT, the focus of IBCT is on emotional
acceptance, as well as change. Unlike the
change-oriented goal of TBCT, the primary goal of
IBCT is to promote each partner’s acceptance of the
other and their differences. Rather than trying to eliminate
a couple’s long-standing conflicts, a goal of IBCT
is to help couples develop a new understanding of their
apparently irreconcilable differences, and to use these
differences to promote intimacy, empathy, and compassion
for one another. With its focus on acceptance
rather than change, IBCT creates an environment for
couples to understand each other’s behavior before deciding
whether and how they might modify it. In the
earlier example, IBCT would explore the husband’s
difficulties in expressing affection and the wife’s difficulties
in giving him compliments—difficulties that
may have little to do with how much love they feel for
one another. Through this exploration of the individuals,
the partners may come to a greater understanding
of one another and experience more emotional closeness,
thus achieving the feelings of love they previously
pursued by requesting changes in each other’s behavior
(i.e., increased physical affection and verbal compliments).


While there is an expectation of “change” in IBCT,
this expectation differs significantly from that of TBCT


Couple Distress

in regard to which partner and what behavior is expected
to change. In TBCT, the “change” involves Partner
A changing the frequency or intensity of a specified behavior
in response to a complaint from Partner B. But
in IBCT, the therapeutic “change” also involves Partner
B modifying his/her emotional reaction to Partner A’s
“problem” behavior. When a difference between partners
is identified to be “irreconcilable,” the therapeutic
strategy of IBCT is to change the “complaining” partner’s
response to the “offending” partner’s behavior
rather than directing all therapeutic efforts at attempting
to change what has historically been an essentially
“unchangeable” behavior. Ideally, through exploration
of the thoughts and feelings underlying Partner A’s
behaviors, Partner B develops a new understanding of
his/her partner’s behavior, and the “complaint” is transformed
into a less destructive response. In turn, this
change in Partner B’s reaction often then has a salutary
impact on the frequency or intensity of Partner A’s behavior.
Using this approach, as opposed to an exclusively
change-focused approach, even the most polarized,
disengaged, and “unchangeable” couples have an opportunity
to increase their overall marital satisfaction.

It is important to note that in this context acceptance
is not confused with resignation. Whereas “resignation”
involves one partner grudgingly giving in and giving
up on the hope for a better relationship, “acceptance”
involves one partner “letting go” of the struggle to
change the other. Ideally, partners “let go” of the struggle
not grudgingly but as a result of a new appreciation
for their partner’s experience. By understanding their
couple distress in terms of their individual differences,
and by learning to accept each other’s differences, it is
hoped that the distress that has historically been generated
by their struggle to change one another will be reduced.
Thus, for IBCT to be effective in treating couple
distress, it is important for partners to understand the
factors that have contributed to the development and
maintenance of their distress.

the etioloGy of couPle Distress

According to IBCT, relationship distress develops as a
result of two basic influences—decreases in reinforcing
exchanges, such as through reinforcement erosion,
and the development of punishing exchanges, such as
through conflict development. “Reinforcement erosion”
refers to the phenomenon whereby behaviors that were
once reinforcing become less reinforcing with repeated

exposure. For example, demonstrations of physical affection
may generate powerful feelings of warmth and
pleasure for each partner during the early stages of their
relationship. But after partners have spent many years
together, the reinforcing properties of these affectionate
behaviors may disappear. For some couples, oncereinforcing
behaviors may become “taken for granted,”
whereas for others, once-reinforcing behaviors may actually
become aversive. In some cases, behaviors that
were once considered attractive, endearing, or pleasing
become the very same behaviors that generate or exacerbate
the couple’s distress.

As with the erosion of reinforcing behaviors, conflicts
may emerge as couples spend more and more
time together. In the early stages of a relationship, differences
in partners’ backgrounds, goals, and interests
may initially be downplayed or ignored. For example, if
Partner A prefers to save money and Partner B prefers
to spend money, this difference may not be apparent
during courtship, when spending money is a tacit expectation
of both partners. If this difference is detected
early on, perhaps it is be regarded as a “positive” difference,
in that each partner is encouraged to be a little
more like the other in his/her spending habits. Or perhaps
each partner expects the other to eventually compromise
or change to his/her way of doing things. But
over time, these incompatibilities and their relevance
to the relationship are inevitably exposed. Differences
that were once regarded as novel, interesting, or challenging
may ultimately be perceived as impediments
to one’s own goals and interests. Furthermore, in addition
to any extant incompatibilities, other unanticipated
incompatibilities may emerge with new life experiences
(e.g., having children, changing careers). Thus,
even those couples who had initially made a realistic
appraisal of their differences may discover unexpected
incompatibilities over time.

These incompatibilities, while challenging in their
own right, can be further exacerbated by each partner’s
emotional sensitivities or vulnerabilities. Returning to
our earlier example, if our “saver” comes from a background
of economic deprivation and has developed a
justifiable fear of being destitute, then the issues related
to saving may be motivated by powerful emotions,
which may impair his/her ability to understand
the partner’s desire to spend and enjoy what they have.
Incompatibilities can also be exacerbated by external
stressors. For example, if one member of our “saver–
spender” couple loses his/her job, that might put their
differences into even sharper relief. Efforts by the part



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

ners to deal with their struggle over money might paradoxically
make the problem worse. If the saver, for example,
engages in behaviors such as investigating and
interrogating the spender while the spender avoids and
hides his/her purchases from the other, their problem
might increase in intensity. One goal of IBCT is to help
the partners identify and reframe their incompatibilities
in a way that minimizes the destructive nature of these
incompatibilities, by encouraging a more effective way
of communicating about them, while maximizing their
level of intimacy and relationship satisfaction.

aPPlicatioN of iBct

The Formulation

The most important organizing principle of IBCT is the
“formulation,” a term used to describe how the therapist
conceptualizes and describes the couple’s problems.
The formulation is based on a functional analysis
of the couple’s problems and comprises three basic
components: a theme, a DEEP analysis, and a mutual
trap. The therapist refers back to the formulation and its
components throughout the treatment process, whenever
couples have conflicts during or between therapy
sessions.

One of the most basic goals of IBCT is for the partners
to adopt the formulation as part of their relationship
history. From that point forward, they can use the
formulation as a context for understanding their relationship
and their conflicts. The formulation also gives
couples a language to discuss their problems, and allows
partners to distance themselves from their problems.
It is important to remember, however, that the
formulation is a dynamic concept that may require alteration
and modification (or “reformulation”) throughout
treatment.

The Theme

The “theme,” the description of the couple’s primary
conflict, is usually described by a word or phrase that
captures the issues with which the couple struggles.
For example, a common theme of many distressed
couples is that of “closeness–independence,” in which
one partner seeks greater closeness, whereas the other
seeks greater independence. Other common themes
center around trust, sexuality, money, and parenting. A
couple may struggle about any particular topic and cer


tainly with many issues, but often their struggles center
around one or two broad themes.

The DEEP Analysis

In IBCT, therapists conduct a DEEP analysis of the
couple’s theme or issue, an acronym that outlines the
four major factors contributing to a couple’s problems:
Differences, Emotional sensitivities, External circumstances,
and Patterns of interaction. IBCT suggests
that partners have their primary conflict, or theme,
because of Differences between them and because of
each partner’s Emotional sensitivities or vulnerabilities
linked to those differences, both of which can be exacerbated
by External circumstances. For example, in
the theme of closeness–independence, Partner A may
want more closeness and connection, and Partner B
may want more independence simply because they are
different people with different genes and different social
learning histories. Perhaps this difference was not
readily apparent early on because both partners were
enchanted by their developing relationship. Or perhaps
there really was little difference in their desires for
closeness and independence until they had children, or
until one partner’s career took off. Whatever the basis
for the difference, it creates problems for the couple
as Differences are perceived as deficiencies. For example,
the closeness seeker may see the other as being
“afraid of intimacy”; the independence seeker may see
the other as being “neurotically dependent.” Partners
find that they cannot both get their needs fully satisfied.
Compromise may be relatively easy unless Emotional
sensitivities or vulnerabilities are also present, which
provide emotional fuel for the differences. If Partner A
wants greater closeness than Partner B and is emotionally
vulnerable to easily feeling abandoned, then negotiations
about closeness may be threatening to Partner

A. Similarly, if Partner B wants greater independence
and is emotionally vulnerable to easily feeling controlled
and restrained, then negotiations about closeness
may be threatening for Partner B as well. External
circumstances may conspire to make the problem even
greater. If the couple lives in an area where Partner
A, who wants more closeness, is far away from other
sources of social support, and where Partner B, who
wants more independence, is close to leisure activities
in which he/she wants to engage independently, the
struggle between them will be even greater. The combination
of their differences (D), their emotional sensitivities
(E), and the external circumstances (E) may

Couple Distress 709

lead the two to engage in a destructive pattern (P) of
interaction that can polarize them even further.

The “pattern of interaction” refers to the often frustrating
and destructive communication that ensues
when a distressed couple enters into a theme-related
conflict. A natural response for partners confronted
with their differences is for each partner to try to
change the other. In many cases these efforts at changing
each other may be successful. However, many times
the result may be that their differences are exacerbated
and the two partners become polarized in their conflicting
positions. When partners have become polarized
on an issue, further attempts to change each other
only increase the conflict and perpetuate their polarized
stance. For example, in a couple whose theme
is closeness–independence, the polarization process
is likely to occur when the independence seeker “retreats”
from attempts by the closeness seeker to gain
more intimacy, which then creates more “intrusive” efforts
by the closeness seeker. The more the one partner
“advances,” the more the other partner “retreats”; the
more that partner “retreats,” the more the other partner
“advances.” Furthermore, being deprived of a desired
goal can make that goal seem even more important:
Partners can become desperate, escalating their futile
efforts, and their differences become magnified. It can
begin to look like the closeness seeker has no needs
for independence and the independence seeker has no
needs for closeness. Through their interaction, they
have become more different than they were originally.

The Mutual Trap

The mutual trap, which describes the outcome of the
polarization process, is called a “trap” because it typically
leaves the partners feeling “stuck” or “trapped”
in their conflict. Partners in a mutual trap feel that they
have done everything they can to change the other, and
nothing seems to work. But they are reluctant to give
up their efforts to change each other because this would
mean resigning themselves to a dissatisfying relationship.
As a result, they become more entrenched in their
respective positions.

The experience of partners who are so polarized is
one of helplessness and futility, and this experience
is rarely discussed openly between them. As a result,
each partner may be unaware that the other also feels
trapped. Making each partner aware of the other’s
sense of entrapment is an important part of acceptance
work, and encouraging each partner to experience the

other’s sense of “stuckness” can sometimes be the first
step toward promoting empathy and intimacy between
partners.

Stages of Therapy

In IBCT there is a clear distinction between the assessment
phase and the treatment itself. The assessment
phase comprises at least one conjoint session with the
couple, followed by individual sessions with each partner.
It is followed by a feedback session, during which
the therapist describes his/her formulation of the partners
and their problems as well as the therapist’s plan
for their treatment. The feedback session is followed
by the treatment sessions, the exact number of which
should be determined on a case-by-case basis depending
on each couple’s treatment needs. However, the protocol
used in a recent clinical trial of IBCT for seriously
and chronically distressed couples (discussed below)
was a maximum of 26 sessions, including both the assessment
and treatment phases.

The Use of Objective Measures

Objective assessment instruments (see Table 18.1) may
be useful for both initial assessment and for monitoring
a couple’s progress at various points throughout
treatment. Although such objective measures are not
necessary to conduct IBCT, they may provide additional
information about areas of disagreement that
have not been covered in the session, or they may provide
objective data about a couple’s levels of distress
and satisfaction. Additionally, research has shown
that sharing and actively discussing a couple’s progress
(or lack thereof) in therapy can improve therapy
outcomes (e.g., Halford et al., 2012). For example, a
couple’s relationship satisfaction can be assessed using
the Couples Satisfaction Index (Funk & Rogge, 2007);
partners’ commitment to the relationship and steps
taken toward separation or divorce can be assessed
using the Marital Status Inventory (Crane & Mead,
1980; Weiss & Cerreto, 1980); partner’s areas of conflict
and troubling behaviors can be assessed with the
Problem Areas Questionnaire (Heavey, Christensen,
& Malamuth, 1995) and the Frequency and Acceptability
of Partner Behavior Inventory (Christensen &
Jacobson, 1997; Doss & Christensen, 2006), and the
couple’s level of physical violence, with the Revised
Conflict Tactics Scales (CTS2; Straus, Hamby, Boney-
McCoy, & Sugarman, 1996).


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

table 18.1. Useful assessment
and screening instruments

••
Couples Satisfaction Index (Funk & Rogge, 2007):
Measures relationship distress. (To obtain this freely
available measure, go to www.courses.rochester.edu/
surveys/funk.)

••
Couple Questionnaire (Christensen, 2009): Brief
screening assessment for couple satisfaction, intimate
partner violence, and commitment, as well as open-ended
descriptions of typical positive and negative interactions.
(To obtain this freely available measure, go to http://ibct.
psych.ucla.edu.)

••
Frequency and Acceptability of Partner Behavior
Inventory (Christensen & Jacobson, 1997; Doss &
Christensen, 2006): Assesses frequency and acceptability
of behavior for 24 categories of spouse behavior. (To
obtain this freely available measure, go to http://ibct.
psych.ucla.edu.)

••
Marital Status Inventory (Crane & Mead, 1980; Weiss &
Cerreto, 1980): Assesses commitment to the relationship
and steps taken toward separation or divorce. (To obtain
this measure, contact Robert L. Weiss, PhD, Oregon
Marital Studies Program, Department of Psychology,
University of Oregon, Eugene, OR 97403-1227; darkwing.
uoregon.edu/~rlweiss/msi.htm.)

••
Problem Areas Questionnaire (Heavey, Christensen, &
Malamuth, 1995): Assesses common problem areas or
areas of disagreement in couples. (To obtain this freely
available measure, go to http://ibct.psych.ucla.edu.)

••
Revised Conflict Tactics Scales (Straus, Hamby, Boney-
McCoy, & Sugarman, 1996): Assesses domestic violence.
(To obtain this measure, contact Multi-Health Systems,

P.O. Box 950, North Tonawanda, NY 14120; www.mhs.
com.)
••
Weekly Questionnaire (Christensen, 2010): Assesses
significant positive and negative events since the
last session and includes a brief form of the Couples
Satisfaction Index. (To obtain this freely available
measure, go to http://ibct.psych.ucla.edu.)

We recommend that, at a minimum, clinicians administer
measures that assess relationship satisfaction,
intimate partner violence, commitment, and problem
areas. The measure of relationship satisfaction serves
as a measure of outcome and should be repeated periodically.
Measures of violence, commitment, and problem
areas are needed because partners may indicate
concerns on a questionnaire that they do not bring up
spontaneously. For example, couples often do not mention
topics such as violence or sexual problems during
therapy, even when these are present. Christensen

(2010) has developed a brief Couple Questionnaire
(Christensen, 2010) that clinicians can use to assess
baseline satisfaction, violence, and commitment. Typically,
partners are given questionnaires at their first
session to complete then return at their individual sessions.
In addition to being part of the assessment phase,
the questionnaires can be administered later in treatment,
at the end of treatment, and at follow-up to assess
changes from partners’ presenting baseline levels of
distress and satisfaction.

Assessment of Domestic Violence

Objective measures are particularly useful in assessing
a couple’s history of physical violence. Assessing
for domestic violence is a critical part of every couple’s
intake—not only to determine whether the personal
safety of either partner is in imminent danger but also
because couple therapy may actually be contraindicated
for some violent couples (Jacobson & Gottman,
1998; Simpson, Doss, Wheeler, & Christensen, 2007).
Couple therapy requires that both partners take some
degree of responsibility for their problems, but such
a perspective is inappropriate when a couple’s problems
include domestic violence because perpetrators
of violence must assume sole responsibility for their
behavior. Furthermore, because therapy sessions can
elicit strong emotions, the couple therapy itself may
trigger postsession violence in some couples. In such
cases, treatment that focuses on the violent behavior of
the perpetrator—and not the interactive distress of the
couple—is indicated. The CTS2 (Straus et al., 1996)
and the Couple Questionnaire (Christensen, 2010) are
useful screening tools for evaluating the frequency and
severity of a couple’s physical aggression, and to determine
whether couple therapy is contraindicated. Finally,
a couple’s history of violence should be directly
addressed during the assessment phase, primarily during
the individual sessions, when each partner can talk
freely without fearing consequences from the other.

Assessment

The assessment phase typically comprises one joint
session with the partners (Session 1), followed by individual
sessions with each partner (Sessions 2 and 3).
The primary goal of the assessment phase is for the
therapist to evaluate whether the couple is appropriate
for therapy and, if so, to develop the formulation.
However, the therapist should also use the assessment


Couple Distress

period to orient the couple to the therapy process. In
addition, although the IBCT therapist is not actively intervening
during the assessment phase, it is possible for
the therapist to have a therapeutic impact in these first
few sessions.

Orientation (Session 1)

After greetings and introductions, the couple is oriented
to the upcoming therapy process. This orientation
likely includes reviewing and signing an informed consent
form, which explains billing procedures, defines
confidentiality and its exclusions, and outlines the possible
risks and benefits of participating in IBCT.

In addition to the general information provided during
informed consent, the couple is also oriented to the
specific process of IBCT. Therapists should explain
the difference between the assessment and treatment
phases of therapy, and ask the couple whether this is
different from the couple’s expectations in coming to
therapy. Therapists should be prepared for couples’ disappointment
when they learn that therapy is not going
to begin immediately. Therapists may need to explain
to couples why an assessment period is needed before
therapists can provide any useful help to them.

Also during the first session, couples are introduced
to their manual, Reconcilable Differences (Christensen,
Doss, & Jacobson, 2014; Christensen & Jacobson,
2000). Couples are asked to complete Part I of this
book prior to the feedback session. Ideally, this reading
helps couples begin to conceptualize their problems in
a way that is similar to how their therapist will frame
them during the feedback session.

Therapists should be aware that at least one partner,
if not both, may likely be ambivalent about participating
in therapy. Such ambivalence should be normalized
and validated, and the therapist should explain to partners
that the assessment period is also their opportunity
to get to know the therapist and to determine whether
this treatment is going to be a “good match” for them.

Problem Areas (Sessions 1, 2, and 3)

After the couple has been oriented to the therapy process,
the therapist begins the evaluation by reviewing
the couple’s presenting problem(s). Much of this information
can be gathered from objective measures and
also during each partner’s individual session, so this
discussion during Session 1 should not consume the
entire session. However, it is important during the first

session that the partners feel heard and validated, and
that their problems and distress are clearly understood
by the therapist.

From the information gathered from objective measures
and during the evaluation sessions, therapists
should be able to describe the partners’ problem areas
and develop their formulation. The following six questions
provide a guideline for this assessment, and each
should be answered by the end of the assessment period.


1. How distressed is the couple?
2. How committed is this couple to the relationship?
3. What issues divide this couple?
4. Why are these issues a problem for them (the
DEEP analysis)?
5. What strengths keep this couple together?
6. What can treatment do to help them?
The first three questions can be addressed with objective
questionnaires. However, even questions that
can be addressed with questionnaires should usually be
explored in further detail in interviews. For example,
the individual sessions may be particularly useful for
assessing whether distress is so great that separation is
imminent, for assessing each partner’s level of commitment
to the relationship and the possible presence of
affairs, and for assessing the couple’s history of physical
violence.

The assessment of problem areas should also include
a determination of the couple’s “collaborative
set” (Jacobson & Margolin, 1979). This term refers to
the couple’s joint perspective that they share responsibility
for the problems in their relationship, and that
both will have to change if the relationship is to change.
The strength of this set determines whether change-
or acceptance-oriented interventions are indicated.
The stronger the couple’s collaborative set, the more
successful initial change-oriented interventions are
likely to be. But partners who lack this collaborative
set—who enter therapy believing they are the innocent
victim of the other’s behavior—first need to focus on
acceptance work.

The fourth question—why the partners’ issues are a
problem for them—requires a functional analysis along
the lines of the DEEP analysis described earlier. It is
usually possible to obtain initial information about all
four aspects of the DEEP analysis in the joint interview,
but more nuanced understandings about these factors,


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

particularly Emotional sensitivities and Patterns of
interaction, are typically best left to the individual interviews.
Because adults are often unaware of the contingencies
controlling their behavior, or may be embarrassed
to admit those contingencies even if they know
them, a functional analysis of emotions and patterns
involves much more than a simple, straightforward inquiry.
The therapist must be particularly sensitive to
the emotional reactions of partners, which may indicate
important reinforcers and punishers. For example,
let us assume that our partners with the closeness–
independence theme argue frequently about the amount
of time they spend together. However, that specific
issue may not be where the most powerful contingencies
are found. Perhaps the wife’s history includes having
been abandoned by her family members at a time
when she was in particular need of their support and
comfort. Her fear in her marital relationship is that her
husband may do likewise. For her, the time they spend
together is simply a poor proxy for her concerns that
he may not always be there when she needs him. If she
felt confident of that, then she could tolerate much less
time together. For her husband’s part, let us assume that
his social learning history has led him to be especially
sensitive to being controlled or restricted by another
person. Therefore, he battles his wife over their time
together not so much because he does not want the time
together, but because he feels controlled by her and
naturally resists. In such a situation, the IBCT therapist
needs to move the discussion away from the repetitive
arguments about time spent together, toward the more
important contingencies that affect each spouse’s behaviors,
for example, the emotional sensitivities that
each partner brings to the relationship and the pattern
of interaction that triggers their emotional responses.

Answers to the fifth question, about the couple’s
strengths, also come from the joint and individual interviews.
It is helpful for couples to keep their strengths
in mind even as they focus on their difficulties. Sometimes
there is an interesting relation between a couple’s
strengths and its problems, in that the latter may involve
some variation of the former. For example, let
us assume that two partners were initially attracted to
each other in part because of their different approaches
to life. He is much more spontaneous; she is more deliberate
and planful. Those differences may be attractive
and helpful at times, but they can also be a source
of irritation and conflict.

In answering the final question, what treatment can
do to help, the therapist must first be sure the couple is

appropriate for couple therapy. If the couple has serious
violence or a substance dependence problem, for example,
then couple therapy as usual will not be the recommendation.
Treatment directed at those particular
problems will be necessary. If the couple is appropriate
for couple therapy, the therapist will need to outline the
focus of the therapy and what it comprises.

The Couple’s History (Session 1)

After the partners have been oriented to therapy and
their problem areas have been assessed, the therapist
then takes the history of the couple’s relationship. The
therapist’s obvious objective for taking this history is
to gain a good understanding of the partners’ attachment
to one another. Often the distress has escalated to
the degree that it has overshadowed the reasons the two
became a couple in the first place. In addition, this history
can provide some immediate therapeutic benefit to
the couple. Generally, when partners discuss the earlier
(and usually happier) stages of their relationship, their
affect is likely to become more positive. They have
been focused for so long on the negative aspects of their
relationship that they probably have not thought about
their early romance, courtship, and attraction to each
other for a very long time. In this way, having couples
describe the evolution of their relationship can be therapeutic
in and of itself. Although some couples may be
in too much pain to discuss their history without blaming
and accusatory remarks (in which case the therapist
should abandon the following guidelines and instead
use the session to validate their pain), most couples
enjoy reminiscing about their happier times.

The following series of questions provides the therapist
with useful information about the couple’s history
and allow the partners an opportunity to reflect on the
reasons they fell in love in the first place:

••
“How did you get together?”

••
“What was your courtship like?”

••
“What attracted each of you to the other?”

••
“What was your relationship like before your

problems began?”

••
“How is your relationship different now on days

when you are getting along?”

••
“How would the relationship be different if your

current problems no longer existed?

These and other, related questions may also reveal
useful information about each partner, such as his/her


Couple Distress

hopes and dreams for the future. Information about the
couple’s history is useful for the therapist in developing
the couple’s formulation, which is presented to the
partners during their feedback session.

Individual History (Sessions 2 and 3)

Each partner’s individual history can often provide useful
information for the formulation, in that it provides
a context for each partner’s behavior and illuminates
possible emotional vulnerabilities in each. For example,
perhaps the husband experienced his mother as
very demanding of him and learned to cope with this
through withdrawal, so the withdrawal continues in response
to his wife’s demands. Or perhaps the wife had
two previous boyfriends who cheated on her, so she is
sensitive to any indication of betrayal by her husband.

The following questions may be useful in guiding a
discussion of each partner’s individual history:

••
“What was your parents’ marriage like?”
••
“What was your relationship with your father
like?”
••
“What was your relationship with your mother
like?”
••
“What were your relationships with your siblings
like?”
••
“What were your relationships with previous important
romantic partners like?”

Each of these questions could potentially take an
inordinate amount of time. The IBCT therapist tries
to elicit features of these early relationships that are
similar to or may inform the current relationship. For
example, if the therapist were aware of a difference between
husband and wife in terms of how comfortable
they were with conflict, he/she would guide the husband
away from details about where his family lived
and focus on the expression of conflict that occurred
in his family.

Feedback

From the information gathered during the assessment
sessions and from the questionnaires, the therapist
develops the couple’s formulation, which is discussed
with the couple in the feedback session (usually Session
4). The feedback session can follow the outline
of the six questions above used to assess the couple’s
problem areas. It is important that the feedback session

be a dialogue and not a lecture from the therapist—
with the therapist continually getting feedback from
the couple about the formulation being presented. The
partners are the experts on their relationship and should
be treated as such.

The feedback session is also used to describe the
proposed treatment plan for the couples, based on the
therapist’s formulation. The therapist describes for the
couple the goals for treatment and the procedures for
accomplishing these goals. The goals for therapy are to
create an in-session environment in which the couple’s
problems can be resolved through some combination
of acceptance and change techniques. In relation to the
DEEP analysis, IBCT promotes emotional acceptance
for the partners’ Differences and Emotional Sensitivities,
in that these factors are likely to change only slowly,
if at all. External stressors can sometimes be changed
but often they too require acceptance. It is the Pattern
of interaction that can be changed and is the focus of
change efforts in IBCT. The procedures for meeting
these goals of acceptance and change are usually (1) insession
discussions of incidents and issues related to the
formulation, and (2) homework to be conducted outside
the session to further the in-session work. During the
feedback session, the therapist introduces the couple
to the Weekly Questionnaire (Christensen, 2010), goes
over it, and asks that each partner to complete it prior
to each session. It provides information on the couple’s
experiences since the last session and serves as the
basis for treatment sessions. This questionnaire includes
the four-item version of the Couples Satisfaction
Index (Funk & Rogge, 2007), so therapists can monitor
the couple’s relationship satisfaction on a weekly
basis. The questionnaire asks whether there have been
any major changes in the couple’s life, and whether any
incidents of violence, or any problematic incidents of
substance/drug use have occurred. Then the questionnaire
asks each partner to describe the most positive or
meaningful interaction they had in the last week, the
most difficult or negative interaction in the last week,
and whether they anticipate any upcoming, challenging
events. Finally, the partners rank what they think would
be most important to discuss: the positive, negative, or
upcoming event, or some issue not tied to a particular
incident (e.g., saving money). Finally there is a place
for the couple’s homework assignment, if there is any.
These positive, negative, and challenging upcoming
events, as well as the general issues the partners indicate
on their questionnaires, provide the usual content
for the therapy sessions.


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers

The purpose of the feedback session is to orient
partners to the goals of change and acceptance through
open communication and finding new ways of looking
at their problems. In addition, the feedback session
gives partners some idea of what they can expect from
therapy, and it elicits their willingness to participate.
Finally, the feedback session may be used to implement
some interventions. The first intervention is the therapist’s
description of the couple’s strengths. From this
discussion, partners may be able to see some solutions
to their problems. The therapist can begin assigning
relevant chapters from Part II of Reconcilable Differences
(Christensen & Jacobson, 2000; Christensen
et al., 2014), which specifically addresses the topic of
acceptance. After the formulation and treatment plan
have been described and the partners have agreed to
proceed with therapy, the remaining sessions are devoted
to building acceptance between partners and promoting
change in each partner.

Treatment

IBCT Techniques for Building
Emotional Acceptance

Typically, treatment begins with a focus on promoting
acceptance. The exception is when partners are able to
collaborate with one another (“the collaborative set”)
and both want to make specific changes in their relationship.
In that case, the therapist begins with change
strategies.

In the context of acceptance work, the actual content
of each session is determined by the partners and
what they “bring in” every week. The therapist looks
for emotionally salient material that is relevant to the
formulation. Recent negative or positive events listed
on the Weekly Questionnaire and related to the formulation
are often the topics of discussion. For example,
a couple with a closeness–independence theme might
discuss a difficult incident in which the independence
seeker wanted to spend the night out with friends and
the closeness seeker protested. Discussions also may be
centered around upcoming events listed on the Weekly
Questionnaire, such as a weekend trip for the couple, in
which the independence seeker fears that there will not
be space for him/her to be alone. Broad issues related
to the formulation and listed on the questionnaire are
also appropriate for discussion, such as whether separate
weekend trips apart with friends are acceptable for
the couple.

Sometimes salient events relevant to the formulation
occur between partners during the session, and
the therapist should generally make these the top priority
because the emotions involving events during
sessions tend to be more accessible than events that
occur between sessions. For example, when the independence
seeker turns away as the closeness seeker
gets emotionally agitated during a discussion, the IBCT
therapist focuses on this “in the moment” example of
their closeness–independence theme and explores
and frames it using the DEEP analysis. The therapist
might also structure interactions during the session that
mimic their difficulties or create possibilities for a different
kind of interaction. For example, the therapist
may have the couple replay a recent, difficult interaction
to learn from it, or encourage the couple to attempt
a different and more positive interaction around the
topic. All of these topics are useful means for implementing
the three acceptance-building strategies of
empathic joining, unified detachment from the problem,
and tolerance building. Because they can create
greater closeness, as well as greater acceptance, the
first two strategies are more commonly employed than
the last one.

eMPATHiC Joining

“Empathic joining” refers to the process by which partners
cease to blame one another for their emotional
suffering and instead develop empathy for each other’s
experience. To foster empathic joining, the IBCT therapist
reformulates the couple’s problem as a result of
common differences rather than deficiencies in either
partner, and highlights the emotional sensitivities that
make these differences especially difficult to handle.
Partners’ behaviors are described in terms of their differences
from one another, and their responses to these
differences are validated as normal and understandable,
especially given the emotional sensitivities that
each may possess.

In making this reformulation of each partner’s behavior,
it is important that the IBCT therapist emphasize
the pain that each partner is experiencing rather
than the pain each has delivered. One strategy for
building empathy between partners is through the
use of “soft disclosures.” Often partners express their
emotional pain by using “hard” disclosures of feelings
such as anger or disgust. Although hard disclosures are
easier to make because they do not reveal vulnerability,
they are more difficult for the other partner to hear be


