
Dissociative disorders

Dissociative disorders are a range of conditions that can cause physical and psychological problems.

Some dissociative disorders are very shortlived, perhaps following a traumatic life event, and resolve on their own over a matter of weeks or months. Others can last much longer.
Symptoms of a dissociative disorder

Symptoms of dissociative disorder can vary but may include:

    feeling disconnected from yourself and the world around you
    forgetting about certain time periods, events and personal information
    feeling uncertain about who you are
    having multiple distinct identities
    feeling little or no physical pain

Dissociation is a way the mind copes with too much stress.

Periods of dissociation can last for a relatively short time (hours or days) or for much longer (weeks or months).

It can sometimes last for years, but usually if a person has other dissociative disorders.

Many people with a dissociative disorder have had a traumatic event during childhood.

They may dissociate and avoid dealing with it as a way of coping with it.
Types of dissociative disorder

There are several different types of dissociative disorder.

The 3 main types are:

    depersonalisation-derealisation disorder
    dissociative amnesia
    dissociative identity disorder

Depersonalisation-derealisation disorder

Depersonalisation is where you have the feeling of being outside yourself and observing your actions, feelings or thoughts from a distance.

Derealisation is where you feel the world around is unreal. People and things around you may seem "lifeless" or "foggy".

You can have depersonalisation or derealisation, or both together. It may last only a few moments or come and go over many years.
Dissociative amnesia

Someone with dissociative amnesia will have periods where they cannot remember information about themselves or events in their past life.

They may also forget a learned talent or skill.

These gaps in memory are much more severe than normal forgetfulness and are not the result of another medical condition.

Some people with dissociative amnesia find themselves in a strange place without knowing how they got there.

They may have travelled there on purpose, or wandered in a confused state.

These blank episodes may last minutes, hours or days. In rare cases, they can last months or years.
Dissociative identity disorder

Dissociative identity disorder (DID) used to be called multiple personality disorder.

Someone diagnosed with DID may feel uncertain about their identity and who they are.

They may feel the presence of other identities, each with their own names, voices, personal histories and mannerisms.

The main symptoms of DID are:

    memory gaps about everyday events and personal information
    having several distinct identities

Associated conditions

Someone with a dissociative disorder may also have other mental health conditions, such as:

    medically unexplained symptoms
    post-traumatic stress disorder
    depression
    mood swings
    anxiety and panic attacks
    suicidal tendencies or self-harm
    phobias
    an eating disorder
    obsessive compulsive disorder

They may also have problems sleeping (insomnia).
Causes of dissociative disorder

The causes of dissociative disorders are not well understood.

They may be related to a previous traumatic experience, or a tendency to develop more physical than psychological symptoms when stressed or distressed.

Someone with a dissociative disorder may have experienced physical, sexual or emotional abuse during childhood.

Some people dissociate after experiencing war, kidnapping or even an invasive medical procedure.

Switching off from reality is a normal defence mechanism that helps the person cope during a traumatic time.

It's a form of denial, as if "this is not happening to me".

It becomes a problem when the environment is no longer traumatic but the person still acts and lives as if it is, and has not dealt with or processed the event.
