
Psychotic depression

Some people who have severe clinical depression will also experience hallucinations and delusional thinking, the symptoms of psychosis.

Depression with psychosis is known as psychotic depression.
Symptoms of severe depression

Someone with severe clinical depression feels sad and hopeless for most of the day, practically every day, and has no interest in anything. Getting through the day feels almost impossible.

Other typical symptoms of severe depression are:

    fatigue (exhaustion)
    loss of pleasure in things
    disturbed sleep
    changes in appetite
    feeling worthless and guilty
    being unable to concentrate or being indecisive
    thoughts of death or suicide

Read more about the psychological, physical and social symptoms of clinical depression
Symptoms of psychosis

Having moments of psychosis (psychotic episodes) means experiencing:

    delusions – thoughts or beliefs that are unlikely to be true
    hallucinations – hearing and, in some cases, feeling, smelling, seeing or tasting things that are not there; hearing voices is a common hallucination

The delusions and hallucinations almost always reflect the person's deeply depressed mood – for example, they may become convinced they're to blame for something, or that they've committed a crime.

"Psychomotor agitation" is also common. This means not being able to relax or sit still, and constantly fidgeting.

At the other extreme, a person with psychotic depression may have "psychomotor retardation", where both their thoughts and physical movements slow down.

People with psychotic depression have an increased risk of thinking about suicide.
What causes psychotic depression?

The cause of psychotic depression is not fully understood. It's known that there's no single cause of depression and it has many different triggers.

For some, stressful life events such as bereavement, divorce, serious illness or financial worries can be the cause.

Genes probably play a part, as severe depression can run in families, although it's not known why some people also develop psychosis.

Many people with psychotic depression will have experienced adversity in childhood, such as a traumatic event.

Read more about the causes of clinical depression
Treating psychotic depression

Treatment for psychotic depression involves:

    medicine – a combination of antipsychotics and antidepressants can help relieve the symptoms of psychosis
    psychological therapies – the 1-to-1 talking therapy cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) has proved effective in helping some people with psychosis
    social support – support with social needs, such as education, employment or accommodation

The person may need to stay in hospital for a short period of time while they're receiving treatment.

Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) may sometimes be recommended if the person has severe depression and other treatments, including antidepressants, have not worked.

Treatment is usually effective, but follow-up appointments so that the person can be closely monitored are usually required.
