
Selective mutism

Selective mutism is a severe anxiety disorder where a person is unable to speak in certain social situations, such as with classmates at school or to relatives they do not see very often.

It usually starts during childhood and, if left untreated, can persist into adulthood.

A child or adult with selective mutism does not refuse or choose not to speak at certain times, they're literally unable to speak. 

The expectation to talk to certain people triggers a freeze response with feelings of panic, like a bad case of stage fright, and talking is impossible.

In time, the person will learn to anticipate the situations that provoke this distressing reaction and do all they can to avoid them.

However, people with selective mutism are able to speak freely to certain people, such as close family and friends, when nobody else is around to trigger the freeze response. 

Selective mutism affects about 1 in 140 young children. It's more common in girls and children who are learning a second language, such as those who've recently migrated from their country of birth.
Signs of selective mutism

Selective mutism usually starts in early childhood, between age 2 and 4. It's often first noticed when the child starts to interact with people outside their family, such as when they begin nursery or school.

The main warning sign is the marked contrast in the child's ability to engage with different people, characterised by a sudden stillness and frozen facial expression when they're expected to talk to someone who's outside their comfort zone.

They may avoid eye contact and appear:

    nervous, uneasy or socially awkward
    rude, disinterested or sulky
    clingy
    shy and withdrawn
    stiff, tense or poorly co-ordinated
    stubborn or aggressive, having temper tantrums when they get home from school, or getting angry when questioned by parents

More confident children with selective mutism can use gestures to communicate – for example, they may nod for "yes" or shake their head for "no".

But more severely affected children tend to avoid any form of communication – spoken, written or gestured.

Some children may manage to respond with a few words, or they may speak in an altered voice, such as a whisper.
What causes selective mutism 

Experts regard selective mutism as a fear (phobia) of talking to certain people. The cause is not always clear, but it's known to be associated with anxiety.

The child will usually have a tendency to anxiety and have difficulty taking everyday events in their stride.

Find out more about anxiety in children.

Many children become too distressed to speak when separated from their parents and transfer this anxiety to the adults who try to settle them.

If they have a speech and language disorder or hearing problem, it can make speaking even more stressful.

Some children have trouble processing sensory information such as loud noise and jostling from crowds – a condition known as sensory integration dysfunction.

This can make them "shut down" and be unable to speak when overwhelmed in a busy environment. Again, their anxiety can transfer to other people in that environment.

There's no evidence to suggest that children with selective mutism are more likely to have experienced abuse, neglect or trauma than any other child.

When mutism occurs as a symptom of post-traumatic stress, it follows a very different pattern and the child suddenly stops talking in environments where they previously had no difficulty.

However, this type of speech withdrawal may lead to selective mutism if the triggers are not addressed and the child develops a more general anxiety about communication.

Another misconception is that a child with selective mutism is controlling or manipulative, or has autism. There's no relationship between selective mutism and autism, although a child may have both.
Diagnosing selective mutism

Left untreated, selective mutism can lead to isolation, low self-esteem and social anxiety disorder. It can continue into adolescence and adulthood if not managed.
Diagnosis in children

A child can successfully overcome selective mutism if it's diagnosed at an early age and appropriately managed. 

It's important for selective mutism to be recognised early by families and schools so they can work together to reduce a child's anxiety. Staff in early years settings and schools may receive training so they're able to provide appropriate support.

If you suspect your child has selective mutism and help is not available, or there are additional concerns – for example, the child struggles to understand instructions or follow routines – seek a formal diagnosis from a qualified speech and language therapist.

You can contact a speech and language therapy clinic directly or speak to a health visitor or GP, who can refer you. Do not accept the opinion that your child will grow out of it or they are "just shy".

Your GP or local integrated care board (ICB) should be able to give you the telephone number of your nearest NHS speech and language therapy service.

Older children may also need to see a mental health professional or school educational psychologist. 

The clinician may initially want to talk to you without your child present, so you can speak freely about any anxieties you have about your child's development or behaviour.

They'll want to find out whether there's a history of anxiety disorders in the family, and whether anything is causing distress, such as a disrupted routine or difficulty learning a second language. They'll also look at behavioural characteristics and take a full medical history.

A person with selective mutism may not be able to speak during their assessment, but the clinician should be prepared for this and be willing to find another way to communicate.

For example, they may encourage a child with selective mutism to communicate through their parents, or suggest that older children or adults write down their responses or use a computer.
Diagnosis in adults

It's possible for adults to overcome selective mutism, although they may continue to experience the psychological and practical effects of spending years without social interaction or not being able to reach their academic or occupational potential.

Adults will ideally be seen by a mental health professional with access to support from a speech and language therapist or another knowledgeable professional.
Diagnosis guidelines

Selective mutism is diagnosed according to specific guidelines. These include observations about the person concerned as outlined:

    they do not speak in specific situations, such as during school lessons or when they can be overheard in public
    they can speak normally in situations where they feel comfortable, such as when they're alone with parents at home, or in their empty classroom or bedroom
    their inability to speak to certain people has lasted for at least 1 month (2 months in a new setting)
    their inability to speak interferes with their ability to function in that setting
    their inability to speak is not better explained by another behavioural, mental or communication disorder

Associated difficulties

A child with selective mutism will often have other fears and social anxieties, and they may also have additional speech and language difficulties.

They're often wary of doing anything that draws attention to them because they think that by doing so, people will expect them to talk.

For example, a child may not do their best in class after seeing other children being asked to read out good work, or they may be afraid to change their routine in case this provokes comments or questions. Many have a general fear of making mistakes.

Accidents and urinary infections may result from being unable to ask to use the toilet and holding on for hours at a time. School-aged children may avoid eating and drinking throughout the day so they do not need to excuse themselves.

Children may have difficulty with homework assignments or certain topics because they're unable to ask questions in class.

Teenagers may not develop independence because they're afraid to leave the house unaccompanied. And adults may lack qualifications because they're unable to participate in college life or subsequent interviews.
