
Claustrophobia

Claustrophobia is the irrational fear of confined spaces.

People affected by claustrophobia will often go out of their way to avoid confined spaces, such as lifts, tunnels, tube trains and public toilets. But avoiding these places may reinforce the fear.

Some people with claustrophobia experience mild anxiety when in a confined space, while others have severe anxiety or a panic attack.

The most common experience is a feeling or fear of losing control.

It's estimated around 10% of the UK population are affected by claustrophobia during their lifetime.
Triggers of claustrophobia

Many different situations or feelings can trigger claustrophobia. Even thinking about certain situations without exposure to them could be a trigger.

Common triggers of claustrophobia include:

    lifts
    tunnels
    tube trains
    revolving doors
    public toilets
    cars with central locking
    car washes
    shop changing rooms
    hotel rooms with sealed windows
    planes

If you have felt anxious in the last 6 months about being in a confined space or crowded place, or you have avoided these situations for this reason, it's likely that you're affected by claustrophobia.
MRI scan anxiety

If you have claustrophobia and need to have an MRI scan, let the staff at the hospital know before the day of your appointment.

They may be able to give you a mild sedative, or will advise you to speak to a GP for a prescription.

In some cases, you may be able to attend an open or upright MRI centre, designed for people with severe MRI anxiety. But these clinics are often only available privately.
Symptoms of claustrophobia

Panic attacks are common among people with claustrophobia. They can be very frightening and distressing.

As well as overwhelming feelings of anxiety, a panic attack can also cause physical symptoms, such as:

    sweating
    trembling
    hot flushes or chills
    shortness of breath or difficulty breathing
    a choking sensation
    a rapid heartbeat (tachycardia)
    chest pain or a feeling of tightness in the chest
    a sensation of butterflies in the stomach
    feeling sick
    headaches and dizziness
    feeling faint
    numbness or pins and needles
    a dry mouth
    a need to go to the toilet
    ringing in your ears
    feeling confused or disorientated

If you have severe claustrophobia, you may also experience psychological symptoms, such as:

    fear of losing control
    fear of fainting
    feelings of dread
    fear of dying

What causes claustrophobia?

Claustrophobia is often caused by a traumatic event experienced during early childhood.

For example, adults may develop claustrophobia if, as a child, they:

    were trapped or kept in a confined space
    were bullied or abused
    had a parent with claustrophobia

Claustrophobia can also be triggered by unpleasant experiences or situations, such as turbulence when flying or being stuck in a tube tunnel between stations.

A child growing up with a parent who has claustrophobia may develop claustrophobia themselves by associating confined spaces with their parent's anxiety and feeling helpless to comfort the person they loved.
