Session 6  Tom completed Challenging Questions Sheets about all of the stuck points he and the therapist had generated. The therapist reviewed these worksheets to determine whether Tom had used the questions as designed. She asked Tom which of the worksheets he had found least helpful. He responded that he had had the most difficulty completing the sheet about deserving to have a family. The therapist then reviewed this sheet in detail with Tom (see Figure 2.2).  tHeraPist: So, I notice that in your answer about the evidence for and against this idea about deserving a family, you included as evidence that you took some other man’s family. I’m glad to see that you didn’t include the word “murder”—that’s progress. But, how is that evidence for you not deserving a family?  tom: It is evidence because I feel like I took someone else’s; therefore, I don’t deserve one for myself. It seems fair.  tHeraPist: Remind me to make sure and look what you put for item 9 about confusing feelings and facts. For now, though, help me understand the math of why you don’t deserve your family, and your happiness about your family, because of what happened?   Posttraumatic Stress Disorder  Challenging Questions Sheet   Below is a list of questions to be used in helping you challenge your maladaptive or problematic beliefs. Not all questions will be appropriate for the belief you choose to challenge. Answer as many questions as you can for the belief you have chosen to challenge below.   Belief: I don’t deserve to havea family.   1. What is the evidence for and against this idea? FOR: I took some other man’s family. AGAINST: I didn’t want to have to shoot anyone. An “eye for an eye” does not apply here.   2. Is your belief a habit or based on facts? It is a habit for me to think this way. The facts are that I didn’t do something wrong to deserve to be punished in this way. 3. Are your interpretations of the situation too far removed from reality to be accurate? My interpretation of the original situation has been fairly unrealistic, which is where I get this belief. 4. Are you thinking in all-or-none terms? N/A 5. Are you using words or phrases that are extreme or exaggerated? (i.e., always, forever, never, need, should, must, can’t, and every time) I guess maybe “deserve” could be an extreme word. 6. Are you taking the situation out of context and only focusing on one aspect of the event? Yes, like #3, I tend to forget what all was going on at the time of my shooting. 7. Is the source of information reliable? No, I’m not very reliable these days. 8. Are you confusing a low probability with a high probability? N/A 9. Are your judgments based on feelings rather than facts? I’m feeling guilty like I did something wrong when the truth is that I did what I was supposed to do. 10. Are you focused on irrelevant factors? Maybe my deserving a family has nothing to do with someone else losing theirs? figUre 2.2. Challenging Questions Sheet.  tom: I don’t know—it just seems fair. shouldn’t have something good like a wife and child in my life.  tHeraPist: Fair? That implies that you did something bad that requires you to be punished. tHeraPist: Maybe we should look at your response  tom: As I’ve been thinking about it more, I don’t think to item 9 now. What did you put in response to the I did something wrong when I really look at it, but question “Are your judgments based on feelings it still feels like I did something wrong and that I rather than facts?”   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  tom: I wrote, “I’m feeling guilty, like I did something wrong when the truth is that I did what I was supposed to do.” I try to remember what we talked about, and what my wife also has said to me about them not responding to the warnings and my shooting them, which may have prevented something else that was bad. I still feel bad—not as bad as I did— but I still feel like I did something wrong.  (The therapist uses this as an opportunity to talk about the need for practicing new alternative thoughts in order to elicit emotional change.)  tHeraPist: You are well on your way, Tom, to getting unstuck and recovering. Your head is starting to get it, and your feelings need to catch up. You’ve been thinking about what happened and what you did in a certain way for awhile now. You blamed yourself over and over and over again, telling yourself that you did something wrong. You gave yourself a steady diet of that type of thinking, which resulted in you feeling guilty about what happened. It is like a well-worn rut of thinking in your brain that automatically leads you down the path of feeling guilty. What you need to do now is start a new road of more realistic and truthful thinking about the situation that will eventually be a well-worn path. What is the more realistic view of your role in this event?  tom: (tearfully) I had to shoot at the car, and people died.  tHeraPist: That’s right. And, let’s pretend for a second that you really do believe that thought. If so, what would you feel?  tom: I’d feel so much lighter. I wouldn’t feel guilty. I’d continue to feel sad about this horrible situation, but I wouldn’t blame myself.  tHeraPist: Let’s take it the next step. If you didn’t blame yourself and feel guilty, then would you believe that you deserve to be happy with your wife and the baby that will soon be here?  tom: Sure.  tHeraPist: So, Tom, your work is to practice, practice, practice this new and more accurate way of looking at what happened and your role in it. With practice, your feelings will start matching the truth about what happened and the fact that you are not to blame.  tom: It is kind of like training to use a weapon. They made us do certain things with our guns over and  over and over again, until it was automatic. It was very automatic after a while.  tHeraPist: That’s right. There are other questions on this sheet that might be helpful in convincing you of the truth about this in your practice. What did you put for the question “Is your belief a habit or based on a fact?”  This dialogue illustrates a common occurrence at this stage in the therapy. Tom was starting to experience cognitive change, but his emotional change was lagging. The therapist reinforced the need to practice the new ways of thinking to feel different. It is also important to highlight clients’ gains in changing their thinking, even if their feelings have not changed or are ambivalent. A change in thinking is framed as more than halfway to a change in feeling. In effect, changed thinking involves competing thoughts or learning, and with more repetitions of the new thought, the associated feelings follow and eventually win out.  In the latter portion of this session the therapist introduced the Patterns of Problematic Thinking Sheet and provided an explanation of how this list was different from the Challenging Questions Sheet (see Figure 2.3). More specifically, she indicated that the Patterns of Problematic Thinking Sheet pertains to more general patterns of thinking versus challenging individual thoughts that Tom might have. The Patterns of Problematic Thinking Sheet lists seven types of faulty thinking patterns (e.g., oversimplifying, overgeneralizing, emotional reasoning).  Tom and the therapist went through the list and generated examples for each of the patterns. For example, for “Disregarding important aspects of a situation,” the therapist pointed out something that Tom had brought up several times during therapy. Initially Tom had not included the important information that he and the other guards had attempted to stop the car before shooting at it. She also pointed out that emotional reasoning was similar to confusing a feeling with a fact, which had been a primary focus of the session.  When they got to the item “Overgeneralizing from a single incident,” Tom said that he had noticed he was beginning to change his thoughts about the government and its leaders. He commented that it had been very powerful for him to consider that, in a number of instances, his fellow soldiers had operated with integrity and were committed to the mission, and to the safety and protection of others. Tom said spontaneously, “I   Posttraumatic Stress Disorder  guess that is also kind of like drawing conclusions when evidence is lacking or even contradictory.” He said that he had started stereotyping after the traumatic event— applying negative attributes and opinions to everyone in the military and the government too broadly. Tom and the therapist discussed how the goal of the therapy was to have a balanced and realistic view of things versus the overly ideal version he had pretrauma or the overly pessimistic version he had posttrauma. In other words, the goal was to find shades of gray and balance in his thinking about the government, the military, and their leadership. Tom added an example of this thinking: “There are at least some people in government who want to do good for others.”  Tom was given the practice assignment to read over the list in the Patterns of Problematic Thinking Sheet and to note examples of times he used each of the problematic thinking patterns.  Session 7  Tom began the session by stating that he was feeling better, and that his wife had also noted a difference in him and was feeling less concerned about the therapy making him worse rather than better. The therapist had given Tom the PCL and the BDI-II to complete while he was waiting for his appointment. She quickly scored these assessment measures and gave Tom feedback  Patterns of Problematic Thinking   Listed below are several types of patterns of problematic thinking that people use in different life situations. These patterns often become automatic, habitual thoughts that cause us to engage in selfdefeating behavior. Considering your own stuck points, find examples for each of these patterns. Write in the stuck point under the appropriate pattern and describe how it fits that pattern. Think about how that pattern affects you.   1. Jumping to conclusions when the evidence is lacking or even contradictory. I tend to jump to the conclusion that I have done something wrong when bad things happen. I assume things are my fault. 2. Exaggerating or minimizing a situation (blowing things way out of proportion or shrinking their importance inappropriately). I minimize the things that I have done well in the military. 3. Disregarding important aspects of a situation. In the past I have tended to neglect the important aspect that several of us tried to stop the car from going through the checkpoint. 4. Oversimplifying things as good–bad or right–wrong. I can sometimes think of all Iraqis as all bad. 5. Overgeneralizing from a single incident (a negative event is seen asa never-ending pattern). I have assumed that because of my traumatic event, I could not be safe with my baby to be born. 6. Mind reading (you assume people are thinking negatively of you when there is no definite evidence for this). I assume that everyone thinks I am a terrible person, a murderer, because of what I did. 7. Emotional reasoning (you havea feeling and assume there must bea reason). This one is easy—I feel guilty, and therefore I must be. figUre 2.3. Patterns of Problematic Thinking Sheet.   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  about his scores at the beginning of this session. His PCL score had decreased from 68 to 39, which was a clear and clinically meaningful change in his PTSD symptomatology. She noticed that his avoidance and reexperiencing symptoms had decreased the most; his hyperarousal symptoms had also decreased, but less so. His score on the BDI-II had decreased from 28 to 14, clearly indicating a reduction in his depressive symptoms.   The therapist asked whether Tom had completed his practice assignment, the Patterns of Problematic Thinking Sheet. He indicated that he had not, but that he had thought about it over the week. He also laughed and said that he had noticed the thinking patterns in his wife and others. The therapist asked Tom to complete some of the sheet in session. At this point in therapy, the therapist was sitting back more as Tom took on the role of challenging his own cognitions. The therapist provided both minimal clarification and additional examples that she had noticed in working with Tom.  In this session, the therapist introduced the Challenging Beliefs Worksheet. She was careful to point out that the worksheet integrated all of the previous work Tom had done and added a few new elements. The following dialogue illustrates the introduction of this sheet (see Figure 2.4).  tHeraPist: I want to show you the final worksheet that  we’re going to be using for the rest of the therapy. tom: OK. Wow—that looks complicated!  tHeraPist: Actually, you’ve done pretty much everything on this worksheet already. This worksheet brings together into one place everything that we’ve been working on.  tom: I’ll take your word for it, Doc.  tHeraPist: Remember the A-B-C Sheets from way back when?  tom: Yes.  tHeraPist: (pointing to first three columns on the Challenging Beliefs Worksheet) This is A, B, and  C. You have in column A the situation, or “Activating Event” that you had on the A-B-C Sheet. In column B you have “Automatic Thoughts,” which is the “Belief” portion of the A-B-C Sheet. Last, column C, “Emotions,” is the “Consequence” portion of the A-B-C Sheet. tom: OK. So far, so good.  tHeraPist: Column D is where you identify the “Challenging Questions” from that sheet that apply to the thought or stuck point that you’re working on. In column E, you identify the type of “Patterns of Problematic Thinking” that apply to the thought or stuck point that you’re working on. Make sense?  tom: Yes.  tHeraPist: So, only column F, “Alternative Thought,” is new. Here you identify alternative thoughts that you could have about the situation. In other words, we’re looking for alternative statements that you can tell yourself or different interpretations of the event. In columns G and H, you get to see how your belief in your original thoughts may change and how the new thoughts affect your feelings.  tom: OK.  tHeraPist: So, let’s pick a stuck point and start using this Challenging Beliefs Worksheet. We’re going to be talking about safety as one of the first topics of the next few sessions. Can you think of a stuck point that relates to your ability to keep yourself safe or to how safe others are around you?  tom: Well, I still wonder if there are people out in the world who want to hurt me, even if I now realize that no sniper is going to take me out.  tHeraPist: So, let’s pick a specific event—the more specific, the better.  tom: I was in the grocery store, and I had my uniform on. There was this guy who seemed to have a chip on his shoulder about it—like he hated me or something.   tHeraPist: So, write down the event in Column A. (Pauses.) What was your thought? You’ve already mentioned one of them.  tom: This guy has a chip on his shoulder about me because I’m in the military.  tHeraPist: Good. How strongly do you believe that thought?  tom: 100%.  tHeraPist: OK, let’s write that next to the thought. We are now rating how much you believe in your thoughts because you’re going to see at the end how much your thought has changed. What feeling or feelings are associated with that thought?  tom: Definitely anger.   A. Situation B. Thoughts D. Challenging Thoughts E. Problematic Patterns F. Alternative Thought Describe the event, thought, or belief leading to theunpleasantemotion(s) . Write thought(s) related to Column A. Rate belief in each thought below from 0–100% . (How much do you believe this thought? ) Use Challengin g Questions to examine your automatic thoughts from Column B. Is the thought balanced and factual or extreme? Use the Problemati c Thinking Patterns sheet to decide if this is one of your problematic patterns of thinking. What else can say instead of Column B? How else can interpret the event instead of Column B? Rate belief in alternativethought(s) from 0–100% At store in uniform “This guy hasa chip on his shoulder because I am in the military. ” (100% ) Evidence? Habi t o r F act? Habit to think everyone dislikes me because I was in Iraq. Interpretations not accurate? All or none? Extreme or exaggerated? Out of context? Sourc e unreliable? Me Low versus high probability? Based on feelings or facts? Irrelevant factors? Jumping to conclusionsExaggerating or minimizing Disregarding important aspects OversimplifyingOvergeneralizingMin d reading I am assuming that he is thinking the worst of me. Emotional reasoning “ I don’t know if he has chip on his shoulder.” (60%) “If he does havea chip on his shoulder, don’tknow what it is about maybe it isn’t even about me, let alone having served in Iraq. (80% G. Rerate Old Thoughts C. Emotion(s) Rerate how much you now believe the thought in Column from 0–100% 35% Specify sad, angry, etc. , and rate how strongly you feel each emotion from 0– 100%. Anger (80% ) Fear (30% ) H. Emotion(s) Now what do you feel? 0– 100% Anger (20% Fear (15%   figUre 2.4. Challenging Beliefs Worksheet completed in session.  97   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  tHeraPist: Makes sense, given your thought. How much anger from 0 to 100%, with 100% being as much anger as you could possibly imagine having?  tom: Hmm . . . I’d say 80%.  tHeraPist: Any other feelings? You can have more than one.  tom: I guess when I stop and think about it, there is some fear there, too.  tHeraPist: That makes sense, too. How much fear from 0 to 100%?  tom: Oh, maybe 30%. It’s not the strongest feeling, but it’s there, because I’m wondering if he is going to say something or do something.  tHeraPist: Nice job. Let’s move onto the next column that relates to the Challenging Questions Sheet you’ve already done. Take a look at this list. What questions might apply here?  tom: I guess I might be confusing a habit with a fact. It seems like it is a habit for me to assume that everyone dislikes me because I was in Iraq. I really don’t know if that is why he seemed to have a chip on his shoulder. I guess I also don’t know for sure if he had a chip on his shoulder. He didn’t say anything to me. (Pauses.) I guess that is also an example of the source of information being unreliable, and that source is me! (Laughs.)  tHeraPist: While you were talking, I was thinking that the same things applied. So you’d write those in this column. You can also pick out other challenging questions that might apply, but usually two or three will do the trick. In the next column, we’re going to refer to the Patterns of Problematic Thinking Sheet. What might fit here?  tom: I guess one jumps out—mind reading.  tHeraPist: How so?  tom: I’m assuming that he is thinking the worst about me and about my having served my country in this war. I’m good at that.  tHeraPist: Write that down. You can add others later if something seems to apply. The next column is very important. This is where you start coaching yourself to come up with alternative thoughts or perceptions about the situation. Based on having asked yourself these questions and noticing the problematic thinking patterns, what other ways might you think about this situation?  tom: I guess one thing I could say to myself is, “I don’t know if he has chip on his shoulder.” I could also say, “If he does have a chip on his shoulder, I don’t know what it is about—maybe it isn’t even about me, let alone about my having served in Iraq.”  tHeraPist: Wow! You’re doing great at this. Let’s get those written down. Let’s also add how much you believe those two new thoughts. Below those alternative thoughts is the column that asks you to reconsider how much you believe your original thoughts over here in column B. How much do you believe them after walking through this process? Before you said 100%.  tom: Oh, I’d say now it is only about 35%.  tHeraPist: That is a big change. You went from 100% certainty to 35% certainty that he had a chip on his shoulder because you fought in the war.  tom: I’m a little surprised by that myself.  tHeraPist: Let’s take it the final step. How about your feelings now? Let’s rerate those here.  tom: My anger is way down—I’d say only about 20%. The anxiety is still there because I really wouldn’t want to have to protect myself, and he might have had a chip on his shoulder at me. It is down a little, though, because I realize I’m not 100% certain he was out to get me. I’d say maybe 15% on fear.  tHeraPist: Do you have questions about what we just did here? tom: Not at the moment. I’ll get back to you.  tHeraPist: I’m going to ask that you do one of these sheets on a stuck point per day until I see you again. I’m also going to give you some example sheets other patients have done that might be helpful to you.  tom: OK. Should be interesting. . . .  The therapist reminded Tom that he might find he is not using problematic thinking, and in that case, no change in feelings would be expected. She also cautioned Tom that he should not expect his beliefs and feelings always to change completely in the process of doing the sheet. The old thought would need to be completely dismantled and the new thought would need to become more habitual for him to see a more permanent change. The therapist suggested that Tom read the sheets he completed over to himself a number of times to facilitate the process.   Posttraumatic Stress Disorder  The Safety module was then introduced. Safety is the first of five modules (two- to three-page handouts) that also include Trust, Power/Control, Esteem, and Intimacy. The therapist oriented Tom to the format of the module, which included discussion about how beliefs about the self and others in this area can be disrupted or seemingly confirmed after a traumatic event, depending on one’s history prior to the traumatic event. The modules describe how these problematic beliefs are manifested emotionally and behaviorally (e.g., not leaving one’s home because of the belief that the world is unsafe). It also provides alternative self-statements that are more balanced and realistic in each area.  Tom had felt safe with others before the traumatic event occurred, and this sense of safety about others had been disrupted, as evidenced by his sense that others around him were out to get him. Pretrauma, Tom had also felt as though he was not a danger to others. Posttrauma, he believed that he could not be safe with others, which specifically manifested in his concerns about being around his pregnant wife. The therapist suggested that Tom complete at least one worksheet on his stuck points about others being safe, as well as his being a possible danger to others. The therapist also reminded Tom that he needed to finish the Patterns of Problematic Thinking Sheet assignment from last session.   Session 8  Tom arrived at the session having completed the Patterns of Problematic Thinking Sheet, as well as two Challenging Beliefs Worksheets. The therapist spent a little time looking at his answers to the Patterns of Problematic Thinking Sheet because she did not want to send the message inadvertently that completing the assignments was unimportant. She asked Tom to read the patterns that he had completed at home, as opposed to those in their previous session.  Tom completed two Challenging Beliefs Worksheets related to the topic of safety, as the therapist had instructed. He did one each on self and other safety beliefs. He did not seem to understand that he could use the Challenging Beliefs Worksheets on everyday events that were distressing or even positive for him. Thus, the therapist emphasized how Tom might use this process more generally in his day-to-day life, and highlighted how more practice would lead to more results. She noted that using the process on less emotionally dis   tressing topics could actually be very helpful in getting the process down. It is always easier to learn something when one is not dealing with the most challenging circumstances. She used a military analogy with Tom about learning to load and shoot a gun—best learned in a nonconflict situation, so that it is a more rote behavior when under fire.  The therapist skimmed the two sheets Tom had completed and noticed that he had struggled most coming up with alternative statements about his own sense of dangerousness related to his wife’s impending delivery of their child. The following dialogue ensued (see Figure 2.5):  tHeraPist: I notice that you might have had the most trouble coming up with alternative thoughts about how safe you can be with your wife and your child who is about to be born.  tom: Yeah, I don’t really like to talk about it. It freaks my wife out. I’m uncomfortable being around my wife, which makes her feel bad, but I’m just afraid I’m going to hurt her or the child.  tHeraPist: Let’s take your first thought because it is kind of general. How is it that you think you’re going to hurt them? Are we talking physically or mentally?  tom: Oh, physically is what I mean. I don’t know how exactly, but somehow, some way, I guess.  tHeraPist: That makes it a bit more concrete. How do you physically think you’re going to hurt them? Do you think you’ll shoot them, given your trauma history?  tom: No. Absolutely not. There are no firearms in my house, and I don’t go hunting or have friends or family who hunt—nothing that would make guns a part of our life.  tHeraPist: So, what have you considered in your mind? tom: I guess I’m worried that, out of nowhere, I’ll get physically violent.  tHeraPist: OK, now we’re cooking. Let’s write that down. “Out of nowhere I’ll get physically violent.” I noticed that in column C you didn’t mention anything about probabilities. Safety issues are almost always about gauging probabilities. The world is not a completely safe place, and every day we all make calculated risks about our safety based on the probability of bad things happening to us or to someone   A. Situation B. Thoughts D. Challenging Thoughts E. Problematic Patterns F. Alternative Thought Describe the event, thought, or belief leading to theunpleasantemotion(s) . Write thought(s) related to Column A. Rate belief in each thought below from 0–100% . (How much do you believe this thought? ) Use Challengin g Questions to examine your automatic thoughts from Column B. Is the thought balanced and factual or extreme? Use the Problemati c Thinking Patterns sheet to decide if this is one of your problematic patterns of thinking. What else can say instead of Column B? How else can interpret the event instead of Column B? Rate belief in alternativethought(s) from 0–100% Being around mywife and child “Out of nowhere, I’ll getphysically violent.” (80% ) Evidence? Habit or fact? Interpretations not accurate? All or none? Extreme or exaggerated? Out of context? Source unreliable? Lo w versu s h ig h p robability? Given my history, it is actually a low probability not high. Based on feelings or facts? Irrelevant factors? Jumping to conclusionsExaggeratin g o r minimizingI’m exaggerating the likelihood thatI’d be violent. Disregarding important aspects OversimplifyingOvergeneralizingI’m assuming because I shot once in a certain situation, I’ll be violent in general. Mind readingEmotional reasoning “It is unlikely that I’ll hurt my family, and even more unlikely that it will be sudden andunexpected.” (95%) G. Rerate Old Thoughts C. Emotion(s) Rerate how much you now believe the thought in Column from 0–100% 10% Specify sad, angry, etc. , and rate how strongly you feel each emotion from 0– 100%. Fear (85% ) H. Emotion(s) Now what do you feel? 0– 100% Fear ( 10%   figUre 2.5. Challenging Beliefs Worksheet regarding safety.  100   Posttraumatic Stress Disorder  else. How do you think the probability questions might apply?  tom: Are you getting at the idea that I’m confusing a low probability with a high probability?  tHeraPist: Precisely. How do you think that applies here?  tom: I’m convinced that “somehow, some way” I’m going to hurt my family, so I believe that it is a high probability that it will happen and not a low probability. I think you think that the probability I will do that is low. But, I’m still concerned about it.  tHeraPist: Let’s talk about the actual probability. How often have you hurt your family physically?  tom: Never. Are you kidding?  tHeraPist: I thought as much, but you made it sound like it was very likely to happen. I guess that’s part of the problem, right?  tom: You’re right.  tHeraPist: How often have you been physically violent against anyone?  tom: I haven’t, besides the shooting. And it surely hasn’t been unexpected. Now that we’re talking through it, it feels a little silly.  tHeraPist: So, it sounds like figuring out the actual probability of this is right where we needed to go. Given what we’ve talked about, what is an alternative statement you can tell yourself and how much do you believe it?  tom: It is unlikely that I’ll hurt my family, and even more unlikely that it will be sudden and unexpected given that it has never happened.  tHeraPist: Let’s keep going to see how that might change how you feel. You wrote that you had 85% fear. What is that rating now?  tom: Less than 10%. There is some fear now that I know I am capable of hurting a family, but like we’ve talked about before—and what I have to remember— is that it occurred in a certain situation and not in my everyday life now as a civilian in my family.  This exchange between Tom and the therapist illustrates the hallmark role of probability in assessments and beliefs about safety. It is important to realize that there are some objectively unsafe situations or behaviors, and these should not be minimized or challenged. If there are unreasonable safety precautions or beliefs,  the actual probability of harm should be carefully evaluated, keeping in mind that 100% safety is rarely, if ever, guaranteed.  The therapist transitioned the session to introduce the Trust module. Tom noted that he had pretty good trust of himself and others prior to his best friend committing suicide when they were in high school. Tom said that after the experience, he sometimes did not trust his judgments about other people, and that he felt responsible for not anticipating his friend’s suicide. The military traumatic event served to confirm his belief that he could not trust his judgments about others’ intentions. Tom’s concerns about his ability to be safe with his wife and unborn child also dovetailed with the issue of trust. The therapist and Tom went over the information in the Trust module handout, and Tom seemed to resonate with all of the potential effects. He reported that he had really been trying to open up with his wife and not avoid her. He noted that they were communicating more, which made both of them more relaxed and comfortable in the final days of her pregnancy.  The therapist closed the session by assigning daily Challenging Beliefs Worksheets, asking Tom to do at least one on the topic of trust. She reminded him that, like other areas, the goal is to develop balanced alternative thoughts. In the case of trust, she noted that stuck points about trust often revolve around making all-ornone judgments, either trusting or not. The goal is to consider trust as multidimensional, with different types of issues resulting in different levels of trust in different situations.  Session 9  Tom arrived at this session having completed a number of Challenging Beliefs Worksheets. Several of them were about trust, including his level of trust of the government and trust of himself in being a father. He had also used the worksheets on non-trust-related topics related to his daily life. He commented that the worksheets had been helpful in working out his thinking before he behaved impulsively or felt miserable.  The therapist praised Tom for completing the worksheets so well, and asked him whether he felt he could use assistance with any of the worksheets. Tom quickly responded that he wanted to focus on the sheet about fatherhood because he was experiencing so much anxiety about his child’s impending birth. In turning their attention to this worksheet, the therapist immediately noticed that Tom had probably struggled with this work    CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  sheet because he had listed so many different types of thoughts that were fueling his anxiety about becoming a father. She used this as an opportunity to fine-tune Tom’s use of the worksheets. The therapist’s choice in thoughts to challenge first also illustrates the prioritization of treatment targets in the therapy. She chose to go after the more directly trauma-related thoughts that contained remnants of assimilation. Tom’s thoughts about deserving to be happy about starting a family, given the death of the woman, fetus, and child, suggested that he had not fully accepted the traumatic event and the circumstances surrounding it. Thus, she addressed this thought first (see Figure 2.6).  tHeraPist: Wow, you’ve got lots of thoughts going on in your head about becoming a father, don’t you? I’m going to suggest that we use a different worksheet for each of the clusters of thoughts you’re having on this topic. I think that will make your use of the Challenging Beliefs Worksheet better. It seems that some thoughts are directly related to your traumatic experience, others are specifically related to your wife’s labor and delivery, and still others are related more generally to being a parent. Let’s focus on those that are directly related to your trauma. You wrote that one of your feelings was guilt (85%), and I’m assuming that it is related to your thought that it isn’t right that you’re happy with a soon-to-be-born baby given what happened.  tom: That’s right. If I’m really honest, I still feel guilty that the Iraqi woman was pregnant and getting ready to have a child, and the shooting deprived her of the ability to have that child and be happy, and I’m getting ready to have that happiness.  tHeraPist: We’ve talked about this before, but we’ve been more focused on the man involved in the situation.   tom: Yeah, I think the closer my wife gets to delivery, the more I think about the Iraqi woman. I’ve been imagining that she wasn’t part of a potential plot for terrorist activity and was more an innocent participant. Then, I go back and forth, thinking that she might have actually been involved and didn’t care that she was pregnant. Or maybe it was just an accident, and they truly didn’t understand that they needed to stop. Uggghhhh, it is exhausting.  tHeraPist: And we’ll never know. If your friend were saying all of this to you, what would be your response to him?  tom: I’d be telling him to quit beating himself up and feeling guilty.  tHeraPist: Easier said than done. Anything else? Maybe it would help to look at the Challenging Questions and Patterns of Problematic Thinking Sheets. I’m wondering if you are focusing on irrelevant factors—item 10 on the Challenging Questions Sheet.  tom: Hmm . . . what is irrelevant in this case?  tHeraPist: How relevant are her intentions to deserving to be happy yourself about having a child?  tom: (Pauses.) I’m going to have to think about that for a second.  tHeraPist: Aren’t your intentions in that situation what is relevant? Were your intentions at that time to deprive her of the right to bear her child and live happily ever after?  tom: No, not at all.  tHeraPist: So, why the guilt? What did you do wrong that you should be punished about?  tom: Oh, wow. I hadn’t thought of that. Her intentions are irrelevant. It only makes me crazy to try to get in her head. I guess that would be mind-reading, now wouldn’t it?  tHeraPist: Very good—a different spin on mind reading. So what is the alternative, more balanced and realistic thought?  tom: My intentions are what matter. I didn’t intend for her to lose her own or her baby’s life.  tHeraPist: Go on . . . do you have a right to experience happiness?  tom: I guess I do. It just feels weird.  tHeraPist: Sure—it feels different. It is different than what you’ve been thinking about it for awhile. I’m curious—what would you feel if you said to yourself, “I did not intentionally do anything to deprive someone else of family happiness. I deserve to be happy in becoming a father.”  tom: I’d feel less guilty for sure, and even happy.  tHeraPist: Let’s get this all written down. Now you have the job of holding on to these new insights and practicing them. Read over this worksheet every day until you see me again. I’d also like you to take these other thoughts on your original Challenging Beliefs Worksheet about this topic and put them on separate worksheets and work through them. Can you commit to doing that?   A. Situation B. Thoughts D. Challenging Thoughts E. Problematic Patterns F. Alternative Thought Describe the event, thought, or belief leading to theunpleasantemotion(s) . Write thought(s) related to Column A. Rate belief in each thought below from 0–100% . (How much do you believe this thought? ) Use Challengin g Questions to examine your automatic thoughts from Column B. Is the thought balanced and factual or extreme? Use the Problemati c Thinking Patterns sheet to decide if this is one of your problematic patterns of thinking. What else can say instead of Column B? How else can interpret the event instead of Column B? Rate belief in alternativethought(s) from 0–100% Killing a pregnant Iraqi woman and her son. “It isn’t right that I’mhappy with a baby on the way, given whathappened.” (80%) “She might not have been part of a terrorist plot, but just a passenger.” (50% ) Evidence? Habit or fact? Interpretations not accurate? All or none? Extreme or exaggerated? Out of context? Source unreliable? Low versus high probability? Based on feelings or facts? Irrelevan t f actors? Her intentions are not relevant. Mine are. Jumping to conclusionsExaggerating or minimizing Disregarding important aspects OversimplifyingOvergeneralizingMin d reading I’m trying to figure out what was in her head. Emotional reasoning “My intentions are whatmatter. didn’t intend todo anything to deprive someone else of family happiness.” (85%) G. Rerate Old Thoughts C. Emotion(s) Rerate how much you now believe the thought in Column from 0–100% 15% (2nd doesn’t matter) Specify sad, angry, etc. , and rate how strongly you feel each emotion from 0– 100%. Guilt (85% ) H. Emotion(s) Now what do you feel? 0– 100% Guilt (5%) Happy (10%   figUre 2.6. Challenging Beliefs Worksheet regarding trauma.  103   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  tom: Yes, I already feel lighter. tHeraPist: This is an exciting time—you’ve got to  continue to work on this, so that you can have the  enjoyment you deserve!  At this point, the therapist introduced the Power/ Control module. Tom admitted that prior to the traumatic event, he was someone who liked to be in control. He did not like unpredictability, and he noticed that this tendency had gotten especially bad after his friend’s suicide. The military lifestyle seemed to be congruent with this tendency. Tom indicated that he had not had authority issues prior to the traumatic event, but he had noticed himself questioning authority much more since his military trauma. As with previous sessions, Tom was given the practice assignment to complete Challenging Beliefs Worksheets every day prior to the next session, and at least one was assigned on power/control.  Session 10  Tom began the session by saying that his wife had gone to her obstetrician the previous day, and that her labor would be induced in 1 week if she did not naturally go into labor before then. Tom indicated that the last session had been very good in helping him to become happier about his child’s impending birth, and that he had read the Challenging Questions Worksheet about deserving to be happy several times since the last session. He believed it more and more. He stated that he was still having some anxiety about becoming a father, and about everything going OK with his wife’s labor and delivery. The therapist normalized some of Tom’s anxiety, stressing how it was very natural for a firsttime father, and Tom was able to recognize the typicality of this anxiety in others he had witnessed becoming parents.  Tom stated that since reading the Power/Control module after the last session, he had started to realize that not everyone in authority over him had wielded his/ her authority malevolently. This was very important in light of Tom’s preexisting history of desiring to exert control; he had directly confronted his illusion of control. The therapist and Tom went over this worksheet.  Tom went on to describe how his belief that he could and should have control over everything had resulted in low self-esteem. In general, when things did not go as he desired, Tom felt as though he was a failure for not controlling the outcome. This belief structure led  him to think that he should have been able to control his friend and stop him from committing suicide. It also led him to believe that he should have been able to create a positive outcome in the military traumatic event. This discussion served as a natural segue to the next topic—esteem. Tom admitted that he had become someone who thrived too much on accomplishment. This had affected his self-esteem and was especially relevant to his belief that he had not accomplished his goal in the military because he had to be taken from the field after the traumatic event at the checkpoint.  After reviewing the Esteem module, the therapist asked Tom to complete Challenging Beliefs Worksheets on his remaining stuck points, as well as any stuck points relating to esteem. He was also given two other assignments: to practice giving and receiving compliments every day, and to do one nice thing for himself every day that was not contingent on “achieving” something. These assignments were to help him with his self- and other-esteem.  Session 11  Tom completed a worksheet on self-esteem related to his belief that he had not achieved his goal within the military. The therapist and Tom went over this worksheet, and both noted that he had made significant progress by using the worksheet to change the way he thought and felt about himself. He asserted that he was beginning to see that people are much more than their professional accomplishments. They also have other activities and relationships with their families, friends, and themselves.  The therapist inquired about the assignment of giving and receiving compliments. Tom replied that it had gone well, even though it felt a bit awkward and forced. He was even able to notice that when he gave compliments and was more positive toward other people, he seemed to get more positive responses back from them. The therapist noticed that several of the compliments were to his wife, and she pointed out that Tom seemed more connected to his wife. He said that he was actually beginning to feel glimmers of excitement about the birth of their child. He reported that he was still feeling some anxiety about becoming a father, and about how the labor and delivery would go, but that the anxiety was less and more manageable. When the therapist asked about Tom receiving compliments, he reported more difficulties. She asked what Tom typically did when he received compliments, and it became   Posttraumatic Stress Disorder  clear that he often deflected or minimized them. Correspondingly, Tom also said that he had only done one nice thing for himself since the last session, and that it had felt uncomfortable. This pattern seemed to fit with Tom’s overall schema of being unworthy and undeserving. The following dialogue ensued between the therapist and Tom:  tHeraPist: It seems like you have a hard time letting someone be nice to you and being nice to yourself.  tom: Yes.  tHeraPist: Why do you think that is?  tom: I don’t know. (Pauses.) I don’t like it. It feels like they shouldn’t be nice to me, and I shouldn’t be nice to me.  tHeraPist: Hmm . . . I wonder if there is anything “off” about that thinking? What do you think?  tom: As I hear myself say it, it sounds a little weird. It sounds like I don’t deserve to have nice things for me. Kind of like not deserving to have a family . . .  tHeraPist: This seems like a larger tendency in your life—one of those problematic thinking patterns. What pattern do you hear in your thinking? Look at the worksheet if you want to.  tom: Maybe emotional reasoning. I feel like I don’t deserve it; therefore, I must not deserve it. That seems like the best one. Maybe I’m also drawing a conclusion when the evidence is lacking.  tHeraPist: I agree. Given how much you seem to follow this pattern of thinking, I’m betting it has been around for awhile—maybe even before the shooting occurred in Iraq.  tom: It has. I think it had to do with my dad, his alcoholism, and not being close to me. As a kid, I always thought I had done something wrong, or that I was so bad that he didn’t want to be around me.  tHeraPist: Now, with adult eyes, what do you think about your dad not being close to you?  tom: I figure that he drank for a reason, and that it might have been me and my other brothers and sisters.   tHeraPist: Why do you assume that he drank because of you kids? tom: I don’t know. I figure it was stressful having four kids.  tHeraPist: It probably was at times, but as you hear  yourself talk about this, what is amiss in how you’ve made sense of his drinking and being close to you?  tom: I’ve known other people who had four kids and didn’t have drinking problems. There were a lot of big families where I grew up. Plus, I know that he and my mom had money problems when we were young, and that they fought a lot.  tHeraPist: So, again, why then do you assume it was you who caused his drinking and alienation? tom: When we talk about it, I guess I see that it might not have been me alone.  tHeraPist: Or not even you at all. Everybody has a choice about how they handle their stress, and it seems that he was distant from everyone, not just you.  tom: True. It still feels that way.  tHeraPist: There seems to be a well-worn path in your brain that when something goes wrong, you blame yourself. The next step is that you deserve to be punished, or at least you don’t deserve anything good. I don’t think this tendency is going to change overnight. You’re going to need to work hard at talking to yourself more rationally to change how you feel. For that new path to get worn, you’re going to have to walk down it a number of times. Pretty soon, the path will be more worn and automatic. It will take some effort, but you can change the way you automatically feel. I’d like you to do a Challenging Beliefs Worksheet about what we’ve just talked about. Once we get a good one about it, you can read and refer to it as part of forging that new path. Can you do that?  tom: Yes. I think it would be good.  This exchange regarding Tom’s dad dovetailed nicely with the final module, Intimacy. The therapist noted that people tend to think of intimacy as it relates to romantic relationships, and especially in terms of sexual intimacy. She stressed that there are all kinds of intimacy with different people. In essence, intimacy relates to how close and open we feel with other people. She went on to discuss the notion of self-intimacy, or how well we take care of, support, and soothe ourselves. In other words, it reflects how good a relationship we have with ourselves. Tom admitted that he struggled with being close to other people, which had most obviously manifested in the work he had done relative to his wife and unborn child. As noted earlier, Tom also struggled with   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  doing nice things and taking good care of himself. Both of these areas seemed to be affected by Tom’s underlying schema that he was undeserving and unworthy.  The therapist assigned daily Challenging Beliefs Worksheets and requested that he do worksheets on being nice to himself and being close to his wife. In addition, she asked Tom to write a final Impact Statement, specifically about his understanding of the trauma now, after all the work he had done. The therapist asked him to write about his current thoughts/beliefs in the areas of safety, trust, power/control, esteem, and intimacy.  Session 12  The day after Session 11, Tom left a message indicating that his wife had delivered a healthy baby girl. He indicated in his voice mail message that he felt happy and relieved. He went on about how beautiful the baby was, how well his wife had done in labor and delivery, and how he had enjoyed holding his daughter in his arms the first time. The 12th session was delayed an extra week because of the baby’s arrival.  Tom’s wife and new daughter accompanied him to the final session. The therapist spent some time admiring Tom’s new baby and congratulating his wife before starting the final session. Tom seemed genuinely proud and happy about his daughter, and noted that becoming a father had been more natural than he had anticipated. He commented that he had been worried that he would not want to hold the infant for fear of hurting her or because he would do something wrong. Instead, he found it almost “instinctual” to hold her, and that soothing her had come more naturally than he expected. Tom seemed surprised about how natural his role as a father had come.  The therapist inquired about how the assignments had gone. Tom said that he had not done as much as he had hoped given the baby’s arrival, but that he had done worksheets about his father and about being close to his wife. The therapist looked over these worksheets, which Tom had done very well. She asked Tom about how helpful they had been, and he reported that they had been very helpful. He added that he was still struggling about his father, but that he was beginning to think that it was not all about him, which had made him feel better about himself and less guilty in general. He mentioned that he was considering writing a letter to his father about his daughter’s arrival, and that he was thinking about asking his father about why he drank  and distanced himself from his family. The therapist reinforced Tom for considering this and for not blindly making assumptions about his role in his father’s drinking. However, she also attempted to inoculate Tom to the possibility that his father could blame him or his siblings for his alcoholism (given that she did not know his father or his history), and that this did not necessarily mean that it was true. She reminded him that he needed to consider the source of information, and that any good detective would get multiple reports. Tom seemed to like the idea of getting more information from others, mentioning that he and his siblings had never really talked about his belief that they were to blame for their father’s alcoholism.  Tom also shared that he better understood the idea of having intimacy, without sex, in his relationship with his wife. He said that since the birth of their child, he felt closer to his wife and had generally been more open and present to her. The therapist asked him about doing nice things for himself, and Tom laughed and said that he was more open to that but was finding less time to do it with a new baby.  The therapist then asked Tom to read the final Impact Statement about the meaning of the event for him after the work that he had done. He wrote:  There is no doubt that this traumatic event has deeply impacted me. My thoughts about myself, others, and the world were changed. When I started therapy, I believed that I was a murderer. I blamed myself completely. Now, I believe that I shot a family, but I did not murder them. I realize that I and others around me had to do what we did at the time, and that we chose to shoot because we had to. I will never know what that man, or maybe even the family, was trying to do by going through that checkpoint, but I know now that I had no choice but to shoot to stop them. Regarding safety, I used to think that there were people out to get me, but now I realize that the probability of that is slim. I still feel a little anxious about me, my wife, and now my daughter, getting hurt, but not by a sniper. That seems unlikely. Now I worry about the stuff that everyone worries about—like crazy drivers, illness, or some accident. About safety, I used to worry that I was going to go “off” and hurt my family. I don’t believe that I will do that because I’ve never done that before and basically this trauma messed with my head about how likely I would be to hurt someone unless I had to. I’m trusting myself more in terms of the decisions I make, and I have some more faith and trust in my government now that I realize I really needed to shoot in that situation. I think I may always struggle with wanting to have   Posttraumatic Stress Disorder  power and control over things, but I’m working on not having control over everything. The fact is, I don’t have control, even though I like to think that I do. My selfesteem is improving. I have to remember that not every bad thing that happens is my fault, and that I deserve to be happy even if I don’t fully believe it yet. One of the biggest things that seems to be changing is that I’m enjoying being close to my wife and my new daughter. I used to avoid my wife because I thought I didn’t deserve to be happy and that I might hurt her. Slowly I’m realizing that it is not very likely that I’ll hurt my wife or my new daughter, or at least hurt them intentionally. My wife seems much happier now. I want to hold on to this time in my life and provide a good life for my daughter and wife. I’m happy to know that my daughter is not going to know someone who thought that snipers were out to get him, and who was anxious, avoiding everything and everyone. It sounds silly, but I’m kind of glad that I went through this because I think I’m going to be better dad and person because of it.  Tom was a bit teary as he finished reading. The therapist asked Tom whether he remembered what he wrote the first time. Tom said no, so the therapist read to him his first Impact Statement. She pointed out that Tom had come a long way, and he agreed. The therapist and Tom reviewed the whole therapy process, what they had covered, and the “stuck points” that Tom had challenged. Tom said that he was going to continue using the worksheets because they had been so helpful in making him slow down to think about things instead of just reacting. They did some lapse planning, and the therapist asked Tom what he could do if he sensed that he was struggling with PTSD or depressive symptoms, or second-guessing his new ways of thinking. He mentioned that he was going to share the materials with his wife because she was very good at helping him to “get his head on straight.” He also included on his list a review of the materials he had completed during the course of therapy. The therapy session ended with a discussion of Tom’s goal to write his father a letter and to increase his contact with his siblings. He was planning to use these contacts to discover more about the reasons his father was alcoholic and had seemed to abandon the family. Tom also shared his goals about the type of father and husband he hoped to be, and what his professional future held as he left the military. The therapist congratulated Tom on his willingness to do the hard work to recover from what happened to him and wished him the best with his family and future. Tom expressed his appreciation for the therapy.  referenCes  American Psychiatric Association. (1994). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (4th ed.). Washington, DC: Author.  American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.). Arlington, VA: Author.  Astin, M. C., Layne, C. M., Camilleri, A. J., & Foy, D. W. (1994). Posttraumatic stress disorder in victimizationrelated traumata. In I. J. Briere (Ed.), Assessing and treating victims of violence: New directions for mental health services (pp. 39–51). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.  Becker, J. V., Skinner, L. J., Abel, G. G., Axelrod, R., & Cichon, J. (1984). Sexual problems of sexual assault survivors. Women and Health, 9, 5–20.  Beckham, J. C., Feldman, M. E., & Kirby, A. C. (1998). Atrocities exposure in Vietnam combat veterans with chronic posttraumatic stress disorder: Relationship to combat exposure, symptom severity, guilt, and interpersonal violence. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 11, 777–785.  Blake, D. D., Weathers, F. W., Nagy, L. M., Kaloupek, D. G., Gusman, F. D., Charney, D. S., et al. (1995). The development of a Clinician-Administered PTSD Scale. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 8, 75–90.  Blanchard, E. B., Hickling, E. J., Buckley, T. C., & Taylor, A.  E. (1996). Psychophysiology of posttraumatic stress disorder related to motor vehicle accidents: Replication and extension. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 64, 742–751. Blanchard, E. B., Hickling, E. J., Devinei, T., Veazey, C. H., Galovski, T. E., & Mundy, E. (2003). A controlled evaluation of cognitive behavioral therapy for posttraumatic stress in motor vehicle accident survivors. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 41, 79–96.  Bowen, G. R., & Lambert, J. A. (1986). Systematic desensitization therapy with post-traumatic stress disorder cases. In  C. R. Figley (Ed.), Trauma and its wake: Vol. II. Traumatic stress theory, research, and intervention (pp. 280–291). New York: Brunner/Mazel. Bradley, R., Greene, J., Russ, E., Dutra, L., & Westen, D. (2005). A multidimensional meta-analysis of psychotherapy for PTSD. American Journal of Psychiatry, 162, 214–227.  Breslau, N., Davis, G. C., & Andreski, P. (1995). Risk factors for PTSD-related traumatic events: A prospective analysis. American Journal of Psychiatry, 152, 529–535.  Brewin, C. R., Dalgleish, T., & Joseph, S. (1996). A dual representation theory of posttraumatic stress disorder. Psychological Review, 103, 670–686.  Briere, J. (1995). The Trauma Symptom Inventory (TSI): Professional manual. Odessa, FL: Psychological Assessment Resources.  Brom, D., Kleber, R. J., & Defares, P. B. (1989). Brief psy    CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  chotherapy for PTSD. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 57, 607–612.  Bryant, R. A., Moulds, M. L., Guthrie, R. M., Dang, S. T., & Nixon, R. D. V. (2003). Imaginal exposure alone and imaginal exposure with cognitive restructuring in treatment of posttraumatic stress disorder. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 71, 706–712.  Buckley, T. C., Blanchard, E. B., & Hickling, E. J. (1998). A confirmatory factor analysis of posttraumatic stress symptoms. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 36, 1091– 1099.  Burt, M. R. (1980). Cultural myths and supports for rape. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 38, 217– 230.  Chard, K. M. (2005). An evaluation of cognitive processing therapy for the treatment of posttraumatic stress disorder related to childhood sexual abuse. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 73, 965–971.  Chemtob, C., Roitblat, H. L., Hamada, R. S., Carlson, J. G., & Twentyman, C. T. (1988). A cognitive action theory of post-traumatic stress disorder. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 2, 253–275.  Cloitre, M. (1998). Sexual revictimization: Risk factors and prevention. In V. M. Follette, J. I. Ruzek, & F. R. Abueg (Eds.), Cognitive-behavioral therapies for trauma (pp. 278–304). New York: Guilford Press.  Cloitre, M., Koenen, K. C., Cohen, L. R., & Han, H. (2002). Skills training in affective and interpersonal regulation followed by exposure: A phase-based treatment for PTSD related to childhood abuse. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 70, 1067–1074.  Cloitre, M., Petkova, E., Wang, J., & Lu Lassell, F. (2012). An examination of the influence of a sequential treatment on the course and impact of dissociation among women with PTSD related to childhood abuse. Depression and Anxiety, 29, 707–717.  Cloitre, M., Stovall-McClough, K. C., Miranda, R., & Chemtob, C. M. (2004). Therapeutic alliance, negative mood regulation, and treatment outcome in child abuse-related posttraumatic stress disorder. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 72, 411–416.  Cox, B. J., Clara, I. P., & Enns, M. W. (2002). Posttraumatic stress disorder and the structure of common mental disorders. Depression and Anxiety, 15, 168–171.  Creamer, M., Burgess, P., & Pattison, P. (1992). Reactions to trauma: A cognitive processing model. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 101, 452–459.  Creamer, M., Morris, P., Biddle, D., & Elliott, P. (1999). Treatment outcome in Australian veterans with combatrelated posttraumatic stress disorder: A cause for cautious optimism? Journal of Traumatic Stress, 12, 545–558.  Dalgleish, T. (2004). Cognitive approaches to posttraumatic stress disorder: The evolution of multirepresentational theorizing. Psychological Bulletin, 130, 228–260.  Denny, N., Robinowitz, R., & Penk, W. (1987). Conduct   ing applied research on Vietnam combat-related posttraumatic stress disorder. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 43, 56–66.  Derogatis, L. R. (1983). SCL-90-R: Administration, scoring and procedures manual–II. Towson, MD: Clinical Psychometric Research.  Devilly, G. J., & Spence, S. H. (1999). The relative efficacy and treatment distress of EMDR and a cognitive-behavior trauma treatment protocol in the amelioration of posttraumatic stress disorder. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 13, 131–157.  Dohrenwend, B. P., Turner, J. B., Turse, N. A., Adams, B. G., Koenen, K. C., & Marshall, R. (2006). The psychological risks of Vietnam for U.S. veterans: A revisit with new data and methods. Science, 313, 979–982.  Ehlers, A., & Clark, D. M. (2000). A cognitive model of posttraumatic stress disorder. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 38, 319–345.  Ehlers, A., Clark, D. M., Hackmann, A., McManus, F., Fennell, M., Herbert, C., et al. (2003). A randomized controlled trial of cognitive therapy, a self-help booklet, and repeated assessments as early interventions for posttraumatic stress disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry, 60, 1024-1032.  Ehlers, A., Hackmann, A., Steil, R., Clohessy, S., Wenninger, K., & Winter, H. (2002). The nature of intrusive memories after trauma: The warning signal hypothesis. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 40, 995–1002.  Falsetti, S. A., Resnick, H. S., Resick, P. A., & Kilpatrick, D.  G. (1993). The Modified PTSD Symptom Scale: A brief self-report measure of posttraumatic stress disorder. Behavior Therapist, 16, 161–162. First, M. B., Spitzer, R. L., Williams, J. B. W., & Gibbon,  M. (1995). Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV— Patient Edition (SCID-P). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press. Foa, E. B. (1995). Posttraumatic Stress Diagnostic Scale (manual). Minneapolis, MN: National Computer Systems.  Foa, E. B., Dancu, C. V., Hembree, E. A., Jaycox, L. H., Meadows, E. A., & Street, G. P. (1999). A comparison of exposure therapy, stress inoculation training, and their combination for reducing posttraumatic stress disorder in female assault victims. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 67, 194–200.  Foa, E. B., Hembree, E. A., Cahill, S. E., Rauch, S. A. M., Riggs, D. S., Feeny, N. C., et al. (2005). Randomized trial of prolonged exposure for posttraumatic stress disorder with and without cognitive restructuring: Outcome at academic and community clinics. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 73, 953–964.  Foa, E. B., Keane, T. M., Friedman, M. J., & Cohen, J. A. (Eds.). (2008). Effective treatments for PTSD: Practice guidelines from the International Society for Traumatic Stress Studies (2nd ed.). New York: Guilford Press.  Foa, E. B., Riggs, D. S., Dancu, C. V., & Rothbaum, B. O.   Posttraumatic Stress Disorder  (1993). Reliability and validity of a brief instrument for assessing post-traumatic stress disorder. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 6, 459–473.  Foa, E. B., & Rothbaum, B. O. (1998). Treating the trauma of rape: Cognitive-behavioral therapy for PTSD. New York: Guilford Press.  Foa, E. B., Rothbaum, B., Riggs, D., & Murdock, T. (1991). Treatment of posttraumatic stress disorder in rape victims: A comparison between cognitive-behavioral procedures and counseling. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 59, 715–723.  Foa, E. B., Steketee, G., & Rothbaum, B. O. (1989). Behavioral/ cognitive conceptualizations of post-traumatic stress disorder. Behavior Therapy, 20, 155–176.  Frank, E., Anderson, B., Stewart, B. D., Dancu, C., Hughes, C., & West, D. (1988). Efficacy of cognitive behavior therapy and systematic desensitization in the treatment of rape trauma. Behavior Therapy, 19, 403–420.  Frank, E., & Stewart, B. D. (1983). Treating depression in victims of rape. Clinical Psychologist, 36, 95–98.  Frank, E., & Stewart, B. D. (1984). Depressive symptoms in rape victims: A revisit. Journal of Affective Disorders, 1, 269–277.  Green, B. L. (1996). Trauma History Questionnaire. In B. H. Stamm (Ed.), Measurement of stress, trauma, and adaptation (pp. 366–369). Lutherville, MD: Sidran.  Griffin, M. G., Resick, P. A., & Mechanic, M. B. (1997). Objective assessment of peritraumatic dissociation: Psychophysiological indicators. American Journal of Psychiatry, 154, 1081–1088.  Griffin, M. G., Uhlmansiek, M. H., Resick, P. A., & Mechanic, M. B. (2004). Comparison of the Posttraumatic Stress Disorder Scale versus the Clinician-Administered Posttraumatic Stress Disorder Scale in domestic violence survivors. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 17, 497–504.  Gutner, C., Rizvi, S. L., Monson, C. M., & Resick, P. A. (2006). Changes in coping strategies, relationship to the perpetrator, and posttraumatic stress disorder in female crime victims. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 19, 813–823.  Hoge, C. W., Auchterlonie, J. L., & Milliken, C. S. (2006). Mental health problems, use of mental health services, and attrition from military service after returning from deployment to Iraq or Afghanistan. Journal of the American Medical Association, 295, 1023–1032.  Hoge, C. W., Castro, C. A., Messer, S. C., McGurk, D., Cotting, D. I., & Koffman, R. L. (2004). Combat duty in Iraq and Afghanistan, mental health problems, and barriers to care. New England Journal of Medicine, 351, 13–22.  Holmes, M. R., & St. Lawrence, J. S. (1983). Treatment of rape-induced trauma: Proposed behavioral conceptualization and review of the literature. Clinical Psychology Review, 3, 417–433.  Horowitz, M. J. (1986). Stress response syndromes (2nd ed.). New York: Aronson.  Ironson, G., Freund, B., Strauss, J. L., & Williams, J. (2002).  Comparison of two treatments for traumatic stress: A community-based study of EMDR and prolonged exposure. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 58, 113–128.  Janoff-Bulman, R. (1985). The aftermath of victimization: Rebuilding shattered assumptions. In C. R. Figley (Ed.), Trauma and its wake: Vol. I. The study and treatment of posttraumatic stress disorder (pp. 15–35). New York: Brunner/Mazel.  Janoff-Bulman, R. (1992). Shattered assumptions: Towards a new psychology of trauma. New York: Free Press.  Jordan, B. K., Marmar, C. R., Fairbank, J. A., Schlenger, W. E., Kulka, R. A., Hough, R. L., et al. (1992). Problems in families of male Vietnam veterans with posttraumatic stress disorder. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 60, 916–926.  Keane, T. M., Brief, D. J., Pratt, E. M., & Miller, M. W. (2007). Assessment and its comorbidities in adults. In M.  J. Friedman, T. M. Keane, & P. A. Resick (Eds.), Handbook of PTSD: Science and practice (pp. 279–305). New York: Guilford Press. Keane, T. M., Caddell, J. M., & Taylor, K. L. (1988). Mississippi Scale for Combat-Related Posttraumatic Stress Disorder: Three studies in reliability and validity. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 56, 85–90.  Keane, T. M., Fairbank, J. A., Caddell, J. M., & Zimering, R.  T. (1989). Implosive (flooding) therapy reduces symptoms of PTSD in Vietnam combat veterans. Behavior Therapy, 20, 245–260. Keane, T. M., Kolb, L. C., Kaloupek, D. G., Orr, S. P., Blanchard, E. B., Thomas, R. G., et al. (1998). Utility of psychophysiology measurement in the diagnosis of posttraumatic stress disorder: Results from a Department of Veteran’s Affairs cooperative study. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 66, 914–923.  Keane, T. M., Malloy, P. F., & Fairbank, J. A. (1984). Empirical development of an MMPI subscale for the assessment of combat-related posttraumatic stress disorder. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 52, 888–891.  Keane, T. M., Zimering, R. T., & Caddell, J. M. (1985). A behavioral formulation of posttraumatic stress disorder. Behavior Therapist, 8, 9–12.  Kessler, R. C., Berglund, P., Demler, O., Jin, R., Merikangas,  K. R., & Walters, E. E. (2005). Lifetime prevalence and age-of-onset distributions of DSM-IV disorders in the National Comorbidity Survey Replication. Archives of General Psychiatry, 62, 593–602. Kessler, R. C., Chiu, W. T., Demler, O., Merikangas, K. R., & Walters, E. E. (2005). Prevalence, severity, and comorbidity of 12-month DSM-IV disorders in the National Comorbidity Survey Replication. Archives of General Psychiatry, 62, 617–627.  Kessler, R. C., Sonnega, A., Bromet, E., Hughes, M., & Nelson, C. B. (1995). Posttraumatic stress disorder in the National Comorbidity Survey. Archives of General Psychiatry, 52, 1048–1060.   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  Kilpatrick, D. G. (1983). Rape victims: Detection, assessment and treatment. Clinical Psychologist, 36, 92–95.  Kilpatrick, D. G., & Amick, A. E. (1985). Rape trauma. In  M. Hersen & C. Last (Eds.), Behavior therapy casebook (pp. 86–103). New York: Springer. Kilpatrick, D. G., Edmunds, C. N., & Seymour, A. K. (1992). Rape in America: A report to the nation. Arlington, VA: National Victim Center.  Kilpatrick, D. G., Resnick, H. S., & Freedy, J. R. (1991). The Potential Stressful Events Interview. Unpublished instrument, National Crime Victims Research and Treatment Center, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston.  Kilpatrick, D. G., Saunders, B. E., Veronen, L. J., Best, C. L., & Von, J. M. (1987). Criminal victimization: Lifetime prevalence, reporting to police, and psychological impact. Crime and Delinquency, 33, 479–489.  Kilpatrick, D. G., & Veronen, L. J. (1983). Treatment for rape-related problems: Crisis intervention is not enough. In L. H. Cohen, W. L. Claiborn, & G. A. Specter (Eds.), Crisis intervention (pp. 165–185). New York: Human Sciences Press.  Kilpatrick, D. G., Veronen, L. J., & Best, C. L. (1985). Factors predicting psychological distress among rape victims. In  C. R. Figley (Ed.), Trauma and its wake: Vol. I. The study and treatment of posttraumatic stress disorder (pp. 114– 141). New York: Brunner/Mazel. Kilpatrick, D. G., Veronen, L. J., & Resick, P. A. (1982). Psychological sequelae to rape: Assessment and treatment strategies. In D. M. Doleys, R. L. Meredith, & A.  R. Ciminero (Eds.), Behavioral medicine: Assessment and treatment strategies (pp. 473–497). New York: Plenum Press. Koss, M. P., & Harvey, M. R. (1991). The rape victim: Clinical and community interventions (2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.  Kubany, E. S., Haynes, S. N., Leisen, M. B., Owens, J. A., Kaplan, A. S., Watson, S. B., et al. (2000). Development and preliminary validation of a brief broad-spectrum measure of trauma exposure: The Traumatic Life Events Questionnaire. Psychological Assessment, 12, 210–224.  Kubany, E. S., Hill, E. E., Owens, J. A., Iannce-Spencer, C., McCaig, M. A., & Tremayne, K. J. (2004). Cognitive trauma therapy for battered women with PTSD (CTT-BW). Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 72, 3–18.  Kubany, E. S., Leisen, M. B., Kaplan, A. S., & Kelly, M. P. (2000). Validation of a brief measure of posttraumatic stress disorder: The Distressing Event Questionnaire (DEQ). Psychological Assessment, 12, 197–209.  Kulka, R. A., Schlenger, W. E., Fairbank, J. A., Hough, R. L., Jordan, B. K., Marmar, C. R., et al. (1990). Trauma and the Vietnam war generation: Report of findings from the National Vietnam Veterans Readjustment Study. New York: Brunner/Mazel.  Lang, P. J. (1968). Fear reduction and fear behavior: Problems in treating a construct. In J. M. Schlien (Ed.), Research in  psychotherapy (pp. 90–102). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.  Lang, P. J. (1977). Imagery in therapy: An information processing analysis of fear. Behavior Therapy, 8, 862–886.  Lanius, R. A., Vermetten, E., Loewenstein, R. J., Brand, B., Schmahl, C., Bremner, J. D., et al. (2010). Emotion modulation in PTSD: Clinical and neurobiological evidence for a dissociative subtype. American Journal of Psychiatry, 167(6), 640–647.  Lauterbach, D., & Vrana, S. R. (1996). Three studies on the reliability and validity of a self-report measure of posttraumatic stress disorder. Assessment, 3, 17–25.  Lauterbach, D., Vrana, S., King, D. W., & King, L. A. (1997). Psychometric properties of the civilian version of the Mississippi PTSD scale. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 10, 499–513.  Lee, C., Gavriel, H., Drummond, P., Richards, J., & Greenwald, R. (2002). Treatment of PTSD: Stress inoculation training with prolonged exposure compared to EMDR. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 58, 1071–1089.  Lester, K. M., Resick, P. A., Young-Xu, Y., & Artz, C. E. (2010). Impact of ethnicity on early treatment termination and outcomes in PTSD treatment. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 4, 480-489.  Mahoney, M. J., & Lyddon, W. J. (1988). Recent developments in cognitive approaches to counseling and psychotherapy. Counseling Psychologist, 16, 190–234.  Marks, I., Lovell, K., Noshirvani, H., Livanou, M., & Thrasher, S. (1998). Treatment of posttraumatic stress disorder by exposure and/or cognitive restructuring: A controlled study. Archives of General Psychiatry, 55, 317–325.  McCann, I. L., & Pearlman, L. A. (1990). Vicarious traumatization: A framework for understanding the psychological effects of working with victims. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 3, 131–149.  McFall, M., Fontana, A., Raskind, M., & Rosenheck, R. (1999). Analysis of violent behavior in Vietnam combat veteran psychiatric inpatients with posttraumatic stress disorder. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 12, 501–517.  McNair, L. D., & Neville, H. A. (1996). African American women survivors of sexual assault: The intersection of race and class. In M. Hill & E. D. Rothblum (Eds.), Classism and feminist therapy: Counting costs (pp. 107–118). New York: Haworth.  Meichenbaum, D. H. (1985). Stress inoculation training. Elmsford, NY: Pergamon.  Miller, M. W., Greif, J. L., & Smith, A. A. (2003). Multidimensional Personality Questionnaire profiles of veterans with traumatic combat exposure: Externalizing and internalizing subtypes. Psychological Assessment, 15, 205–215.  Miller, M. W., Kaloupek, D. G., Dillon, A. L., & Keane, T.  M. (2004). Externalizing and internalizing subtypes of combat-related PTSD: A replication and extension using the PSY-5 scales. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 113, 636–645.  Posttraumatic Stress Disorder  Miller, M. W., & Resick, P. A. (2007). Internalizing and externalizing subtypes in female sexual assault survivors: Implications for the understanding of complex PTSD. Behavior Therapy, 38, 58–71.  Monson, C. M., Gradus, J. L., Young-Xu, Y., Schnurr, P. P., Price, J. A., Schumm, J. A. (2008). Change in posttraumatic stress disorder symptoms: Do clinicians and patients agree? Psychological Assessment, 20, 131–138.  Monson, C. M., Price, J. L., & Ranslow, E. (2005, October). Treating combat PTSD through cognitive processing therapy. Federal Practitioner, 22(10), 75–83.  Monson, C. M., Schnurr, P. P., Resick, P. A., Friedman, M. J., Young-Xu, Y., & Stevens, S. P. (2006). Cognitive processing therapy for veterans with military-related posttraumatic stress disorder. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 74, 898–907.  Morland, L. A., Hynes, A. K., Mackintosh, M., Resick, P. A., & Chard, K. M. (2011). Group cognitive processing therapy delivered to veterans via telehealth: A pilot cohort. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 24, 465–469.  Mowrer, O. H. (1947). On the dual nature of learning—a reinterpretation of “conditioning” and “problem-solving.” Harvard Educational Review, 14, 102–148.  National Institute of Clinical Excellence. (2005). Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD): The treatment of PTSD in adults and children. London: Author.  Neuner, F., Schauer, M., Klaschik, C., Karunakara, U., & Elbert, T. (2004). A comparison of narrative exposure therapy, supportive counseling, and psychoeducation for treating posttraumatic stress disorder in an African refugee settlement. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 72, 579–587.  Norris, F. H. (1990). Screening for traumatic stress: A scale for use in the general population. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 20, 1704–1718.  Norris, F. H. (1992). Epidemiology of trauma: Frequency and impact of different potentially traumatic events on different demographic groups. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 60, 409–418.  Oquendo, M. A., Friend, J. M., Halberstam, B., Brodsky, B. S., Burke, A. K., Grunebaum, M. F., et al. (2003). Association of comorbid posttraumatic stress disorder and major depression with greater risk for suicidal behavior. American Journal of Psychiatry, 160, 580–582.  Orr, S. P., Lasko, N. B., Metzger, L. J., Berry, N. J., Ahern,  C. E., & Pitman, R. K. (1998). Psychophysiologic assessment of women with posttraumatic stress disorder resulting from childhood sexual abuse. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 66, 906–913. Orr, S. P., Metzger, L. J., Miller, M. W., & Kaloupek, D. G. (2004). Psychophysiological assessment of PTSD. In J.  P. Wilson & T. M. Keane (Eds.), Assessing psychological trauma and PTSD (2nd ed., pp. 289–343). New York: Guilford Press. Pitman, R. K., Orr, S. P., Altman, B., Longpre, R. E., Poire, R.  E., & Macklin, M. L. (1996). Emotional processing during eye movement desensitization and reprocessing therapy of Vietnam veterans with chronic posttraumatic stress disorder. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 37, 419–429.  Pitman, R. K., Orr, S. P., Forgue, D. F., & Altman, B. (1990). Psychophysiologic responses to combat imagery of Vietnam veterans with posttraumatic stress disorder versus other anxiety disorders. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 99, 49–54.  Pitman, R. K., Orr, S. P., Forgue, D. F., de Jong, J., & Claiborn, J. M. (1987). Psychophysiologic assessment of posttraumatic stress disorder imagery in Vietnam combat veterans. Archives of General Psychiatry, 44, 970–975.  Power, K., McGoldrick, T., Brown, K., Buchanan, R., Sharp, D., & Swanson, V. (2002). A controlled comparison of eye movement desensitization and reprocessing versus exposure plus cognitive restructuring versus wait list in the treatment of posttraumatic stress disorder. Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy, 9, 299–318.  Powers, M. B., Halpern, J. M., Ferenschak, M. P., Gillihan,  S. J., & Foa, E. B. (2010). A meta-analytic review of prolonged exposure for posttraumatic stress disorder. Clinical Psychology Review, 30, 635–641. Prins, A., Ouimette, P., Kimerling, R., Camerond, R. P., Hugelshofer, D. S., Shaw-Hegwer, J., et al. (2004). The Primary Care PTSD Screen (PC-PTSD): Development and operating characteristics. Primary Care Psychiatry, 9, 9–14.  Renfrey, G., & Spates, C. R. (1994). Eye movement desensitization: A partial dismantling study. Journal of Behavior Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry, 25, 231–239.  Resick, P. A., Galovski, T. E., Uhlmansiek, M. O., Scher, C. D., Clum, G., & Young-Xu, Y. (2008). A randomized clinical trial to dismantle components of cognitive processing therapy for posttraumatic stress disorder in female victims of interpersonal violence. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 76, 243–258.  Resick, P. A., Jordan, C. G., Girelli, S. A., Hutter, C. K., & Marhoeder-Dvorak, S. (1988). A comparative outcome study of behavioral group therapy for sexual assault victims. Behavior Therapy, 19, 385–401.  Resick, P. A., & Markaway, B. E. (1991). Clinical treatment of adult female victims of sexual assault. In C. R. Hollin & K. Howells (Eds.), Clinical approaches to sex offenders and their victims (pp. 261–284). London: Wiley.  Resick, P. A., Monson, C. M., & Chard, K. M. (2007). Cognitive processing therapy: Veteran/military version. Washington, DC: Department of Veterans Affairs.  Resick, P. A., Nishith, P., & Griffin, M. G. (2003). How well does cognitive-behavioral therapy treat symptoms of complex PTSD?: An examination of child sexual abuse survivors within a clinical trial. CNS Spectrums, 8, 340–355.  Resick, P. A., Nishith, P., Weaver, T. L., Astin, M. C., & Feuer, C. A. (2002). A comparison of cognitive processing therapy, prolonged exposure and a waiting condition   CLINICAL HANDBOOK OF PSYCHOLOGICAL DISORDERS  for the treatment of posttraumatic stress disorder in female rape victims. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 70, 867–879.  Resick, P. A., & Schnicke, M. K. (1992). Cognitive processing therapy for sexual assault victims. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 60, 748–756.  Resick, P. A., & Schnicke, M. K. (1993). Cognitive processing therapy for rape victims: A treatment manual. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.  Resick, P. A., Williams, L. F., Suvak, M. K., Monson, C. M., & Gradus, J. L. (2012). Long-term outcomes of cognitivebehavioral treatments for posttraumatic stress disorder among female rape survivors. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 80, 201–210.  Resnick, H. S., Kilpatrick, D. G., Dansky, B. S., Saunders, B. E., & Best, C. L. (1993). Prevalence of civilian trauma and posttraumatic stress disorder in a representative national sample of women. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 61, 984–991.  Resnick, H. S., Kilpatrick, D. G., & Lipovsky, J. A. (1991). Assessment of rape-related posttraumatic stress disorder: Stressor and symptom dimensions. Psychological Assessment, 3, 561–572.  Robins, L. N., Helzer, J. E., Croughan, J., & Ratcliff, K. S. (1981). National Institute of Mental Health Diagnostic Interview Schedule: Its history, characteristics, and validity. Archives of General Psychiatry, 38, 381–389.  Rosenheck, R., & Fontana, A. (1996). PTSD and communitybased treatment: A commentary on “PTSD diagnosis and treatment for mental health clinicians.” Community Mental Health Journal, 32, 191–193.  Rosenheck, R., Fontana, A., & Cottrol, C. (1995). Effect of clinician–veteran racial pairing in the treatment of posttraumatic stress disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 152, 555–563.  Rothbaum, B. O., Astin, M. C., & Marsteller, F. (2005). Prolonged exposure versus eye movement desensitization and reprocessing (EMDR) for PTSD rape victims. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 18, 607–616.  Rothbaum, B. O., & Foa, E. B. (1992). Exposure therapy for rape victims with post-traumatic stress disorder. Behavior Therapist, 15, 219–222.  Rothbaum, B. O., Hodges, L. F., Ready, D., Graap, K., & Alarcon, R. (2001). Virtual reality exposure therapy for Vietnam veterans with PTSD. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 62, 617–622.  Saunders, B. E., Arata, C. M., & Kilpatrick, D. G. (1990). Development of a crime-related posttraumatic stress disorder scale for women within the Symptom Checklist–90—Revised. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 3, 439–448.  Schindler, F. E. (1980). Treatment by systematic desensitization of a recurring nightmare of a real life trauma. Journal of Behavior Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry, 11, 53–54.  Schnurr, P. P., Friedman, M. J., Engel, C. C., Foa, E. B., Shea,  T., Chow, B. K., et al. (2007). Cognitive-behavioral therapy for posttraumatic stress disorder in women: A randomized controlled trial. Journal of the American Medical Association, 297, 820–830.  Shalev, A. Y., Orr, S. P., & Pitman, R. K. (1992). Psychophysiologic response during script-driven imagery as an outcome measure in posttraumatic stress disorder. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 53, 324–326.  Shapiro, F. (1989). Eye movement desensitization: A new treatment for post-traumatic stress disorder. Journal of Behavior Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry, 20, 211–217.  Shapiro, F. (1995). Eye movement desensitization and reprocessing: Basic principles, protocols, and procedures. New York: Guilford Press.  Shay, J., & Munroe, J. (1999). Group and milieu therapy for veterans with complex posttraumatic stress disorder. In  P. A. Saigh & J. D. Bremner (Eds.), Posttraumatic stress disorder: A comprehensive text (pp. 391–413). Needham Heights, MA: Allyn & Bacon. Silverman, D. (1977). First do no more harm: Female rape victims and the male counselor. American Journal of Orthopsychiatry, 47, 91–96.  Street, A. E., Gradus, J. L., Vogt, D. S., Giasson, H. L., & Resick, P. A. (2013). Gender differences among veterans deployed in support of the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq. Journal of General Internal Medicine, 28(Suppl. 2), 556–562.  Sutker, P. B., Uddo-Crane, M., & Allain, A. N. (1991). Clinical and research assessment of posttraumatic stress disorder: A conceptual overview. Psychological Assessment, 3, 520–530.  Tarrier, N., Pilgrim, H., Sommerfield, C., Faragher, B., Reynolds, M., Graham, E., et al. (1999). A randomized trial of cognitive therapy and imaginal exposure in the treatment of chronic posttraumatic stress disorder. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 67, 13–18.  Tarrier, N., & Sommerfield, C. (2004). Treatment of chronic PTSD by cognitive therapy and exposure: 5-year followup. Behavior Therapy, 35, 231–246.  Taylor, S., Kuch, K., Koch, W. J., Crockett, D. J., & Passey, G. (1998). The structure of posttraumatic stress symptoms. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 107, 154–160.  Taylor, S., Thordarson, D. S., Maxfield, L., Fedoroff, I. C., Lovell, K., & Orgodniczuk, J. (2003). Comparative efficacy, speed, and adverse effects of three PTSD treatments: Exposure therapy, EMDR, and relaxation training. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 71, 330–338.  Tolin, D. F., & Foa, E. B. (2006). Sex differences in trauma and posttraumatic stress disorder: A quantitative review of 25 years of research. Psychological Bulletin, 132, 959– 992.  U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2001). Mental health: A report of the Surgeon General. Washington, DC: Author.  Posttraumatic Stress Disorder  U.S. Departments of Veterans Affairs and Defense. (2010). VA/DoD clinical practice guideline for the management of PTSD. Washington, DC: Author.  van Etten, M. L., & Taylor, S. (1998). Comparative efficacy of treatments for post-traumatic stress disorder: A metaanalysis. Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy, 5, 126–144.  Vogt, D., Smith, B., Elwy, R., Martin, J., Schultz, M., Drainoni, M.-L., et al.(2011). Predeployment, deployment, and postdeployment risk factors for posttraumatic stress symptomatology in female and male OEF/OIF veterans. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 120, 819–831.  Vrana, S., & Lauterbach, D. (1994). Prevalence of traumatic events and post-traumatic psychological symptoms in a nonclinical sample of college students. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 7, 289–302.  Weathers, F. W., Blake, D. D., Schnurr, P. P., Kaloupek,  D. G., Marx, B. P., & Keane, T. M. (2013). Clinician- Administered PTSD Scale for DSM-5. Washington, DC: U.S. Veterans Affairs National Center for Posttraumatic Stress Disorder. Weathers, F., Litz, B. T., Herman, D. S., Huska, J. A., & Keane, T. M. (1993, October). The PTSD Checklist (PCL): Reliability, validity, and diagnostic utility. Presentation at the International Society for Traumatic Stress Studies, San Antonio, TX.  Weathers, F. W., & Keane, T. M. (1999). Psychological assessment of traumatized adults. In P. A. Saigh & J. D. Bremner (Eds.), Posttraumatic stress disorder: A comprehensive text (pp. 219–247). Boston: Allyn & Bacon.  Weathers, F. W., Keane, T. M., & Davidson, J. R. (2001).  Clinician-Administered PTSD Scale: A review of the first ten years of research. Depression and Anxiety, 13, 132– 156.  Weathers, F. W., Litz, B., Keane, K. M., Palmieri, P. A. , Marx, B., & Schnurr, P. P. (2013). PTSD Checklist–5. Washington, DC: U.S. Veterans Affairs National Center for Posttraumatic Stress Disorder.  Weathers, F. W., Ruscio, A. M., & Keane, T. M. (1999). Psychometric properties of nine scoring rules for the Clinician-Administered Posttraumatic Stress Disorder Scale. Psychological Assessment, 11, 124–133.  Weiss, D. S., & Marmar, C. R. (1997). The Impact of Event Scale—Revised. In J. P. Wilson & T. M. Keane (Eds.), Assessing psychological trauma and PTSD (pp. 399–411). New York: Guilford Press.  Wilson, A. E., Calhoun, K. S., & Bernat, J. A. (1999). Risk recognition and trauma-related symptoms among sexually revictimized women. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 67, 705–710.  Wilson, D., Silver, S. M., Covi, W., & Foster, S. (1996). Eye movement desensitization and reprocessing: Effectiveness and automatic correlates. Journal of Behavior Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry, 27, 219–229.  Wolf, E. J., Lunney, C. A., Miller, M. W., Resick, P. A., Friedman, M. J., & Schnurr, P. P. (2012). The dissociative subtype of PTSD: A replication and extension. Depression and Anxiety, 29, 679–688.  Zoellner, L. A., Feeny, N. C., Fitzgibbons, L. A., & Foa, E.  B. (1999). Response of African American and Caucasian women to cognitive behavioral therapy for PTSD. Behavior Therapy, 30, 581–595.  CHaPter 3  social Anxiety Disorder  richarD G. heiMBerG leaNNe MaGee  Many people are very shy and somewhat inhibited. for this reason, the suffering associated with social anxiety disorder is often minimized as a common trait in the population that does not require a heavy artillery of formalized treatment interventions (either drugs or psychological treatments). nothing could be further from the truth. for members of a very large segment of the population with debilitating social anxiety (over 12% and increasing), at some point in their lives, the seemingly simple process of interacting with people or forming relationships provokes overwhelming terror and is often avoided. The effects on career and quality of life can be devastating. This chapter examines the latest iteration of an established psychological treatment for social anxiety disorder. As is increasingly true of our new generation of psychological interventions, cognitive‑ behavioral therapy has proven to be significantly better than equally credible but less focused psychological interventions, and its effect is increasingly powerful over time. As such, this treatment is among the best of the new generation of psychological treatments characterized by power and specificity. The case of Josie, with a report of her progress at a 5‑year follow‑up that is new to this edition, also illustrates the maturity and clinical sophistication of this remarkable approach to social anxiety.—D. H. B.  The National Comorbidity Survey Replication Study (NCS-R), which assessed over 9,000 noninstitutionalized individuals throughout the United States, found that 12.1% of people have social anxiety disorder at some point during their lives (Kessler et al., 2005). In this survey, social anxiety disorder (also known as social phobia; Liebowitz, Heimberg, Fresco, Travers, & Stein, 2000) was the fourth most common psychiatric disorder, with only major depressive disorder, alcohol abuse, and specific phobia being more prevalent. More conservative lifetime prevalence estimates suggest that clinically significant social anxiety affects a compelling but more modest 4% of the population (Narrow, Rae, Robins, & Regier, 2002).  When social anxiety disorder was first included as a diagnostic category in the third edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-III; American Psychiatric Association, 1980), it was thought to result in only minimal disruption in role functioning. Research has since revealed that social anxiety disorder can be quite incapacitating. The vast majority of individuals with social anxiety disorder report that their work, academic, and social functioning have been seriously impaired by their fears (Acarturk, de Graaf, van Straten, ten Have, & Cuijpers, 2008; Aderka et al., 2012; Katzelnick et al., 2001; Schneier et al., 1994). Compared to their nonanxious peers, individuals with social anxiety disorder report fewer  114   Social Anxiety Disorder  friends and dating partners (Rodebaugh, 2009; Wenzel, 2002), and they are less likely to marry, even in comparison to persons with other anxiety disorders. In one study, despite a mean age in the early 30s, 50% of individuals with social anxiety disorder had never married, compared to 36% of individuals with panic disorder and agoraphobia, and 18% of those with generalized anxiety disorder (Sanderson, Di Nardo, Rapee, & Barlow, 1990). In another study, individuals with social anxiety disorder were more likely than their nonanxious counterparts to work at a job below their level of educational attainment and to believe that their supervisors did not think that they fit into the work environment (Bruch, Fallon, & Heimberg, 2003). Symptoms of social anxiety are also associated with a low level of life satisfaction, even after taking into account the level of disability engendered by these symptoms (Hambrick, Turk, Heimberg, Schneier, & Liebowitz, 2003).  Social anxiety disorder most commonly begins during early childhood or adolescence (Schneier, Johnson, Hornig, Liebowitz, & Weissman, 1992) and typically follows an unremitting course in clinical samples (Bruce et al., 2005). Nevertheless, most individuals with social anxiety disorder do not seek treatment unless they develop an additional disorder (Schneier et al., 1992). In contrast, rates of remission have been higher in epidemiological than in clinical samples (Blanco et al., 2011; Vriends, Becker, Meyer, Williams, et al., 2007).  Approximately 70–80% of individuals with social anxiety disorder meet criteria for additional diagnoses, and, in most cases, social anxiety disorder predates the onset of the comorbid condition (W. J. Magee, Eaton, Wittchen, McGonagle, & Kessler, 1996; Schneier et al., 1992). In community samples, the most common additional diagnoses include specific phobia, agoraphobia, major depression, and alcohol use disorders (W. J. Magee et al., 1996; Schneier et al., 1992). Compared to individuals with uncomplicated social anxiety disorder, persons with social anxiety disorder and comorbid disorders have higher rates of suicide attempts, are more likely to report significant role impairment, and more often use medication to control their symptoms (W. J. Magee et al., 1996; Schneier et al., 1992).  Comorbidity is also associated with more severe impairment before and after cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT), although individuals with and without comorbid conditions make similar gains (Erwin, Heimberg, Juster, & Mindlin, 2002). Comorbid mood disorders appear to be more strongly associated with impairment than do comorbid anxiety disorders (Erwin et al., 2002).  suBtyPes of social aNxiety DisorDer aND avoiDaNt PersoNality DisorDer  Individuals with social anxiety are a heterogeneous group in terms of the pervasiveness and severity of their fears. Many individuals have a range of social fears, including social interaction fears (e.g., dating, joining an ongoing conversation, being assertive), performance fears (e.g., public speaking, playing a musical instrument in front of others), and observation fears (e.g., working in front of others, walking down the street). In previous editions of the DSM, this was labeled as a generalized subtype of social anxiety disorder, a term absent in DSM-5. Instead, DSM-5 includes a performance-only subtype, reflecting individuals for whom the fear is restricted to speaking or performing in public (American Psychiatric Association, 2013).  Relative to the DSM-5 performance-only subtype, having social anxiety in many situations has been associated with earlier age of onset, decreased educational attainment, higher rates of unemployment, and a greater likelihood of being unmarried (Heimberg, Hope, Dodge, & Becker, 1990; Mannuzza et al., 1995). This group also experiences more depression, anxiety, avoidance, fear of negative evaluation, and functional impairment (e.g., Brown, Heimberg, & Juster, 1995; Herbert, Hope, & Bellack, 1992; Turner, Beidel, & Townsley, 1992). Nevertheless, after CBT, clients who fear many social situations improve as much as those who only fear performance situations (Brown et al., 1995; Hope, Herbert, & White, 1995; Turner, Beidel, Wolff, Spaulding, & Jacob, 1996). However, because clients with multiple social fears begin treatment with greater impairment, they remain more impaired after receiving the same number of treatment sessions. Therefore, these individuals may require a longer course of treatment to achieve outcomes similar to those of clients with the performance-only subtype. However, it has not been clearly established that the DSM-5 subtyping scheme provides more information than a simple count of the number of feared social situations (Vriends, Becker, Meyer, Michael, & Margraf, 2007).  With the exception of the performance-only subtype, social anxiety disorder has many features in common with avoidant personality disorder (APD). In the current diagnostic system, APD is characterized by a long-standing pattern “of social inhibition, feelings of inadequacy, and hypersensitivity to negative evaluation” (American Psychiatric Association, 2013, p. 672). Given the similarity between the descriptions of the two   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  disorders, it is not surprising that many individuals who meet criteria for social anxiety disorder also meet criteria for APD. In both clinical and community samples (Cox, Pagura, Stein, & Sareen, 2009; Huppert, Strunk, Ledley, Davidson, & Foa, 2008; Marques et al., 2012), individuals who met criteria for both social anxiety disorder and APD were more depressed and demonstrated greater functional impairment and reduced quality of life. However, in one study, these differences were no longer evident when severity of social anxiety was controlled (Chambless, Fydrich, & Rodebaugh, 2008). The most parsimonious description of the relationship between social anxiety disorder and APD may be that they are not different disorders and that individuals meeting criteria for both disorders are simply the most severely impaired persons with social anxiety disorder (Chambless et al., 2008; Heimberg, Holt, Schneier, Spitzer, & Liebowitz, 1993). With regard to treatment outcome, some studies have found that clients with and without comorbid APD make similar gains (Brown et al., 1995; Hofmann, Newman, Becker, Taylor, & Roth, 1995; Hope, Herbert, et al., 1995), although others have found that comorbid APD is associated with poorer treatment response (Chambless, Tran, & Glass, 1997; Feske, Perry, Chambless, Renneberg, & Goldstein, 1996), despite greater improvement early in the treatment process in one study (Huppert et al., 2008). As with individuals meeting criteria for social anxiety disorder, clients with APD may require prolonged treatment to achieve an optimal outcome.  overview of the treatMeNt outcoMe literature  Researchers have investigated the efficacy of a broad range of treatments for social anxiety disorder, including social skills training, cognitive therapy, relaxation training, exposure, interpersonal psychotherapy, dynamically oriented supportive psychotherapy, and various pharmacotherapies. This review examines only studies that have tested the efficacy of combined exposure and cognitive treatment. The combination of exposure and cognitive restructuring has been the most frequently studied form of psychosocial intervention for social anxiety disorder and represents the focus of the intervention described in this chapter (broader reviews of the treatment outcome literature are provided by Pontoski, Heimberg, Turk, & Coles, 2010, and Wong, Gordon, & Heimberg, 2012).  Researchers have often sought to demonstrate that the efficacy of exposure is improved by the addition of cognitive restructuring. The results of these efforts have been mixed. A meta-analysis conducted by Powers, Sigmarsson, and Emmelkamp (2008) revealed no greater benefit from the addition of cognitive restructuring to exposure. However, a more recent metaanalysis by Ougrin (2011) demonstrated a significant difference in favor of this combination, assessed either immediately after treatment or at follow-up assessments. This difference was evident in the treatment of social anxiety disorder, but not in the treatment of other anxiety disorders.  Heimberg, Dodge, and colleagues (1990) conducted the first controlled trial of his group treatment for social anxiety disorder, which comprised integrated exposure, cognitive restructuring, and homework assignments (i.e., cognitive-behavioral group therapy [CBGT]). This treatment was compared to an attention control treatment that comprised education about social anxiety disorder and nondirective supportive group therapy. CBGT participants reported less anxiety during an individualized behavioral test and were more likely than control participants to be rated as improved by a clinical assessor. A 5-year follow-up of a subset of participants from the original sample indicated that individuals who had received CBGT were more likely than comparable attention control participants to maintain their gains (Heimberg, Salzman, Holt, & Blendell, 1993).  In a component analysis of CBGT, Hope, Heimberg, and Bruch (1995) reported that CBGT and exposure alone were both more effective than a waitinglist control. At posttest, there was some evidence that the exposure-alone condition was more effective than CBGT, but these differences disappeared at 6-month follow-up.  In a two-site study, 133 clients were randomly assigned to receive CBGT, the monoamine oxidase inhibitor phenelzine, pill placebo, or the attention control psychotherapy developed by Heimberg, Dodge, and colleagues (1990; Heimberg et al., 1998). At posttest, independent assessors classified 21 of 28 CBGT completers (75%; 58% of the intent-to-treat [ITT] sample) and 20 of 26 phenelzine completers (77%; 65% of the ITT sample) as treatment responders. The response rates for phenelzine and CBGT clients were significantly better than those for clients receiving pill placebo or the attention control psychotherapy. In the second phase of this study, clients who responded to CBGT or phenelzine were continued through an additional 6 months   Social Anxiety Disorder  of maintenance treatment and a 6-month follow-up period (Liebowitz et al., 1999). At study’s end, 50% of previously responding clients who received phenelzine relapsed, compared to only 17% of clients who received CBGT.  Another study examined the efficacy of CBGT alone, versus phenelzine, and in combination with phenelzine (Blanco et al., 2010). Response rates at posttest suggested that combined treatment was superior to placebo, but that CBGT and phenelzine alone did not differ from each other, from combined treatment, or from placebo. However, additional examination suggested that phenelzine was often superior to CBGT in these short-term analyses, not inconsistent with the findings of Heimberg and colleagues (1998).  Two studies compared CBGT to mindfulness and acceptance-based treatments. Koszyski, Benger, Shilk, and Bradwejn (2007) compared CBGT to mindfulnessbased stress reduction (MBSR; Kabat-Zinn, 1990). In this study, MBSR comprised eight 2.5-hour group sessions and one full-day meditation retreat. Both treatments produced improvements in mood, functioning, and quality of life; however, CBGT was associated with significantly greater reductions in self- and clinicianrated social anxiety, as well as higher rates of response and remission. Piet, Hougaard, Hecksher, and Rosenberg (2010) compared CBGT to mindfulnessbased cognitive therapy (MBCT; Segal, Williams, & Teasdale, 2002) in socially anxious young adults ages 18–25. Using a crossover design, participants were randomly assigned to eight 2-hour group sessions of MBCT and twelve 2-hour sessions of CBGT. MBCT produced moderate effects (d = 0.78), which were lower but not significantly different from those produced by CBGT (d = 1.15), and participants continued to improve during the 6-month follow-up period.  A waiting-list controlled study of the individually administered version of this treatment was recently completed (Ledley et al., 2009). The individual cognitive-behavioral treatment consistently outperformed the waiting list on both self-report and clinician-administered measures of social anxiety. Effect sizes were large, and little dropout occurred. These positive findings were essentially replicated by Goldin and colleagues (2012) in an independent sample.  Controlled trials of Clark’s cognitive therapy (CT) for social anxiety disorder have also yielded large effect sizes and appear promising. CT includes exposure and cognitive restructuring, with emphasis on identifying and eliminating safety behaviors. In CT, the  therapist and patient create a personalized conceptualization of the factors serving to maintain the patient’s social anxiety (e.g., patient’s idiosyncratic thoughts, images, safety behaviors, and attentional strategies). Throughout therapy, the patient’s negatively distorted self-representations are modified using video feedback, in which predicted performance is compared to actual performance. Additionally, the therapist encourages direction of attention away from aversive internal experiences (i.e., symptoms of anxiety), toward the task at hand. CT has demonstrated efficacy for individuals with social anxiety disorder (Clark et al., 2003; 2006), as well as superiority to interpersonal therapy (Stangier, Schramm, Heidenreich, Berger, & Clark, 2011). Gains made during CT were maintained when assessed after 5 years (Mörtberg, Clark, & Bejerot, 2011).  In summary, it appears that a combined package of exposure and cognitive restructuring is an effective intervention for social anxiety disorder. Whether it is more effective than exposure alone is more difficult to determine given the limited number of studies and mixed results. However, more important to practitioners is the mounting evidence that three out of four clients with social anxiety disorder are likely to realize clinically significant change after a reasonably intensive trial of combined exposure and cognitive restructuring.   aN iNteGrateD coGNitive‑Behavioral MoDel of social aNxiety DisorDer  Rapee and Heimberg’s (1997) development of an integrated cognitive-behavioral model that describes how individuals with social anxiety disorder process information when confronted with a situation that holds the potential for negative evaluation has been recently updated by Heimberg, Brozovich, and Rapee (2010). The process begins when the socially anxious individual is in the presence of an audience. The term “audience” captures the sense that socially anxious individuals have of being “on stage” in the presence of others, whether the situation is a speech, social interaction, or another situation in which the person may be observed by others. Socially anxious persons perceive this audience as inherently critical (e.g., Leary, Kowalski, & Campbell, 1988) and as having standards that they are unlikely to meet (e.g., Wallace & Alden, 1991).  In the presence of an audience, socially anxious individuals construct a mental representation of how they   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  appear to other people. This mental representation of the self comprises negative and distorted images in which the self is viewed from an observer perspective (Hackmann, Surawy, & Clark, 1998). These images have been found to be related to memories of early adverse social events, such as being bullied (Hackmann, Clark, & McManus, 2000). For example, one client described being mercilessly teased by her peers as a young adolescent for being tall and skinny. Although at the time of treatment she was an attractive adult, she still described her appearance as “gangly,” “awkward,” and “ugly.” Research has also shown that socially anxious individuals rate their own social behavior more harshly than do objective observers (Rapee & Lim, 1992; Stopa & Clark, 1993) and overestimate the visibility of their anxiety relative to ratings by objective observers (Bruch, Gorsky, Collins, & Berger, 1989; Norton & Hope, 2001). Undoubtedly, these beliefs negatively impact their image of how they are coming across to others. The image of the self is further influenced by internal cues (e.g., somatic sensations of perspiration may produce images of sweat dripping down one’s face) and external cues such as others’ reactions (e.g., someone glancing at one’s clothing and frowning might lead to images of appearing disheveled).  Beliefs that they are unacceptable to other people, that other people are inherently critical, and that the evaluation of others is extremely important motivate individuals with social anxiety disorder to be hypervigilant for early indications of disapproval from others (e.g., frowns, yawns) and aspects of their own behavior or appearance that might elicit negative evaluation from others (e.g., making an inane comment, not being dressed appropriately, visibly shaking). The division of attentional resources among external social threats, the (distorted) mental representation of the self as seen by others, and the demands of the current social task may result in actual performance deficits, which may then elicit actual negative social feedback. In effect, socially anxious persons operate within the equivalent of a multiple-task paradigm, which increases the probability of disrupted social performance (MacLeod & Mathews, 1991). Therefore, complex social tasks are more likely than less complex tasks to result in poorer performance, due to limited processing resources.  Persons with social anxiety disorder also attempt to predict the standards that the audience holds for them in the situation. Characteristics of the audience (e.g., importance, attractiveness) and features of the situation (e.g., whether it is formal or informal) influence the  projected standards of the audience. Individuals with social anxiety disorder then attempt to judge the extent to which their current mental representation of their appearance and behavior matches the predicted standards of the audience. Of course, given the negative bias present in their mental self-representation, they are likely to conclude that they are falling short of the audience’s expectations, and painful outcomes such as loss of social status and rejection are likely follow. Negative predictions result in cognitive, behavioral, and physiological symptoms of anxiety that eventually feed back into the negatively biased mental representation of the self as seen by others and perpetuate the cycle of anxiety.  A significant recent change to the model addresses what is thought to be the core fear in social anxiety disorder, typically characterized as a fear of negative evaluation. However, recent research suggests that socially anxious individuals fear any evaluation, whether it is negative or positive (e.g., Weeks, Heimberg, Rodebaugh, & Norton, 2008). Fear of positive evaluation (FPE) may arise when successful social performance activates the belief that others will expect continued success in future social interactions, but the person doubts his/her ability to meet these increased expectations. However, the construct of FPE is derived from an evolutionary model of social anxiety disorder, which posits that socially anxious individuals work to maintain their (low) social status by not drawing attention to themselves (Gilbert, 2001). In this way, they neither risk losing status nor have to engage in conflict with more powerful others to defend any elevated social status they may have achieved. The update to the Rapee– Heimberg model reflects this line of thinking, and the model now posits that socially anxious persons fear and attend to cues of evaluation, regardless of valence. The model as updated by Heimberg and colleagues (2010) is presented in Figure 3.1. See the chapter in that book for a fuller explication of revisions to the original model.  treatMeNt ratioNale froM a coGNitive‑Behavioral PersPective  The heart of our approach to treatment is the integration of exposure and cognitive restructuring (Heimberg & Becker, 2002; Hope, Heimberg, & Turk, 2010a, 2010b). Exposure is beneficial for several reasons that are communicated to the client. One of the most important aspects of exposure is the opportunity to test dysfunctional beliefs (e.g., “I will get too anxious to finish   Social Anxiety Disorder  Preferential Allocation of Attentional Resources Perceived Internal Cues Cognitive Symptoms of Anxiety Physical Symptoms of Anxiety Behavioral Symptoms of Anxiety Judgment of Probability andConsequence of Evaluation from Audience Comparison of Mental Representation of Self as Seen by Audience with Appraisal of Audience's Expected Standard Mental Representation of Self as Seen by Audience PERCEIVED AUDIENCE Observation / Image of Self and Audience Behavior External Indicators of Evaluation figUre 3.1. An updated cognitive-behavioral model of social anxiety disorder. From Heimberg, Brozovich, and Rapee (2010, Figure 15.2, p. 416). Copyright 2010 by Elsevier Limited. Reprinted by permission.   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  the speech”) and to generate more realistic ways of understanding the self and others (e.g., “I can continue the speech even if I am anxious”). Exposure also allows clients to experience the natural anxiety reduction that comes with staying in a feared situation for a prolonged period of time on several occasions (i.e., habituation). Last, exposure allows clients to practice long-avoided behavioral skills (e.g., asking someone for a date, being assertive) and to engage in behaviors consistent with their personal goals (e.g., engaging in small talk with new people that may lead to friendships in the future).  Cognitive restructuring is also important for several reasons communicated to clients. Clients learn to treat their anxiety-provoking thoughts and beliefs as hypotheses and to explore whether there are more helpful or realistic ways of viewing the situation, the self, and others. As clients come to view social situations as less threatening, they are often more willing to confront those situations in exposures. Furthermore, addressing dysfunctional cognitions often frees up attentional resources that can be used to increase focus on the social task at hand and potentially improve performance. Additionally, cognitive restructuring may help clients to take credit for successes and cope with disappointments after exposures. The use of cognitive skills to diffuse postevent processing may be especially important given that rumination following one anxiety-provoking event is associated with greater initial anxiety prior to confronting another anxiety-provoking event (for a review, see Brozovich & Heimberg, 2008). Last, as clients’ cognitive assessments of the danger inherent in social situations become more realistic, their physiological symptoms of anxiety often diminish as well.  In-session exposures, with cognitive restructuring occurring before, during, and after each exposure, are particularly crucial. With the gentle encouragement and emotional support of the therapist, clients are often willing to engage in behaviors in session that they have avoided outside of session for many years. Successful in-session exposures can provide clients with the confidence and motivation to try out these behaviors in the real world. In-session exposures may also be more easily graduated than in vivo exposures. For example, a client who is terrified of formal public speaking might do an initial in-session exposure that comprises reading an article aloud from a magazine while sitting down. The next exposure might involve standing up while reading the article aloud, then taking questions from a small audience. In-session exposures also provide the therapist with the opportunity to teach clients about the  principles of effective exposure, such as staying in a feared social situation for a prolonged period of time without avoiding, even if anxiety escalates. In-session exposures also allow the therapist to see firsthand any subtle avoidance behaviors (i.e., safety behaviors) that the client may employ to manage anxiety. For example, a client who fears that other people might reject him if they got to know him personally may assail a conversation partner with questions and not reveal any personal information. A client who is afraid of the reaction of others to her speech might never look up from her notes, so that she never has to see any bored or critical faces (and, of course, also never has a chance to see any interested or approving faces). As noted by Clark and Wells (1995), such safety behaviors are essentially attempts to avoid feared outcomes, but they may have the unintended effect of making individuals appear socially awkward and increase the likelihood of negative reactions from others. Furthermore, clients do not learn that they might have managed the social situation as well, if not better, without engaging in safety behaviors. In-session exposures provide the therapist with the opportunity to point out these behaviors and to set goals for the next exposure that involve fully confronting the feared situation (e.g., looking at the audience during the speech, revealing personal information during a conversation). In-session exposures also provide the opportunity for clients to receive direct feedback on their social performance in a way that is often not possible in real life. For example, a client who believes that she trembles so much during public speaking that others pity her can ask her exposure audience how noticeable the trembling was and what they thought of her (rarely will an audience reply that an anxious person was pitied). Last, in-session exposures provide the opportunity for the therapist to assist clients in applying cognitive restructuring skills to an actual anxiety-provoking situation. Once in-session exposures begin, homework involves confronting similar situations outside of session. As with in-session exposures, clients are asked to engage in cognitive restructuring activities before, during, and after each in vivo exposure.  treatMeNt‑relateD variaBles  Group versus Individual Treatment  Treatment of social anxiety disorder has often been conducted in a group format (e.g., Blanco et al., 2010;   Social Anxiety Disorder  Heimberg, Dodge, et al., 1990; Heimberg et al., 1998), which has been conceptualized as having a number of advantages over the individual format. It provides opportunities for vicarious learning, support from others with similar problems, the availability of multiple roleplay partners, informal exposure stemming from group participation, and a range of people to provide evidence to counter distorted thinking (Heimberg & Becker, 2002; Sank & Shaffer, 1984). Nevertheless, the group format has a number of potential disadvantages as well. Treatment cannot begin until a group of approximately six clients has been assembled, which means that the first few individuals joining the group may have to wait for an extended period before starting treatment. Some of these individuals lose motivation and drop out before the group begins. Group treatment also provides less flexibility in making up missed sessions. Although group treatment provides opportunities for vicarious learning, this benefit may be offset by the reduced time available for the idiosyncratic needs of each client. Clinically, some clients appear to get discouraged and lose motivation when they see other group members progressing at a more rapid pace than themselves. Additionally, even when efforts are made to screen potential group members, a group may include a client who is domineering, aggressive, or otherwise difficult to manage, and may have a negative impact on the group. Last, some individuals never fully habituate to the group setting, and their anxiety may interfere with their ability to process information during sessions.  Little available data speak to the issue of whether individual or group therapy provides better outcomes. In their meta-analysis, Powers and colleagues (2008) reported that group and individual cognitive-behavioral interventions for social anxiety disorder produced similar effect sizes, but another meta-analysis based on a small sample of studies (Aderka, 2009) suggested a modest advantage for individual treatment. Group and individual formats have rarely been compared within the same study. Scholing and Emmelkamp (1993) examined various combinations of exposure and cognitive restructuring delivered in group or individual formats and found no clear advantage for either treatment modality. Similarly, Wlazlo, Schroeder-Hartwig, Hand, Kaiser, and Münchau (1990) found no differences in outcome between group and individual exposure treatment. One study did find that an individual version of CBT for social anxiety disorder was superior to the group version, and that both formats were superior to a waiting list (Stangier, Heidenreich, Peitz, Lauterbach,  & Clark, 2003). However, the data do not suggest a clear advantage for either modality in the treatment of social anxiety disorder.  Heimberg and Becker (2002) provide a description of CBGT for social anxiety disorder. This chapter provides a description of the individual version of this treatment, which has been the focus of our attention in recent years (see also Hope et al., 2010a; 2010b).  Appropriate Clients  In treatment studies to date, social anxiety disorder has been the primary diagnosis of the participants. As previously discussed, social anxiety disorder is often comorbid with other disorders (W. J. Magee et al., 1996; Schneier et al., 1992). In such cases, the clinician and client need to reach a joint decision that social anxiety will be the focus of treatment for a specified period of time (e.g., 16 weeks). Clinically, it is important to clarify this issue prior to beginning treatment because some clients may express a desire to switch the focus of treatment to another problem area when it is time to begin exposures. In general, our policy is to remind the client of the original treatment contract and goals, and to encourage him/her to “avoid avoidance.” In some cases, the best clinical decision is to change the focus of treatment due to changes in the client’s life circumstances or symptoms. Nevertheless, we are especially wary of altering the treatment plan when the client’s desire to change the focus of treatment coincides with the initiation of exposures. Therapists without a strong background in CBT or exposure therapy may be at risk for changing the focus of treatment too readily, partially due to their own discomfort with conducting in-session exposures. Sometimes a compromise can be reached in which exposures remain in the treatment plan but some session time is set aside to deal with other issues.  Appropriate Therapists  The ideal therapist has a strong background in the theoretical underpinnings of CBT for anxiety disorders, experience conducting exposures, good basic therapy skills, and experience with social anxiety in particular. Little is known about the effectiveness of manualized treatments when implemented by clinicians without extensive training in the manual’s theoretical underpinnings and procedures (Chambless & Ollendick, 2001), although data are accumulating to suggest that the treatments described here or similar ones retain   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  their efficacy when implemented in community settings (Gaston, Abbott, Rapee, & Neary, 2006; Lincoln et al., 2003; McEvoy, 2007; McEvoy, Nathan, Rapee, & Campbell, 2012). Our clinical experience suggests that with good supervision, this treatment can be successfully implemented by novice therapists seeing their very first clients (in fact, the client presented later was treated by L. Magee, who at the time was a novice therapist) and experienced therapists with a theoretical orientation other than a cognitive-behavioral one. Experienced clinicians with a good cognitive-behavioral background are likely to do quite well working independently with this manualized treatment. Moreover, our client workbook (Hope et al., 2010a) and therapist guide (Hope et al., 2010b) were designed with the intention of being sufficiently detailed to allow therapists with a wide variety of backgrounds to provide this treatment, although supervision and/or consultation with an experienced cognitive-behavioral therapist on the first few cases and the more complex cases would be beneficial.  Medication and CBT for Social Anxiety Disorder  Many clients are already taking psychotropic medications when they present for therapy. Some take medication to control their social anxiety, whereas others take medication for comorbid conditions. We do not require clients to discontinue medications prior to starting CBT (unless dictated by a specific research protocol). However, we do ask clients to stabilize their dosage before starting treatment and to refrain from changing their dosage or trying any new medications during treatment. Clinically, we want clients to attribute positive changes in their symptoms to the work they are doing in therapy rather than to changes in their medication regimen. Individuals who take medication on an as-needed basis are asked to refrain from doing so before sessions or exposure homework assignments. The same request is made of individuals who use nonprescription drugs, alcohol, or other substances to control their anxiety.  PretreatMeNt assessMeNt aND PreParatioN for treatMeNt  Assessment should play an integral part in diagnosis, case conceptualization, treatment planning, and termination decisions. Although administering all of the  measures presented here is not practical in most clinical settings, we highly recommend administering a subset of the self-report and clinician-rated instruments described below, and a behavioral assessment, if at all possible (for a more thorough review of assessment of social anxiety disorder, see Heimberg & Turk, 2002).  Clinical Interview  The Anxiety Disorders Interview Schedule for DSM- IV (ADIS-IV; Brown, Di Nardo, & Barlow, 1994), the ADIS-IV—Lifetime Version (ADIS-IV-L; Di Nardo, Brown, & Barlow, 1994), as well as the ADIS for DSM-5 (ADIS-5-L; Brown, Di Nardo, & Barlow, 2013), provide a thorough diagnostic assessment of the anxiety disorders and include modules for mood disorders, substance use disorders, and disorders that overlap with anxiety disorders in clinical presentation (e.g., hypochondriasis, somatization disorder). There are screening questions for other major disorders (e.g., psychosis). A 0- to 8-point clinician’s severity rating (CSR) designates the degree of distress and interference associated with each diagnosis. A CSR of 4 or higher suggests that the client meets diagnostic criteria. When multiple disorders receive a CSR of 4 or higher, the disorder receiving the highest CSR is designated as the principal diagnosis and the other disorders are designated as additional. In a major reliability study of the ADIS-IV-L, 362 individuals seeking treatment at an anxiety specialty clinic received two independent administrations of the ADIS-IV (Brown, Di Nardo, Lehman, & Campbell, 2001). Social anxiety disorder evidenced good reliability as a principal diagnosis (kappa = .77), as a clinical (principal or additional) diagnosis (kappa = .77), and as a past (lifetime) diagnosis (kappa = .72). The CSR for social anxiety disorder (r = .80) also evidenced good interrater reliability.  We routinely administer the ADIS during the first client visit. Semistructured interviews such as the ADIS assist with differential diagnosis and in providing systematic assessment for a broad range of comorbid conditions that may affect the course of treatment. Nevertheless, diagnostic interviews may be costly and time-consuming. Regardless of whether a semistructured or unstructured clinical interview is conducted, devoting time to a thorough and accurate diagnostic evaluation is crucial to appropriate treatment planning. Clients whose symptoms are better accounted for by another diagnosis may experience, among other things, little improvement with treatment targeting social anxi    Social Anxiety Disorder  ety, unnecessarily prolonged suffering as they go without the appropriate treatment, increased hopelessness, and financial hardship.  Self‑Report Instruments  Self-report instruments are an important complement to the diagnostic interview. Clients may experience feelings of shame and embarrassment during a clinical interview and give descriptions of their problems that do not fully reflect the severity or pervasiveness of their social fear or avoidance. Furthermore, normative data on questionnaires allow the clinician to evaluate the severity of a client’s symptoms relative to meaningful reference points. Importantly, pretreatment scores provide a baseline against which treatment progress can be assessed.  Measures of Social Anxiety  A number of questionnaires are available to assess social anxiety and avoidance. The Social Interaction Anxiety Scale (SIAS) and Social Phobia Scale (SPS) are commonly used companion measures designed specifically for the assessment of social anxiety disorder (Mattick & Clarke, 1998). The SIAS assesses fear of interacting in dyads and groups, and the SPS assesses fear of being observed by others (e.g., eating in front of others). In most published studies, the SIAS and SPS contain 20 items each. For each instrument, respondents rate how characteristic each statement is of them on a 5-point Likert-type scale (0, Not at all; 4, Extremely). Multiple studies suggest that the SIAS and SPS are reliable and valid measures, and sensitive to the effects of CBT (e.g., Brown et al., 1997; Cox, Ross, Swinson, & Direnfeld, 1998; Heimberg, Mueller, Holt, Hope, & Liebowitz, 1992; Ries et al., 1998). However, recent research suggests that the 17 straightforwardly worded items of the SIAS are more sensitive to the construct of social anxiety than the three reverse-scored items, which seem more related to the construct of extraversion (Rodebaugh, Woods, & Heimberg, 2007). A number of studies now support the use of the 17-item scale (e.g., Rodebaugh et al., 2011). Recently, even shorter forms of both instruments have been developed (Fergus, Valentiner, McGrath, Gier-Lonsway, & Kim, 2012; Kupper & Denollet, 2012; Peters, Sunderland, Andrews, Rapee, & Mattick, 2012), as has a brief instrument derived from a factor analysis of the pooled item set (Social Interaction Phobia Scale; Carleton et  al., 2009). However, it is premature at this time to suggest that it is time to set the originals aside in favor of recent variants.  Another commonly used instrument developed to assess social anxiety disorder, the Social Phobia and Anxiety Inventory (SPAI; Turner, Beidel, Dancu, & Stanley, 1989), comprises a Social Phobia subscale, an Agoraphobia subscale, and a derived Difference (or Total) score (i.e., Social Phobia–Agoraphobia subscales). The SPAI contains 45 items, 21 of which require multiple responses. For example, for the item that begins “I attempt to avoid social situations where there are .. . ,” the client separately rates how frequently he/ she avoids situations involving strangers, authority figures, the opposite sex, and people in general. The client gives a total of 109 responses, making the administration and scoring of the SPAI relatively time-consuming. Despite the disadvantages imposed by the length of the scale, the quantity and specificity of information that it elicits can be quite helpful in case formulation and treatment planning.  The Social Phobia subscale assesses somatic, cognitive, and behavioral responses to a variety of interaction, performance, and observation situations. The Agoraphobia subscale assesses anxiety in situations commonly feared by individuals with panic disorder with agoraphobia (e.g., waiting in line). Respondents rate how frequently they feel anxious in each situation using a 7-point Likert-type scale (1, Never; 7, Always). The Difference score is intended to provide an index of social anxiety and avoidance distinct from the sometimes similar concerns of clients with agoraphobia. However, the very high correlation between the Difference score and the score of the Social Phobia subscale (r = .91) (Ries et al., 1998) suggests that there may be little benefit to this strategy. Multiple studies suggest that the SPAI is a reliable and valid instrument (e.g., Beidel, Turner, Stanley, & Dancu, 1989; Herbert, Bellack, & Hope, 1991; Turner et al., 1989), and sensitive to treatment-related change (e.g., Cox et al., 1998; Ries et al., 1998; Taylor, Woody, McLean, & Koch, 1997).  Another scale that may prove to be quite useful is the 17-item Social Phobia Inventory, also known as the SPIN (Antony, Coons, McCabe, Ashbaugh, & Swinson, 2006; Connor et al., 2000), which has demonstrated good reliability, significant correlations with related measures, and the ability to discriminate between clients with social anxiety disorder and those with other anxiety disorders. A three-item version of the SPIN, the Mini-SPIN, has also shown substantial utility as   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  a screening device for social anxiety disorder in both general health care (Connor, Kobak, Churchill, Katzelnick, & Davidson, 2001) and anxiety specialty clinic (Weeks, Spokas, & Heimberg, 2007) settings.  Although developed and validated with college students prior to the inclusion of social anxiety disorder in the DSM, the original Fear of Negative Evaluation scale (FNE; Watson & Friend, 1969) and the brief version of the scale (BFNE; Leary, 1983) continue to be widely used because they target a core construct of the disorder. The FNE comprises 30 items and employs a true–false format. In treatment studies, changes on the FNE have been found to predict end-state functioning (e.g., Mattick & Peters, 1988). The FNE appears to be sensitive to the effects of treatment, although changes are typically small in magnitude (Heimberg, 1994). The BFNE contains 12 items, uses a 5-point Likerttype format (1, Not at all characteristic of me; 5, Extremely characteristic of me), and correlates highly with the original scale (r = .96) (Leary, 1983). In a recent study by Rodebaugh and colleagues (2004) that utilized a large sample of undergraduates, the BFNE was more sensitive than the FNE to differing degrees of fear of negative evaluation. A study by Weeks and colleagues (2005) that utilized a large sample of clients with social anxiety disorder found that the BFNE had high internal consistency, correlated with measures of social anxiety, showed good discriminant validity, and was sensitive to the effects of CBT. Both of these studies suggest quite compellingly that, similar to the SIAS, the reverse-scored items of the BFNE may detract from its validity, and we now score only the straightforwardly worded items. Others have taken a similar approach by rewording the reverse-scored items to be consistent with the straightforwardly worded items (e.g., Collins, Westra, Dozois, & Stewart, 2005).  The Social Anxiety Session Change Index (SASCI; Hayes, Miller, Hope, Heimberg, & Juster, 2008) was developed for the assessment of session-by-session change in the treatment of social anxiety disorder. Clients use a 7-point Likert-type scale to indicate how much they have changed since the beginning of therapy on four dimensions: anxiety, avoidance, concern about humiliation and embarrassment, and interference. A total score of 16 indicates no change since the beginning of treatment. Scores of 4–15 indicate improvement, whereas scores of 17–28 indicate deterioration. The internal consistency of the SASCI across sessions ranged from .84 to .94 across sessions (M = .89) in the study by Hayes and colleagues (2008). Change on the  SASCI was related to change in fear of negative evaluation and to clinician-rated improvement, but not to ratings of anxiety sensitivity or depression. The use of the SASCI and the BFNE as session-by-session measures is demonstrated in the case study reported later in this chapter.  Other Self-Report Measures  In addition to measures targeting social anxiety, we administer questionnaires assessing other constructs relevant to case conceptualization and treatment outcome. We routinely administer the Beck Depression Inventory–II (BDI-II; A. T. Beck, Steer, & Brown, 1996), which assesses symptoms of depression, including the affective, cognitive, behavioral, somatic, and motivational components, as well as suicidal wishes. We also use the Liebowitz Self-Rated Disability Scale (Schneier et al., 1994), which assesses impairment across 11 domains (e.g., school, work, alcohol abuse), and the Quality of Life Inventory (Frisch, 1994), which assesses the client’s overall sense of well-being and satisfaction with life.  Feedback and Treatment Contract Interview  At the session following the intake session, the interviewer reviews assessment data with the client, explains diagnoses, answers questions, and offers treatment recommendations. For clients with comorbid diagnoses, the benefits of initially making social anxiety the primary focus of treatment for 12–16 weekly sessions is discussed, as noted earlier. Last, clients are assured that the severity of their social anxiety symptoms and any comorbid conditions will be reassessed following this initial course of treatment and, if necessary, additional treatment recommendations will be made at that time. Additional assessments may be conducted at this visit, or clients may be scheduled for one additional session to conduct further assessments before treatment formally begins. The additional assessments may include clinician-administered measures of social anxiety and behavior tests.  Clinician‑Administered Measures of Social Anxiety  The two most commonly used clinician-administered measures of social anxiety are the Liebowitz Social Anxiety Scale (LSAS; Liebowitz, 1987) and the Brief   Social Anxiety Disorder  Social Phobia Scale (BSPS; Davidson et al., 1991, 1997). We routinely utilize the LSAS, so we describe it here. This measure is completed at the second clinic visit largely to avoid making the initial intake session unduly lengthy. The LSAS separately evaluates Fear and Avoidance of 11 interaction (e.g., talking to people in authority) and 13 performance (e.g., working while being observed) situations using 4-point Likert-type scales.  Summing the Fear and Avoidance ratings for all 24 items yields an index of overall severity. The LSAS has been shown to have good reliability and convergent/ discriminant validity (e.g., Cox et al., 1998; Heimberg et al., 1999). It discriminates well between clients with social anxiety disorder and those with generalized anxiety disorder (Heimberg & Holaway, 2007). It has also demonstrated sensitivity to cognitive-behavioral and pharmacological treatment of social anxiety disorder (e.g., Blanco et al., 2010; Heimberg et al., 1998). When the LSAS is accompanied by detailed instructions, it appears that it also has good reliability and validity as a self-report instrument (Fresco et al., 2001; Rytwinski et al., 2009).  Behavioral Assessment  Behavior tests, or role plays of social situations relevant to the client, can be a very useful addition to the selfreport and clinician-administered measures described here. Although these tests may be quite anxietyprovoking for the client, the information obtained during a behavior test is unique and important in several ways. Individuals with social anxiety disorder are likely to describe their social behavior as inadequate (e.g., Rapee & Lim, 1992; Stopa & Clark, 1993) and their anxiety as highly visible to others (e.g., Norton & Hope, 2001). However, behavior tests often demonstrate that these reports are largely inaccurate and are essentially examples of distorted beliefs. Furthermore, level of anxiety and quality of performance exhibited by a client during behavior tests may be used to calibrate the difficulty of exposures and increase the likelihood that the therapist creates a first exposure that provides both a challenge and a successful experience for the client.  During behavior tests, the clinician may ask for anxiety ratings before, at several points during, and after the role play. Other assessments, such as asking clients to rate the quality of their performance or list the thoughts they had during the role play, are easily incorporated. Affordable ambulatory physiological assessment de   vices, such as pulse monitors, are available and add a useful dimension. The clinician can choose to test the limits of a client’s ability to perform when anxious by asking him/her to remain in the situation for a certain period of time (typically 4–5 minutes). On the other hand, the clinician may give the client explicit permission to stop (e.g., Ries et al., 1998) when the anxiety is excessive, and latency to escape the situation becomes a measure of avoidance.  Behavior tests may either be standardized or individualized. Standardized role plays allow for the observation of differences across patients for a particular task. Commonly used tasks include a conversation with a same-sex stranger, a conversation with an opposite-sex stranger, a conversation with two or more people, and a speech to a small audience. In contrast, the advantage of individualized behavior tests is that they may be designed more precisely to target idiosyncratic fears. For example, a client with a fear of displaying a hand tremor when eating in front of others may experience little anxiety during a one-on-one conversation. However, if that client is asked to engage in a one-on-one conversation while eating a bowl of soup, his or her anxiety is more likely to be activated.  iNDiviDual cBt for social aNxiety DisorDer  Principles and Logistics  For our studies on individual treatment of social anxiety disorder, we have established guidelines to which our therapists must adhere (Hope et al., 2010b). One issue facing manualized treatments is that it is unclear to what extent one may take liberties with how the treatment is carried out and still expect outcomes similar to those obtained during efficacy studies. Therefore, although we recognize that this treatment may be applied more flexibly in clinical settings, we present these guidelines to help therapists understand the treatment as it has been most thoroughly studied.  The treatment comprises 16 weekly 1-hour sessions within a period of 16–20 weeks. Although completing 16 sessions within 16 weeks might be ideal, up to 20 weeks are allowed to take into consideration sessions missed due to illness, vacations, holidays, and so forth. Taking longer than 20 weeks to complete 16 sessions may compromise the momentum of therapy. The two to three pretreatment sessions described earlier, as well   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  as posttreatment assessment and feedback sessions, are not counted as part of the 16-session treatment phase.  Our individual treatment requires that the client use a workbook (Hope et al., 2010a) as he/she works with the therapist during each session and for homework assignments. This workbook comprises 13 chapters, but the treatment program does not follow a one-chapterper- session format. Rather, treatment is divided into five segments, described below, and the therapist has flexibility in terms of the pace and, to some extent, the content of these segments. We ask clients to read assigned chapters before coming to the session.  Clients are asked to bring their workbook to every session. Therapists typically bring their own copy of the workbook and/or a copy of the therapist guide to session as well. The therapist also makes sure that there is something to write on that therapist and client can look at together during the session. In our clinic, a newsprint easel or a dry-erase board mounted to the wall is typically used (for ease, we refer to the use of an easel hereafter). However, at times, we have also just pulled two chairs side by side, so that both therapist and client can write on and view the same piece of paper on a clipboard. Importantly, every session introduces key concepts that are written down (e.g., a therapist may draw a continuum of anxiety in Session 1; client automatic thoughts and rational responses are always recorded). Writing things down during session helps clients better to track and process the information being covered and is a required component of the treatment.  The therapeutic relationship is actively fostered throughout treatment. As Kendall, Chu, Gifford, Hayes, and Nauta (1998) have pointed out, some critics assume that the therapeutic relationship is not considered relevant when a manual is utilized (see also Kendall, Gosch, Furr, & Sood, 2008). To the contrary, our therapist adherence manual (Hope, Van Dyke, Heimberg, Turk, & Fresco, 2002) includes explicit ratings of the therapeutic relationship within each segment of treatment. Therapists are rated on how well they engage in active listening, respond to verbal and nonverbal cues, facilitate the client’s investment in treatment, and communicate support of and investment in the client. Additionally, therapists are expected to help clients to experience and deepen affect as appropriate to the situation at hand. For example, a therapist would be expected to help a client both to be open to the experience of anxiety during exposures and to process and grieve losses that are a consequence of many years of social avoidance. In other situations, the therapist would be  expected to help the client use uncomfortable feelings as cues for additional cognitive coping practice. For example, the therapist would help a client who experiences a deep sense of shame after making a small social mistake (e.g., spilling a drink, calling someone by the wrong name) to engage in cognitive restructuring to change the meaning of the event eliciting such emotions. Therapists are actively supervised on these aspects of treatment, and not attending to the therapeutic relationship or appropriately responding to what is going on in session is considered a serious failure to follow protocol.  Recent data suggest that the therapeutic relationship is indeed related to successful outcomes in our protocol (Hayes, Hope, Van Dyke, & Heimberg, 2007). Clients’ ratings of the therapeutic alliance were positively related to their perceptions of session helpfulness. Interestingly, the relationship between the therapeutic alliance and anxiety reduction during in-session exposures was curvilinear; that is, when ratings of the alliance were higher or lower, clients showed less anxiety reduction than when the ratings of the alliance were moderate. The effect for low ratings of the alliance may not require explanation, but we have conjectured that if the client feels too comfortable with the therapist, then this may possibly interfere with anxiety evocation during exposures and thereby, emotional processing. Maintaining the “right” therapeutic alliance is important in CBT for social anxiety disorder (Hayes et al., 2007).  Therapists are also expected to engage in efficient time management. Our therapist adherence manual rates therapists’ ability to cover required topics flexibly, without rushing or boring the client by belaboring various points (Hope et al., 2002). Two types of problems that tend to crop up with regard to time management may in turn negatively impact the therapeutic relationship. Some therapists fall into the trap of turning each session into a psychoeducational lecture, and this tendency may be aggravated if the therapist is working with a client who is very quiet in the early sessions. The primary recommendation in this situation is to ask open-ended questions that prompt the client to relate his/her personal experiences to the material. The client’s verbalizations in response to these questions are then reinforced through the use of active listening skills, which elicit more client verbalizations. The other trap into which some therapists fall is allowing the client to dominate the session with long, detailed stories about experiences with social anxiety. In some cases, the therapist may have inadvertently taught the client to   Social Anxiety Disorder  lead the session in this way, by indiscriminately using active listening skills and nonverbal cues, even when the client is discussing tangential or repetitive material. In other cases, clients may be accustomed to dominating sessions through prior experiences with traditional talk therapy, or they may even intentionally attempt to dominate the session to avoid difficult material, particularly in-session exposures. In this situation, gentle verbal redirection is required. In some cases, a straightforward discussion of time management issues and negotiation of session time may be beneficial.  Last, we want to emphasize our belief that manualized treatments such as this one do not represent an inflexible set of procedures applied indiscriminately to all clients. Rather, we expect therapists to develop an individualized conceptualization of each client’s particular presenting problem, which is continually refined over the course of treatment and incorporates the unique characteristics of the client (e.g., cultural group, sex, educational background). Treatment procedures are then tailored to address the unique aspects of each case.  Segment 1: Psychoeducation  Segment 1 covers the material in Chapters 1–4 of the client workbook (Hope et al., 2010a). Establishing a good working relationship is a critical goal for this segment of therapy. If the therapist was not also the initial interviewer, three to four sessions are typically needed for the psychoeducation segment to allow adequate attention to building rapport. If a good working alliance has been established during the course of the initial assessment and if the client is especially bright and motivated, it may be possible to cover two chapters per session, finishing this portion of treatment in as little as 2 weeks. Therapists should not assign more than two chapters per week at any point in therapy because clients are unlikely to process the material fully and make the most of the associated exercises and selfmonitoring homework.  One or two chapters are assigned as homework at the end of each session. Each chapter includes a variety of forms that the client attempts to complete as well. At the beginning of the next session, the therapist asks the client for reactions to and questions about the readings, and therapist and client review corresponding forms completed by the client. If the client has not made an attempt to complete a form, it is completed at the beginning of the session during homework review.  Therapists are required to review certain topics from each chapter in the client workbook in session; other topics are optional depending on the needs of the individual client. For Chapter 1, the therapist must review two topics: (1) normal versus problematic social anxiety, and (2) the investment that treatment will require. The discussion of normal and problematic social anxiety conveys to the client that social anxiety exists along a continuum, with some people rarely experiencing any social anxiety, other people frequently experiencing intense social anxiety, and most people falling somewhere between these extremes. People who fall in the middle of the continuum experience social anxiety in some situations, such as a first date or a job interview, but the anxiety is typically manageable and decreases as the person remains in the situation. Factors such as intensity and duration of anxiety before and during social situations, the number of situations eliciting anxiety, and the degree of life impairment differentiate between normal social anxiety and problematic social anxiety for which a diagnosis may be assigned. By asking what types of situations elicit social anxiety for many people and what purpose social anxiety might serve, the therapist can engage the client in illustrating the notion that social anxiety has an adaptive value (e.g., caring about what other people think might cause anxiety, but it also helps people to treat each other more kindly). A therapist typically uses this opportunity to discuss what the client should expect in terms of treatment outcome. First, the therapist points out that social anxiety is part of the human condition; thus, it is impossible to remove it completely, even if this were a desirable goal. Total freedom from social anxiety is not a reasonable expectation for treatment. However, it is reasonable to expect to move down the continuum from problematic levels of social anxiety to a level of social anxiety that is more typical of most people. Not all clients are willing to accept that social anxiety exists on a continuum or that it can have an adaptive value this early in treatment. This first session is merely an introduction to these concepts, and arguing with a client about these issues is likely to be unproductive. Rather, the therapist empathizes with the client’s current worldview (e.g., “You feel you are either calm or extremely anxious, and that no middle ground is possible for you”) but does not agree with it.  The discussion of the required investment in treatment involves instilling hope in the client that he/she will be able to make significant changes and conveying the time, effort, and emotional energy that treatment activities require. Research has shown that positive expec    CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  tancies are associated with more favorable outcomes in CBT for social anxiety (Chambless et al., 1997; Safren, Heimberg, & Juster, 1997). The therapist shares with the client that in studies of individuals who completed CBT, approximately 75–80% were rated by independent clinical interviewers as having experienced meaningful reductions in their social anxiety (e.g., Heimberg et al., 1998). The therapist also emphasizes that attending sessions regularly, doing homework, being willing to experience anxiety during exposures, and being open to new ways of looking at the world, other people, and oneself are factors that substantially influence whether someone becomes a treatment responder, and that these factors are largely under the client’s control. During this time, clients are encouraged to speak about their fears regarding treatment and their goals for a better life after treatment. Included is a motivational exercise in which the client is asked to generate pros and cons for working on his/her social anxiety and a similar list for not doing so as a means to increase commitment to the treatment process.  Next, the therapist reviews with the client the three components of anxiety presented in Chapter 2 of the client workbook (Hope et al., 2010a). Each of the three components of anxiety is described: (1) The physiological component comprises bodily reactions, such as a pounding heart; (2) the cognitive component comprises what a person thinks, such as “I look foolish”; and (3) the behavioral component comprises what a person does when he/she is anxious, such as avoiding eye contact. When presenting the behavioral component, the therapist emphasizes how escape and avoidance behaviors may reduce anxiety in the short term but lead to missed opportunities, a less satisfying life, and other negative feelings, such as guilt and shame, in the long term.  The therapist then helps the client to practice identifying each of these components with a hypothetical example. Over the years, we have found that initially using a hypothetical example is much more conducive to learning than starting with an example from the client’s own experience. Issues such as fear of negative evaluation, defensiveness, anxiety, and lack of objectivity can result in a client having difficulty identifying the three components from a personal experience this early in treatment (e.g., “I wasn’t thinking anything”). The default option for the therapist is simply to review the hypothetical examples from the workbook that illustrate the three components, but we generally recommend using a different hypothetical example in session  to give the client more practice. Alternatively, we use the example from the group treatment version (Heimberg & Becker, 2002), in which the client is asked to imagine a person waiting in the lobby to interview for a job that is extremely attractive in terms of responsibilities, pay, and hours. The client is told that the person is feeling anxious about the interview and then is asked what that person might be experiencing as he/she anxiously waits to be called in to the office. Using the easel, the therapist writes the client’s responses under the appropriate heading (e.g., “feeling nauseous” is written under “Physiological Component”). After classifying the client’s spontaneous responses, the therapist then asks questions to elicit several examples of each of the three components (e.g., “Might the person have any thoughts relating to her sweaty palms? What might she say to herself about that?”). The therapist makes an effort to draw out how each of the three components interacts with the others, resulting in an escalating spiral of anxiety (e.g., sweaty palms might lead to the thought “The interviewer will think I am anxious,” which might lead to a behavior of wiping sweaty hands on one’s suit). The therapist concludes that treatment involves learning ways to disrupt this spiral of anxiety. Assuming that the client does reasonably well with this exercise, the therapist then helps the client to repeat the exercise with a recent, personal experience of social anxiety. At this point in therapy, the therapist makes no effort to help the client to challenge anxiety-provoking cognitions, only to identify the three components of anxiety and to understand how they interact with each other. In addition to readings from the workbook, the client is given the homework assignment of identifying all three components of anxiety experienced in a social situation during the week.  Referring to the material covered in Chapter 3 of the client workbook, the therapist teaches the client how to use the Subjective Units of Discomfort Scale (SUDS; Wolpe & Lazarus, 1966) and construct a fear and avoidance hierarchy. The assignment from the previous week is repeated here and again over the next few sessions to solidify learning in this important domain, and weekly assessment of progress using the SASCI is initiated.  Next, the therapist describes for the client factors that are thought to be related to the development of problematic social anxiety, which are presented in Chapter 4 of the workbook. The therapist tells the client that research suggests that genetics plays a role in the etiology of social anxiety disorder. The therapist em    Social Anxiety Disorder  phasizes that what is inherited is probably a tendency to be a sensitive and emotionally reactive individual rather than a gene that inevitably results in social anxiety (Barlow, 2002). This inherited sensitivity might not be at all problematic, and it may even be a good thing. For example, the person might be especially empathic toward others and have a greater capacity to experience joy, as well as anxiety. However, if a biologically sensitive individual is exposed to important social experiences during development and learns that others are threatening and hurtful, then the biological vulnerability may contribute to the development of problematic social anxiety. The therapist might inquire whether other family members seem to have problems with social anxiety or other types of anxiety, suggesting a genetic predisposition. The therapist then presents experiences within the family as another potential factor contributing to social anxiety. For example, a socially anxious mother might teach a child that the opinions of others are extremely important and that negative evaluation is to be avoided at all cost. Alternatively, a verbally abusive father might provide experiences that teach the child that other people are dangerous, and that avoidance is a good strategy for self-protection. Again, the therapist asks the client whether this information fits with his/her personal experiences. Last, the therapist describes how experiences outside of the family can similarly teach a person that others are a source of threat. For example, teasing by peers seems to be related to later social anxiety (Roth, Coles, & Heimberg, 2002). This discussion is facilitated by a homework assignment completed in advance of the session, in which the client answers a series of questions relevant to his/ her own personal experiences of social anxiety and how they map onto these three major sources of input, and completes a pie chart indicating his/her belief in the relative importance of each. Throughout the discussion, the therapist emphasizes the idea that because social anxiety is largely learned through experience, it can be changed through experience.  This discussion of the etiology of social anxiety leads into a discussion of dysfunctional thoughts. Therapists might ask clients what lessons they learned about themselves and other people through a negative early-life social experience, such as being teased (e.g., “I learned that I don’t fit in”). In this way, therapists educate clients about the origins of many of their automatic thoughts, which is important given that many clients view their tendency to have negative cognitions as a sign of inherent personal flaws rather than a logical  consequence of their experiences. They then ask clients to think about how these dysfunctional ways of thinking color the kinds of thoughts and reactions they now have when confronting social situations (e.g., thoughts of not fitting in at parties, expecting to be made fun of by coworkers). At this point in therapy, clients are asked simply to consider the possibility that changing some of these automatic thinking biases might change the experience of anxiety. Therapists then set forth the rationale for primary interventions of cognitive restructuring, exposures, and homework.  Segment 2: Training in Cognitive Restructuring  Training in cognitive restructuring typically requires two to three sessions. The material is presented in Chapters 5 and 6 of the client workbook (Hope et al., 2010a). After three sessions, a small minority of clients may still be struggling to master the cognitive concepts due to factors such as low educational attainment and/ or poor abstract thinking skills. Our experience suggests that rather than forcing the issue with such clients, it is better simply to move on to the next segment of treatment after three sessions. In this circumstance, Heimberg and Becker (2002) recommend that, for the remainder of therapy, the cognitive portion of treatment be deemphasized in favor of relying more heavily on repeated exposure. Additionally, such clients may be able to generate realistic self-statements (e.g., “I have done this before”) or self-instructions (e.g., “Start by introducing myself”) informally, with help from the therapist, for use in anxiety-provoking situations rather than relying on more formal cognitive restructuring.  As in the previous segment, each session begins with a homework review and ends with homework assignment. Homework assignments include readings from the client workbook, associated forms, and selfmonitoring exercises. Some clients begin to attempt in vivo exposures spontaneously at this point in treatment, without being specifically assigned to do so. If these exposures go well, then they may be beneficial to the client. However, therapists should not actively encourage exposures as homework until completion of training in cognitive restructuring and one in-session exposure. At this point in treatment, clients still have few adaptive strategies for managing anxiety or coping with social situations that have disappointing outcomes. They are also likely to escape a situation at the first sign of trouble. Therefore, the possibility of a less than positive ex    CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  posure experience at this phase of treatment could lead to resistance to attempting future exposures.  In this segment of treatment, clients are explicitly introduced to the basic tenet of the cognitive-behavioral model, which proposes that emotional reactions occur as a result of interpretations of situations, not situations themselves. “Automatic thoughts” are defined as negative, distorted, or irrational thoughts about oneself, the world, or the future that lead to or increase the experience of problematic anxiety. These concepts are first demonstrated with a hypothetical example rather than an emotionally charged example from the client’s own life. The client workbook describes the very different thoughts of two young men after meeting a woman. Negative thoughts lead one man to give up any attempts to get to know the woman better and to experience several more unpleasant thoughts and emotions. The more neutral and realistic thoughts of the other man facilitate his continued efforts at making conversation. Additional examples are provided for therapist and client to examine whether the client appears to need further instruction on the concept of automatic thoughts. Clients are then asked to examine their own thoughts, first related to a hypothetical social situation, then as recorded on previously completed homework forms.  “Thinking errors” are defined as common categories into which automatic thoughts may fall. Clients often find that they are particularly prone to engage in certain types of distorted thinking (e.g., mind reading, fortune-telling, disqualifying the positive), and identifying these habitual thinking errors can assist in challenging automatic thoughts (e.g., “There I go, mind reading again. I have no reason to assume that they are thinking the worst”). Clients are introduced to an adaptation of the list of thinking errors outlined by Judith Beck (1995) in the first edition of her book Cognitive Therapy: Basics and Beyond. Ideally, the client has reviewed this list in the course of doing the readings for homework, and therapist and client can briefly discuss which thinking errors the client personally found most relevant. If the client has not done the homework, each thinking error is briefly reviewed by therapist and client in session. The therapist and client can practice identifying both the thinking errors in workbook examples and the client’s automatic thoughts recorded as part of previous homework assignments, and further examine automatic thoughts the client might have about upcoming situations. For homework, clients monitor their automatic thoughts, their belief in the automatic thoughts (on a 0- to 100-point scale), the thinking errors they  contain, and the emotions they cause in one or two naturally occurring situations during the week.  The next steps in cognitive restructuring are to challenge the automatic thoughts and develop rational responses to them. The process of challenging automatic thoughts is begun with the assistance of disputing questions, originally adapted from the work of Sank and Shaffer (1984). These generic questions can be brought to bear on automatic thoughts (e.g., “Do I know for certain that ?”; “What evidence do I have that ?; What evidence do I have that the opposite is true?”; “What is the worst that could happen? How bad is that? How can I cope with that?”; “What does mean? Does really mean that I am a(n) ?”). Before having the client apply these questions to his/her own thoughts, however, the therapist and client review a hypothetical example from the client workbook. Thereafter, the therapist addresses the client’s automatic thoughts examined in the earlier discussion of thinking errors. Together client and therapist question the automatic thoughts using the disputing questions to arrive at alternative, more realistic ways of viewing the situation. It is typically the case that the answers to disputing questions themselves include automatic thoughts, and these must be further disputed. This process, which we have labeled the Anxious Self/Coping Self Dialogue, ultimately helps the client arrive at answers to the original disputing questions that are more believable and acceptable to him/her. The output of this dialogue is then summarized into one or two statements that serve as rational responses. A rational response provides a realistic and balanced view of the situation that is typically more positive than that provided by the automatic thoughts. For the next homework assignment, the clients record their automatic thoughts from an anxietyprovoking situation during the week, rate their belief in the automatic thoughts, identify the thinking errors they contain, dispute the automatic thoughts, develop a rational response, and rate their belief in that rational response. As can be seen, these homework assignments build on previous ones, becoming increasingly complex but increasingly empowering.  Toward the end of the final session in this segment, the therapist informs the client that exposures will begin the following week. To the extent that beginning exposures cause the client to feel anxious, the client is encouraged to “avoid avoidance” by coming to the next session and to identify automatic thoughts related to the exposure, challenge them, and arrive at a ratio   