Sleep Disturbance  of learning and achievements guides relapse prevention work. Areas needing further intervention are addressed by setting specific goals and creating plans for achieving each goal.  In the final session, therapist and client distinguish between a lapse (an occasional night of insomnia), which is normal even for good sleepers, and relapse (return of frequent and chronic insomnia). Discuss with the client the inevitability of having an occasional poor night’s sleep and caution against interpreting this as evidence that chronic insomnia has returned. Identifying situations that have been problematic in the past, and reviewing a “new” response to temporary setbacks, can be critical in maintaining gains.  The therapist can guide the client in imagining a typical scenario in which insomnia is present for two or three nights, then follow up by exploring strategies the client might use to handle this situation in the future. This is a good opportunity to check, once again, whether the client has integrated the necessary skills to cope with such insomnia nights. Discuss how he/she can avoid falling back in the old patterns of poor sleep.  Clients are strongly urged to review their materials from treatment and do their own assessment of the problem and identify the best course of action. Therapists also encourage clients to continue using tools after treatment has concluded. They work with clients to review tools, along with how the tools can be used to prevent insomnia reemergence. For example, the therapist can give the client multiple copies of the extended thought record or materials that the client found particularly helpful in session.  coMMoN ProBleMs iN treatMeNt  There are at least three common problems practitioners may encounter in delivering CBT-I for treatment of insomnia: difficulty regularizing the sleep–wake schedule, opposition to sleep restriction, and beliefs about the cause of insomnia that can hinder treatment compliance. We briefly discuss solutions to each problem below.  Clients are often reluctant to go to bed and wake up at the same time every day, including on weekends. This can be particularly problematic for teenagers or young adults who often socialize and/or schedule pleasurable activities in the weekend evening hours. As described earlier, MI that honestly reviews the pros and cons of regularizing a sleep schedule can be one way  to clarify ambivalence and prepare clients for change. Therapists may also find it helpful to guide clients in some general behavioral activity scheduling (e.g., encouraging clients to schedule a brunch, hike, or social visit on weekend mornings instead of weekend evenings, to enhance motivation). Finally, family members and friends can be instrumental to encouraging change. One client found it helpful to have a parent come in and turn on the overhead bedroom lights every morning, including weekends; another agreed to have a friend call at the same time every morning, and to keep her phone by the bed so that she knew to answer it.  In addition to regularizing sleep schedules, clients are often resistant to implementing sleep restriction. It is helpful to allow clients to voice their concerns with this component of treatment (e.g., fear of reduced sleep), then follow up with basic education and problem solving to address specific areas noted. Often it is helpful to characterize the mild sleep deprivation engendered by sleep restriction as a “tool” that will allows sleep pressure to build and the system to get back on track, or as a short-term side effect on the road to long-term, lasting gains. Encourage clients to experiment with their sleep.  Finally, clients may have a variety of beliefs about the cause of their insomnia that may shape treatment expectations and compliance. Some clients see their insomnia as purely biological; others recognize psychological components; and still others attribute emergence of their insomnia to environmental causes (e.g., the birth of a child, or experiencing a trauma). Each of these may influence motivation to implement components of CBT-I. The therapist can acknowledge the client’s beliefs about his/her insomnia while explaining the Spielman model (see the earlier “Models of Insomnia” section), highlighting the fact that regardless of the predisposing/precipitating factors that initiated insomnia, perpetuating factors (excessive time in bed, worry, napping) are currently maintaining the insomnia. These perpetuating factors will be the focus of CBT-I treatment.  coNclusioN aND future DirectioNs  CBT-I is emerging as an effective treatment option for insomnia. Administered as a brief, structured outpatient treatment, CBT-I targets behavioral, cognitive, and attentional processes that mutually maintain insomnia. Though it is structured, we wish to underscore the idea that CBT-I can be adapted flexibly according to   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  the individualized conceptualizations of clients. Clinicians can use assessment data, sleep diaries, and clinical intuition to formulate a plan that emphasizes and addresses particular areas of concern (e.g., erratic sleep schedules, worry and rumination, or reliance on safety behaviors). Finally, CBT-I can be adapted for clients with comorbid conditions and even be used as a platform for addressing sleep problems such as hypersomnolence disorder. In this concluding section, we consider client–therapist variables that predict success or failure in treatment, issues specific to treating insomnia in mood disorders, and use of CBT-I principles to treat hypersomnolence.  Predictors of Clinical Outcome  There is limited research on factors that predict success or failure with CBT-I, though this represents an exciting area of future research. Evidence suggests that client factors predicting dropout from treatment include short sleep duration and elevated levels of baseline depressive symptomotolgy (Ong, Kuo, & Manber, 2008), though, in those who complete treatment, more severe insomnia and functional impairment at baseline actually predict clinical improvement (Van Houdenhove, Buyse, Gabriëls, & Van den Bergh, 2011). Clinical improvement is also predicted by changes in unhelpful beliefs about sleep (Edinger, Wohlgemuth, Radtke, Marsh, & Quillian, 2001; Morin, Blais, & Savard, 2002). Therapist qualities that appear to predict success in group CBT-I include client perceptions of therapist affiliation and warmth, while therapists perceived as confrontational have more client dropout (Constantino et al., 2007). In our own clinical experience, we have found that fostering a sense of curiosity and experimentation, and providing a clear rationale for homework completion, makes a big difference in client motivation and treatment outcome.  Treating Insomnia in Mood Disorders  Sleep disturbance is commonly comorbid with other mood disorders (Armitage, 2007), and CBT-I may be a particularly useful intervention to stabilize sleep and circadian rhythms. For example, individuals with bipolar disorder display night-to-night variability in TST (Gruber et al., 2009), along with reduced sleep efficiency and increased nighttime wakefulness (Eidelman, Talbot, Gruber, Hairston, & Harvey, 2010; Harvey, Schmidt, Scarna, Semler, & Goodwin, 2005) that may  respond particularly well to sleep restriction and stimulus control. Preliminary studies suggest that CBT-I improves unipolar depression when administered in combination with antidepressants (Manber et al., 2008) or as a stand-alone treatment (Taylor, Lichstein, Weinstock, Sanford, & Temple, 2007).  For practitioners who wish to address sleep problems in the context of depression or bipolar disorder, we offer the following recommendations. First, routinely monitor depression, anxiety, and/or mania symptoms, as applicable, at the start of each session. Negotiate a safety plan with the client prior to the start of therapy should his/her mood grow unstable during treatment. If symptoms of depression or mania emerge, evaluate changes in TST that may be contributing to decline and consider modifying or temporarily suspending sleep restriction or stimulus control if necessary. Finally, we encourage practitioners to monitor sleepiness regularly, using an instrument such as the Epworth Sleepiness Scale (Johns, 1991). When Epworth levels reach clinical significance (a score of 10), discourage clients from driving or engaging in other potentially unsafe behaviors during periods of drowsiness.  Adapting CBT‑I to Treat Hypersomnolence  As with insomnia, several authors have raised the possibility that psychological mechanisms may contribute to the maintenance of hypersomnolence, or too much sleep (Billiard, Dolenc, Aldaz, Ondze, & Besset, 1994; Jacobson, Martell, & Dimidjian, 2001; Nofzinger et al., 1991). If these hypotheses are supported empirically, there may be utility in developing a psychological intervention for hypersomnolence. We have been developing a four- to eight-session multicomponent psychological intervention, briefly described below, though we emphasize that this approach awaits empirical evaluation. A number of the components used to treat hypersomnolence are adaptations or extensions of the interventions for insomnia reviewed earlier.  As in insomnia treatment, hypersomnolence treatment begins with a functional analysis and case formulation. Clinicians probe for the frequency, intensity, and duration of the hypersomnolence, as well as its antecedents, behaviors, and consequences. Clients complete a daily sleep diary, supplementing standard sleep diary questions with additional probes for energy, activity levels, and other contextual/psychological data of note. The first session also involves MI, including a straightforward review of pros and cons of working   Sleep Disturbance  toward managing the hypersomnolence (Miller & Rollnick, 2002). The practitioner and client then set goals for treatment. The first and most obvious goal we set is for sleep (typically reducing sleep to approximately 8 hours per night), though we find it is equally critical to set goals for life. The latter is based on our clinical experience that “having nothing to get up for” is a key contributor to hypersomnolence in clients with mood disorders. Often the combination of the mood disorder and the sleep disorder has led to unemployment and disrupted social networks. Without work to get up for and family/friends to see, some individuals’ motivation to reduce sleep seems to waver. After setting the “sleep” and “life” goals for the treatment, the client is asked to identify one small step toward these goals for the coming week. We engage in problem solving to limit the impact of these obstacles on reaching the goal, and a method is developed for monitoring the extent to which the goal is achieved (e.g., activity scheduling).  Clients with hypersomnolence also benefit from education about a range of issues relating to sleep. Two domains have been particularly important. The first involves education about the operation of the circadian system, the stimulating environmental influences acting on it (e.g., light), and the tendency, if left unchecked, to move toward a delayed phase. The second involves education about sleep inertia described earlier. Finally, we work with clients to establish a wind-down period, a “wake-up protocol” (e.g., not hitting “snooze” on the alarm; making the bed, so that the incentive to get back in is reduced; heading for the shower; taking a quick brisk walk; getting sunlight), and to minimize fluctuation in the sleep–wake schedule across the nights of the week.  Finally, many of the same behavioral experiments and surveys described in this chapter appear to effectively treat the decreased energy and fatigue that we see in hypersomnolence. For example, clients benefit from completing an “energy experiment” to experience how spending energy can be a useful way to generate energy. Other times, we structure an experiment in which clients are asked to rate their mood and energy before and after engaging in a social activity or leaving the house, to illustrate contextual variables that can improve mood and sleepiness. Creating a survey that emphasizes collecting data on what others do to generate energy, to get out of bed, or to fill their time when bored can offer helpful strategies. Finally, education and experiments on monitoring fatigue versus external stimuli can help to break attentional biases in hyper   somnolence. As always, we conclude with a session on relapse prevention in which progress is reviewed, gains are consolidated, and possible setbacks are discussed. In this manner, many of the treatment principles useful for insomnia may also be used to treat hypersomnolence.   referenCes  Achermann, P., & Borbely, A. A. (2010). Sleep homeostasis and models of sleep regulation. In M. H. Kryger, T. Roth, & W. C. Dement (Eds.), Principles and practice of sleep medicine (5th ed., pp. 431–444). Philadelphia: Elsevier.  Akerstedt, T., Billiard, M., Bonnet, M., Ficca, G., Garma, L., Mariotti, M., et al. (2002). Awakening from sleep. Sleep Medicine Reviews, 6, 267–286.  American Academy of Sleep Medicine. (2005). International classification of sleep disorders (ICSD): Diagnostic and coding manual (2nd ed.). Westchester, IL: Author.  American Psychiatric Association. (2000). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (4th ed., text rev.). Washington, DC: Author.  American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.). Arlington, VA: Author.  Ancoli-Israel, S. (2009). Sleep and its disorders in aging populations. Sleep Medicine, 10(Suppl. 1), S7–S11.  Armitage, R. (2007). Sleep and circadian rhythms in mood disorders. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 433(Suppl.), 104–115.  Banks, S., & Dinges, D. F. (2010). Chronic sleep deprivation. In M. H. Kryger, T. Roth, & W. C. Dement (Eds.), Principles and practice of sleep medicine (5th ed., pp. 67–75). Philadelphia: Elsevier/Saunders.  Bastien, C. H., Vallieres, A., & Morin, C. M. (2001). Validation of the Insomnia Severity Index as an outcome measure for insomnia research. Sleep Medicine, 2, 297–307.  Beck, J. S. (1995). Cognitive therapy: Basics and beyond. New York: Guilford Press.  Belleville, G., Guay, C., Guay, B., & Morin, C. M. (2007). Hypnotic taper with or without self-help treatment of insomnia: a randomized clinical trial. Journal of Consulting Clinical Psychology, 75, 325–335.  Besset, A., Villemin, E., Tafti, M., & Billiard, M. (1998). Homeostatic process and sleep spindles in patients with sleep-maintenance insomnia: Effect of partial (21 h) sleep deprivation. Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology, 107(2), 122–132.  Billiard, M., Dolenc, L., Aldaz, C., Ondze, B., & Besset, A. (1994). Hypersomnia associated with mood disorders: A new perspective. Journal of Psychosomatic Research, 38(Suppl. 1), 41–47.  Bixler, E. O., Kales, A., Leo, L. A., & Slye, T. A. (1973).   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  A comparison of subjective estimates and objective sleep laboratory findings in insomnia patients. Sleep Research, 2, 143.  Bootzin, R. R. (1972). Stimulus control treatment for insomnia. Proceedings of the American Psychological Association, 7, 395–396.  Bootzin, R. R., Epstein, D., & Wood, J. M. (1991). Stimulus control instructions. In P. J. Hauri (Ed.), Case studies in insomnia (pp. 19–28). New York: Plenum Press.  Borbely, A. A. (1982). A two process model of sleep regulation. Human Neurobiology, 1, 195–204.  Borkovec, T. D. (1982). Insomnia. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 50, 880–895.  Breslau, N., Roth, T., Rosenthal, L., & Andreski, P. (1996). Sleep disturbance and psychiatric disorders: A longitudinal epidemiological study of young adults. Biological Psychiatry, 39(6), 411–418.  Buysse, D., Ancoli-Israel, S., Edinger, J. D., Lichstein, K. L., & Morin, C. M. (2006). Recommendations for a standard research assessment of insomnia. Sleep, 29, 1155–1173.  Buysse, D. J., Reynolds, C. F., Monk, T. H., Berman, S. R., & Kupfer, D. J. (1989). The Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index: A new instrument for psychiatric practice and research. Psychiatry Research, 28, 193–213.  Carney, C. E., Buysse, D. J., Ancoli-Israel, S., Edinger, J. D., Krystal, A. D., Lichstein, K. L., et al. (2012). The consensus sleep diary: Standardizing prospective sleep selfmonitoring. Sleep, 35(2), 287–302.  Carskadon, M. A., Dement, W. C., Mitler, M. M., Guilleminault, C., Zarcone, V. P., & Spiegel, R. (1976). Selfreports versus sleep laboratory findings in 122 drug-free subjects with complaints of chronic insomnia. American Journal of Psychiatry, 133(12), 1382–1388.  Chambless, D. L., & Hollon, S. D. (1998). Defining empirically supported theories. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 1, 7–18.  Chesson, A. L., Jr., Anderson, W. M., Littner, M., Davila, D., Hartse, K., Johnson, S., et al. (1999). Practice parameters for the nonpharmacologic treatment of chronic insomnia (An American Academy of Sleep Medicine report, Standards of Practice Committee of the American Academy of Sleep Medicine). Sleep, 22, 1128–1133.  Clark, D. M., Ehlers, A., Hackmann, A., McManus, F., Fennell, M., Grey, N., et al. (2006). Cognitive therapy versus exposure and applied relaxation in social phobia: A randomized controlled trial. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 74, 568–578.  Clark, D. M., Salkovskis, P. M., Hackmann, A., Wells, A., Ludgate, J., & Gelder, M. (1999). Brief cognitive therapy for panic disorder: A randomized controlled trial. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 67, 583–589.  Clarke, G., & Harvey, A. G. (2012). The complex role of sleep in adolescent depression. Child and Adolescent Psychiatric Clinics of North America, 21(2), 385–400.  Constantino, M. J., Manber, R., Ong, J., Kuo, T. F., Huang, J.,  & Arnow, B. A. (2007). Patient expectations and therapeutic alliance as predictors of outcome in group cognitivebehavioral therapy for insomnia. Behavioral Sleep Medicine, 5(3), 210–228.  Crick, F., & Mitchison, G. (1983). The function of dream sleep. Nature, 304, 111–114.  Crowley, S. J., & Carskadon, M. A. (2010). Modifications to weekend recovery sleep delay circadian phase in older adolescents. Chronobiology International, 27, 1469–1492.  Edinger, J. D., Bonnet, M. H., Bootzin, R. R., Doghramji, K., Dorsey, C. M., Espie, C. A., et al. (2004). Derivation of research diagnostic criteria for insomnia: Report of an American Academy of Sleep Medicine Work Group. Sleep, 27, 1567–1596.  Edinger, J. D., Wohlgemuth, W. K., Radtke, R. A., Marsh, G. R., & Quillian, R. E. (2001). Does cognitive-behavioral insomnia therapy alter dysfunctional beliefs about sleep? Sleep, 24, 591–599.  Edinger, J. D., Wyatt, J. K., Olsen, M. K., Stechuchak, K. M., Carney, C. E., Chiang, A., et al. (2009). Reliability and validity of the Duke Structured Interview for Sleep Disorders for insomnia screening. Sleep, 32, A265.  Eidelman, P., Talbot, L. S., Gruber, J., Hairston, I., & Harvey,  A. G. (2010). Sleep architecture as correlate and predictor of symptoms and impairment in inter-episode bipolar disorder: Taking on the challenge of medication effects. Journal of Sleep Research, 19(4), 516–524. Espie, C. A. (2002). Insomnia: Conceptual issues in the development, persistence, and treatment of sleep disorder in adults. Annual Review of Psychology, 53, 215–243.  Ford, D. E., & Kamerow, D. B. (1989). Epidemiologic study of sleep disturbances and psychiatric disorders. An opportunity for prevention? Journal of the American Medical Association, 262, 1479–1484.  Gruber, J., Harvey, A. G., Wang, P. W., Brooks, J. O., III, Thase, M. E., Sachs, G. S., et al. (2009). Sleep functioning in relation to mood, function, and quality of life at entry to the Systematic Treatment Enhancement Program for Bipolar Disorder (STEP-BD). Journal of Affective Disorders, 114(1–3), 41–49.  Harvey, A. G. (2001). Insomnia: Symptom or diagnosis? Clinical Psychology Review, 21, 1037–1059.  Harvey, A. G. (2002a). A cognitive model of insomnia. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 40, 869–894.  Harvey, A. G. (2002b). Trouble in bed: The role of pre-sleep worry and intrusions in the maintenance of insomnia [Special issue]. Journal of Cognitive Psychotherapy, 16, 161–177.  Harvey, A. G. (2003a). The attempted suppression of presleep cognitive activity in insomnia. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 27, 593–602.  Harvey, A. G. (2003b). Beliefs about the utility of presleep worry: An investigation of individuals with insomnia and good sleepers. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 27, 403–414.   Sleep Disturbance  Harvey, A. G. (2005). A cognitive theory of and therapy for chronic insomnia. Journal of Cognitive Psychotherapy: An International Quarterly, 19, 41–60.  Harvey, A. G. (2008). Sleep and circadian rhythms in bipolar disorder: Seeking synchrony, harmony, and regulation. American Journal of Psychiatry, 165, 820–829.  Harvey, A. G. (2009). The adverse consequences of sleep disturbance in pediatric bipolar disorder: Implications for intervention. Child and Adolescent Psychiatry Clinics of North America, 18(2), 321–338.  Harvey, A. G., & Eidelman, P. (2012). Intervention to reduce unhelpful beliefs about sleep. In M. Perlis, M. Aloia, & B. Kuhn (Eds.), Behavioral sleep medicine treatment protocols (pp. 79–90). New York: Academic Press.  Harvey, A. G., Schmidt, D. A., Scarna, A., Semler, C. N., & Goodwin, G. M. (2005). Sleep-related functioning in euthymic patients with bipolar disorder, patients with insomnia, and subjects without sleep problems. American Journal of Psychiatry, 162, 50–57.  Harvey, A. G., Sharpley, A. L., Ree, M. J., Stinson, K., & Clark, D. M. (2007). An open trial of cognitive therapy for chronic insomnia. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 45, 2491–2501.  Harvey, A. G., & Talbot, L. (2012a). Behavioral experiments. In M. Perlis, M. Aloia, & B. Kuhn (Eds.), Behavioral sleep medicine treatment protocols (pp. 71–78). New York: Academic Press.  Harvey, A. G., & Talbot, L. S. (2012b). Intervention to reduce misperception. In M. Perlis, M. Aloia, & B. Kuhn (Eds.), Behavioral sleep medicine treatment protocols (pp. 91– 96). New York: Academic Press.  Harvey, A. G., & Tang, N. K. (2012). (Mis)perception of sleep in insomnia: A puzzle and a resolution. Psychological Bulletin, 138(1), 77–101.  Harvey, A. G., Tang, N. K. Y., & Browning, L. (2005). Cognitive approaches to insomnia. Clinical Psychology Review, 25, 593–611.  Hoddes, E., Zarcone, V., Smythe, H., Phillips, R., & Dement,  W. C. (1973). Quantification of sleepiness: A new approach. Psychophysiology, 10, 431–436. Hohagen, F., Rink, K., Kappler, C., Schramm, E., Riemann, D., Weyerer, S., et al. (1993). Prevalence and treatment of insomnia in general practice: A longitudinal study. European Archives of Psychiatry and Clinical Neuroscience, 242, 329–336.  Irwin, M. R., Cole, J. C., & Nicassio, P. M. (2006). Comparative meta-analysis of behavioral interventions for insomnia and their efficacy in middle-aged adults and in older adults 55+ years of age. Health Psychology, 25, 3–14.  Jacobson, N., Martell, C., & Dimidjian, S. (2001). Behavioral activation treatment for depression: Returning to contextual roots. Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 8, 255–270.  Jansson, M., & Linton, S. J. (2007). Psychological mechanisms in the maintenance of insomnia: Arousal, distress,  and sleep-related beliefs. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 45(3), 511–521.  Jean-Louis, G., von Gizycki, H., Zizi, F., Spielman, A., Hauri, P., & Taub, H. (1997). The actigraph data analysis software: II. A novel approach to scoring and interpreting sleep-wake activity. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 85, 219–226.  Jenni, O. G., Achermann, P., & Carskadon, M. A. (2005). Homeostatic sleep regulation in adolescents. Sleep, 28, 1446–1454.  Johns, M. W. (1991). A new method for measuring daytime sleepiness: The Epworth sleepiness scale. Sleep, 14, 540– 545.  Karni, A., Tanne, D., Rubenstien, B. S., Askenasy, J. J. M., & Sagi, D. (1994). Dependence on REM sleep of overnight improvement of a perceptual skill. Science, 265, 679–682.  Klerman, E. B., & Dijk, D. J. (2008). Age-related reduction in the maximal capacity for sleep—implications for insomnia. Current Biology, 18(15), 1118–1123.  Kryger, M. H., Roth, T., & Dement, W. C. (2010). Principles and practice of sleep medicine (5th ed.). Philadelphia: Saunders.  Lack, L. C., & Bootzin, R. R. (2003). Circadian rhythm factors in insomnia and their treatment. In M. Perlis & K. Lichstein (Eds.), Treatment of sleep disorders: Principles and practice of behavioral sleep medicine (pp. 305–343). New York: Wiley.  Lichstein, K. (2000). Secondary insomnia. In K. Lichstein &  C. Morin (Eds.), Treatment of late-life insomnia (pp. 297– 319). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. Lichstein, K. L., Durrence, H. H., Taylor, D. J., Bush, A. J., & Riedel, B. W. (2003). Quantitative criteria for insomnia. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 41, 427–445.  Lichstein, K. L., Peterson, B. A., Riedel, B. W., Means, M. K., Epperson, M. T., & Aguillard, R. N. (1999). Relaxation to assist sleep medication withdrawal. Behavior Modification, 23(3), 379–402.  Lichstein, K. L., & Rosenthal, T. L. (1980). Insomniacs’ perceptions of cognitive versus somatic determinants of sleep disturbance. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 89, 105–107.  Lichstein, K. L., Stone, K. C., Donaldson, J., Nau, S. D., Soeffing, J. P., Murray, D., et al. (2006). Actigraphy validation with insomnia. Sleep, 29, 232–239.  Manber, R., Edinger, J. D., Gress, J. L., San Pedro-Salcedo,  M. G., Kuo, T. F., & Kalista, T. (2008). Cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia enhances depression outcome in patients with comorbid major depressive disorder and insomnia. Sleep, 31(4), 489–495. Miller, W. R., & Rollnick, S. (2002). Motivational interviewing: Preparing people for change (2nd ed.). New York: Guilford Press.  Montgomery, P., & Dennis, J. (2003). Cognitive behavioural interventions for sleep problems in adults aged 60+. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 1, CD003161.   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  Morgenthaler, T., Alessi, C., Friedman, L., Owens, J., Kapur, V., Boehlecke, B., et al. (2007). Practice parameters for the use of actigraphy in the assessment of sleep and sleep disorders: An update for 2007. Sleep, 30(4), 519–529.  Morin, C. M. (1993). Insomnia: Psychological assessment and management. New York: Guilford Press.  Morin, C. M., Blais, F., & Savard, J. (2002). Are changes in beliefs and attitudes about sleep related to sleep improvements in the treatment of insomnia? Behaviour Research and Therapy, 40, 741–752.  Morin, C. M., Bootzin, R. R., Buysse, D. J., Edinger, J., D., Espie, C. A., & Lichstein, K. L. (2006). Psychological and behavioral treatment of insomnia: An update of recent evidence (1998–2004). Sleep, 29, 1396–1406.  Morin, C. M., Culbert, J. P., & Schwartz, S. M. (1994). Nonpharmacological interventions for insomnia: A metaanalysis of treatment efficacy. American Journal of Psychiatry, 151, 1172–1180.  Morin, C. M., & Espie, C. A. (2003). Insomnia: A clinical guide to assessment and treatment. New York: Kluwer Academic/Plenum Press.  Morin, C. M., Gaulier, B., Barry, T., & Kowatch, R. A. (1992). Patients’ acceptance of psychological and pharmacological therapies for insomnia. Sleep, 15, 302–305.  Morin, C. M., Hauri, P. J., Espie, C. A., Spielman, A. J., Buysse, D. J., & Bootzin, R. R. (1999). Nonpharmacologic treatment of chronic insomnia: An American Academy of Sleep Medicine review. Sleep, 22, 1134–1156.  Morin, C. M., Koetter, U., Bastien, C., Ware, J. C., & Wooten, V. (2005). Valerian–hops combination and diphenhydramine for treating insomnia: A randomized placebocontrolled clinical trial. Sleep, 28(11), 1465–1471.  Morin, C. M., Vallieres, A., Guay, B., Ivers, H., Savard, J., Merette, C., et al. (2009). Cognitive behavioral therapy, singly and combined with medication, for persistent insomnia: A randomized controlled trial. Journal of the American Medical Association, 301(19), 2005–2015.  Murtagh, D. R., & Greenwood, K. M. (1995). Identifying effective psychological treatments for insomnia: A metaanalysis. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 63, 79–89.  Neitzert Semler, C., & Harvey, A. G. (2004). Monitoring for sleep-related threat: A pilot study of the sleep associated monitoring index (SAMI). Psychosomatic Medicine, 66, 242–250.  National Institutes of Health. (2005). National Institutes of Health State of the Science Conference Statement: Manifestations and management of chronic insomnia in adults, Sleep, 28, 1049–1057.  Nofzinger, E. A., Thase, M. E., Reynolds, C. F., III, Himmelhoch, J. M., Mallinger, A., Houck, P., et al. (1991). Hypersomnia in bipolar depression: A comparison with narcolepsy using the multiple sleep latency test. American Journal of Psychiatry, 148(9), 1177–1181.  Ohayon, M. M. (2002). Epidemiology of insomnia: What we know and what we still need to learn. Sleep Medicine Reviews, 6, 97–111.  Ong, J. C., Kuo, T. F., & Manber, R. (2008). Who is at risk for dropout from group cognitive-behavioral theapy for insomnia? Journal of Psychosomatic Research, 64(4), 419–425.  Paquet, J., Kawinska, A., & Carrier, J. (2007). Wake detection capacity of actigraphy during sleep. Sleep, 30(10), 1362–1369.  Perlis, M., Aloia, M., & Kuhn, B. (Eds.). (2012). Behavioral sleep medicine treatment protocols. New York: Academic Press.  Perlis, M., & Lichstein, K. (Eds.). (2003). Treating sleep disorders: Principles and practice of behavioral sleep medicine. New York: Wiley.  Perlis, M. L., Smith, M. T., & Pigeon, W. R. (2005). Etiology and pathophysiology of insomnia. In M. H. Kryger, T. Roth, & W. C. Dement (Eds.), Principles and practice of sleep medicine (4th ed., pp. 714–725). Philadelphia: Elsevier/ Saunders.  Ree, M., & Harvey, A. G. (2004a). Insomnia. In J. Bennett- Levy, G. Butler, M. Fennell, A. Hackman, M. Mueller, &  D. Westbrook (Eds.), Oxford guide to behavioural experiments in cognitive therapy (pp. 287–305). Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. Ree, M., & Harvey, A. G. (2004b). Investigating safety behaviours in insomnia: The development of the Sleep- Related Behaviours Questionnaire (SRBQ). Behaviour Change, 21, 26–36.  Ree, M. J., Harvey, A. G., Blake, R., Tang, N. K., & Shawe-Taylor, M. (2005). Attempts to control unwanted thoughts in the night: Development of the thought control questionnaire-insomnia revised (TCQI-R). Behaviour Research and Therapy, 43, 985–998.  Reite, M., Buysse, D., Reynolds, C., & Mendelson, W. (1995). The use of polysomnography in the evaluation of insomnia. Sleep, 18, 58–70.  Roth, T., Coulouvrat, C., Hajak, G., Lakoma, M. D., Sampson, N. A., Shahly, V., et al. (2011). Prevalence and perceived health associated with insomnia based on DSM-IV-TR; International Statistical Classification of Diseases and related health problems, Tenth Revision; and Research Diagnostic Criteria/International Classification of Sleep Disorders, Second Edition criteria: Results from the America Insomnia Survey. Biological Psychiatry, 69, 592–600.  Rybarczyk, B., Lopez, M., Schelble, K., & Stepanski, E. (2005). Home-based video CBT for comorbid geriatric insomnia: A pilot study using secondary data analyses. Behavioral Sleep Medicine, 3, 158–175.  Salkovskis, P. M. (1991). The importance of behaviour in the maintenance of anxiety and panic: A cognitive account. Behavioural Psychotherapy, 19, 6–19.   Sleep Disturbance  Sivertsen, B., Omvik, S., Pallesen, S., Bjorvatn, B., Havik, O. E., Kvale, G., et al. (2006). Cognitive behavioral therapy vs zopiclone for treatment of chronic primary insomnia in older adults: A randomized controlled trial. Journal of the American Medical Association, 295, 2851–2858.  Smith, L. J., Nowakowski, S., Soeffing, J. P., Orff, H. J., & Perlis, M. L. (2003). The measurement of sleep. In M. L. Perlis & K. L. Lichstein (Eds.), Treating sleep disorders: Principles and practice of behavioral sleep medicine (pp. 29–73). New York: Wiley.  Smith, M. T., Huang, M. I., & Manber, R. (2005). Cognitive behavior therapy for chronic insomnia occurring within the context of medical and psychiatric disorders. Clinical Psychology Review, 25, 559–592.  Spielman, A. J., Caruso, L. S., & Glovinsky, P. B. (1987). A behavioral perspective on insomnia treatment. Psychiatric Clinics of North America, 10, 541–553.  Spielman, A. J., Saskin, P., & Thorpy, M. J. (1987). Treatment of chronic insomnia by restriction of time in bed. Sleep, 10, 45–56.  Stepanski, E. J., Zorick, F., Roehrs, T., & Roth, T. (2000). Effects of sleep deprivation on daytime sleepiness in primary insomnia. Sleep, 23, 215–219.  Taylor, D. J., Lichstein, K. L., Weinstock, J., Sanford, S., & Temple, J. R. (2007). A pilot study of cognitive-behavioral therapy of insomnia in people with mild depression. Behavior Therapy, 38(1), 49–57.  Vallieres, A., & Morin, C. M. (2003). Actigraphy in the assessment of insomnia. Sleep, 26, 902–906.  Van Houdenhove, L., Buyse, B., Gabriëls, L. & Van den  Bergh, O. (2011). Treating primary insomnia: Clinical effectiveness and predictors of outcomes on sleep, daytime function and health-related quality of life. Journal of Clinical Psychology in Medical Settings, 18(3), 312– 321.  Van Someren, E. J. (2000). Circadian rhythms and sleep in human aging. Chronobiology International, 17, 233–243.  Walker, M. P., & Stickgold, R. (2006). Sleep, memory, and plasticity. Annual Review of Psychology, 57, 139–166.  Watkins, E., & Baracaia, S. (2001). Why do people ruminate in dysphoric moods? Personality and Individual Differences, 30, 723–734.  Watts, F. N., Coyle, K., & East, M. P. (1994). The contribution of worry to insomnia. British Journal of Clinical Psychology, 33, 211–220.  Wicklow, A., & Espie, C. A. (2000). Intrusive thoughts and their relationship to actigraphic measurement of sleep: Towards a cognitive model of insomnia. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 38(7), 679–693.  Wyatt, J. K., Stepanski, E. J., & Kirkby, J. (2006). Circadian phase in delayed sleep phase syndrome: Predictors and temporal stability across multiple assessments. Sleep, 29, 1075–1080.  Yoo, S. S., Gujar, N., Hu, P., Jolesz, F. A., & Walker, M. P. (2007). The human emotional brain without sleep—a prefrontal amygdala disconnect. Current Biology, 17, R877– R878.  Zee, P. C., & Turek, F. W. (2006). Sleep and health: Everywhere and in both directions. Archives of Internal Medicine, 166, 1686–1688.   CHaPter 17  eating Disorders  A Transdiagnostic Protocol  christoPher G. fairBurN zafra cooPer  The fifth edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DsM‑5) clearly defines and separates anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa, and recognizes for the first time binge‑eating disorder as a specific diagnosis. But many people with serious eating disorders do not quite fit these diagnostic criteria and would be lumped into an “other specified feeding or eating disorder” category. it is also the case that individuals with eating disorders change from one category to another over time. The authors of this chapter, involved over the years in the creation of the DsM eating disorder categories, are also among the originators of the most successful treatment yet devised for these disorders. Thus, it is significant that fairburn and colleagues have moved ahead of the curve and created a “transdiagnostic” unified theory and treatment protocol applicable to all eating disorders, including those falling into the “other specified” category. (for a similar approach to emotional disorders, see Payne, ellard, farchione, fairholme, & Barlow, Chapter 6, this volume.) in this chapter fairburn and Cooper describe this state‑of‑theart treatment. in what to some readers may be a surprising departure, the authors’ note that the central problem requiring intervention is not necessarily dieting, bingeing, low weight, or purging, but rather the culturally reinforced abnormal attitudes and beliefs regarding shape and weight. The recommendation for applying various treatment components in a “modular” fashion speaks to the art of administering this treatment. The detailed explication of cognitive‑behavioral therapy as applied to eating disorders should be extraordinarily useful to clinicians working with these difficult problems.—D. H. B.  Clinical eating disorders such as anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa, and binge-eating disorder are a cause of substantial physical and psychosocial morbidity among adolescent girls and young adult women. They are much less common among men. They typically begin in adolescence and may run a chronic course. Their effect is pervasive, since they interfere with  psychological, physical, and social functioning. Once established, they are difficult to treat and impose a significant burden on health services. In this chapter we describe the psychopathology of the eating disorders and the mechanisms that cause them to persist. We then describe a transdiagnostic cognitive-behavioral treatment designed to disrupt these mechanisms.  670   Eating Disorders  classificatioN aND DiaGNosis  The DSM‑5 Scheme  The DSM-5 scheme for classifying and diagnosing eating disorders recognizes three specific disorders: anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa, and binge-eating disorder. In addition, there are two residual categories termed “other specified feeding or eating disorder” and “unspecified feeding or eating disorder,” respectively (American Psychiatric Association, 2013).  In essence, three features needed to be present to make a diagnosis of anorexia nervosa:  1. The overevaluation of shape and weight; that is, judging self-worth largely, or even exclusively, in terms of shape and weight. 2. This is often expressed as a strong desire to be thin, combined with an intense fear of gaining weight and becoming fat. 3. The active maintenance of an unduly low body weight (e.g., maintaining a body weight less than 85% of that expected or a body mass index ≤ 17.51). Amenorrhea (in postpubertal females), another requirement for the diagnosis of anorexia nervosa in the previous DSM edition, has been removed due to its questionable validity; that is, the majority of female patients who meet the other diagnostic criteria are also amenorrheic, and those who are not closely resemble those who are.  Three features also need to be present to make a diagnosis of bulimia nervosa:  1. The overevaluation of shape and weight, as in anorexia nervosa. 2. Recurrent binge eating. A “binge” is an episode of eating during which an objectively large amount of food is eaten, and there is a sense of loss of control at the time. 3. Extreme weight-control behavior, such as strict dietary restriction, recurrent self-induced vomiting, or marked laxative misuse. In addition, to diagnose bulimia nervosa, there is an exclusionary criterion, namely, that the diagnostic criteria for anorexia nervosa not be met. This criterion ensures that it is not possible for patients receiving both diagnoses at one time.  Binge-eating disorder, which was a provisional diagnosis in DSM-IV, is now recognized as a full disorder in DSM-5. It is designed to denote an eating problem characterized by recurrent binge eating in the absence of the extreme weight control behavior seen in bulimia nervosa and anorexia nervosa.  No diagnostic criteria are specified for the two residual eating disorder diagnoses.  cliNical features  Anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa, and most cases of other specified eating disorders, share a distinctive “core psychopathology” that is essentially the same in females and males, adults and adolescents. This is the overevaluation of shape and weight. Whereas most people evaluate themselves on the basis of their perceived performance in a variety of life domains (e.g., the quality of their relationships; their work performance; their sporting prowess), people with eating disorders judge their self-worth largely, or even exclusively, in terms of their shape and weight, and their ability to control them. This psychopathology is peculiar to the eating disorders (and to body dysmorphic disorder) and is rarely seen in the general population. It should be distinguished from “body shape dissatisfaction,” which refers to dislike of aspects of one’s appearance. Some degree of body shape dissatisfaction is widespread and its presence is sometimes referred to as “normative discontent.”   The overevaluation of shape and weight results in the pursuit of weight loss—note that it is usually weight loss that is sought, not a specific weight—and an intense fear of weight gain and fatness. Most other features of these disorders are secondary to this core psychopathology and its consequences (e.g., undereating; becoming severely underweight). Thus, in anorexia nervosa there is a sustained and successful pursuit of weight loss that results in patients becoming severely underweight. This pursuit is not seen as a problem: Rather, it is valued and, as a consequence, patients have little desire to change. For this reason it is often other people who are responsible for these patients’ entry into treatment. In bulimia nervosa, equivalent attempts to restrict food intake are disrupted by repeated episodes of loss of control over eating (binges). Generally these binges are aversive and a source of distress, and they lead patients to seek help. Consequently those with bulimia nervosa are easier to engage in treatment,   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  although because of the accompanying shame and secrecy, there is typically a delay of many years before they divulge their eating problem and enter treatment.  The core psychopathology of anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa has other expressions, too. Many patients mislabel adverse physical and emotional states as “feeling fat” and equate this with actually being fat. In addition, many repeatedly scrutinize their bodies, focusing on parts that they dislike. This may contribute to patients’ overestimation of their size. Others actively avoid seeing their bodies, assuming that they look fat and disgusting. Equivalent behavior is seen with respect to weighing (weight checking), with many patients weighing themselves frequently. As a result these patients become preoccupied with trivial, day-to-day fluctuations, whereas others actively avoid knowing their weight but nevertheless remain highly concerned about it.  Anorexia Nervosa  In anorexia nervosa, the pursuit of weight loss leads patients to engage in a severe and selective restriction of food intake, avoiding foods viewed as fattening. Generally there is no true “anorexia” (loss of appetite) as such. The undereating may also be an expression of other motives, including asceticism, competitiveness, and a desire to attract the attention of others. In the early stages of the disorder, undereating may be a goal in its own right, with the patient valuing the sense of self-control that it confers. Some patients also engage in a driven type of exercising that contributes to their weight loss. This is characterized by a strong drive to exercise, a tendency to overexercise, and giving exercise precedence over other aspects of life. Self-induced vomiting and other extreme forms of weight control (e.g., the misuse of laxatives or diuretics) are practiced by a subgroup of these patients, and patients in an overlapping group have episodes of loss of control over eating, although the amount eaten may not be objectively large (“subjective binge eating”). Depressive and anxiety features, irritability, lability of mood, impaired concentration, loss of sexual appetite, and obsessional features are also frequently present. Typically these features get worse as weight is lost and improve with weight regain. Interest in the outside world also wanes as patients become underweight, with the result that most become socially withdrawn and isolated. This, too, tends to reverse with weight regain.  Bulimia Nervosa  The eating habits of those with bulimia nervosa resemble those seen in anorexia nervosa. The main distinguishing feature is that the attempts to restrict food intake are disrupted by repeated episodes of binge eating. The frequency of these episodes ranges from once a week (the DSM-5 diagnostic threshold) to several times a day, and the amount eaten per episode varies but is typically between 1,000 and 2,000 kilocalories (kcal). In most cases, each binge is followed by compensatory, self-induced vomiting or laxative misuse but there is a subgroup of patients who do not “purge.” The weight of most patients with bulimia nervosa is in the healthy range (BMI between 18.5 and 25.0) due to the effects of undereating and overeating balancing each other. As a result, these patients do not experience the secondary psychosocial and physical effects of maintaining a very low weight. Depressive and anxiety features are prominent in bulimia nervosa—indeed, more than in anorexia nervosa—and there is a subgroup of patients who engage in substance misuse or self-injury, or both. This subgroup, which is also present in some anorexia nervosa patients who binge-eat, tends to attract the diagnosis of borderline personality disorder.  Binge‑Eating Disorder  Patients with binge-eating disorder report recurrent binge eating, much as in bulimia nervosa, but their eating habits outside the binges are quite different. As noted earlier, in bulimia nervosa there is a high level of dietary restraint, with most patients attempting to adhere to a highly restricted diet when not binge eating. In contrast, in binge-eating disorder there is a tendency to overeat outside the binges. Indeed, the eating habits of patients with binge-eating disorder resemble those of people with obesity, albeit with binges superimposed. Thus, self-induced vomiting and laxative misuse are not present, nor is there any tendency to overexercise. Most people who seek treatment for binge-eating disorder are overweight or meet criteria for obesity (BMI ≥ 30.0).  Other Specified and Unspecified Eating Disorders  The psychopathology of the “other specified” and “unspecified” eating disorders in DSM-5, referred to as   Eating Disorders  eating disorder NOS in DSM-IV, closely resembles that seen in anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa, and binge-eating disorder. It is also of comparable duration and severity (Fairburn et al., 2007). Conceptually, it is helpful to distinguish two subgroups within these categories, although there is no sharp boundary between them. The first comprises cases that closely resemble anorexia nervosa or bulimia nervosa but just fail to meet their diagnostic criteria; for example, body weight may be marginally above the threshold for anorexia nervosa or the frequency of binge eating may be just too low for a diagnosis of bulimia nervosa. These cases belong to the “other specified feeding or eating disorder” category. The second and larger subgroup comprises cases in which the clinical features of anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa are combined in a manner that is different than that seen in the two prototypical disorders. Such states may be described as “mixed” in character and they belong to the “unspecified feeding and eating disorder” category. Cases of this type are common (Fairburn & Cooper, 2011).  Readers may come across references to so-called “purging disorder,” a term that refers to a state characterized by recurrent purging in the absence of binge eating. In DSM-5 these cases are placed in the “other specified feeding or eating disorder” category. In our experience, the great majority of people who meet these criteria experience subjective binges and are therefore best viewed as having a variant of bulimia nervosa.  Last, patients who describe overeating that is confined to the late evening or night are referred to as having “night eating syndrome,” a relatively neglected state, and one that is outside the scope of this chapter. For information on night eating syndrome and its treatment readers are referred to the book by Lundgren, Allison, and Stunkard (2012).  DeveloPMeNt aND suBsequeNt course  Anorexia nervosa typically starts in adolescence with the onset of dietary restriction that becomes progressively more extreme and inflexible. In its early stages the disorder may be self-limiting and treatment-responsive, but if it persists, it tends to become entrenched and requires more intensive treatment. In 10–20% of cases, it proves intractable and unremitting. Even in patients who recover, residual features are common, particularly some degree of overconcern about shape, weight,  and eating. A frequent occurrence is the development of binge eating and, in about half the cases, progression on to full bulimia nervosa. Most prominent among the favorable prognostic factors are early age of onset and short history, whereas unfavorable prognostic factors include a long history, severe weight loss, binge eating, and vomiting. Anorexia nervosa is the one eating disorder to be associated with a raised mortality rate, with the standardized mortality ratio over the first 10 years from presentation being about 10. The majority of deaths are either a direct result of medical complications or due to suicide.  Bulimia nervosa has a slightly later age of onset, typically in late adolescence or early adulthood. It usually starts in much the same way as anorexia nervosa—indeed, in about one-fourth of cases the diagnostic criteria for anorexia nervosa are met for a time. Eventually, however, episodes of binge eating interrupt the dietary restriction and, as a result, body weight rises to normal or near normal levels. The disorder is extremely self-perpetuating. Thus, patients often present with an unremitting history of 8 years or more of disturbed eating. No consistent predictors of outcome have been identified, although there is evidence that childhood obesity, low self-esteem, and signs of personality disturbance are associated with a worse prognosis.  Binge-eating disorder has a rather different age of presentation and course. Most of these patients are middle-aged and one-third or more are male. This is quite unlike patients with anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa, and the two groups of residual eating disorders, who are generally female (about 10% are male) and are adolescents or young adults. Clinical experience suggests that binge-eating disorder also differs in its course, in that it tends to be phasic rather than persistent, with most patients describing sustained periods lasting many months free from binge eating. Throughout, these patients have a general tendency to overeat and gain weight. Few report a history of either anorexia nervosa or bulimia nervosa.  Little is known about the development and course of the residual eating disorders. Most patients present in their adolescence or 20s, as in bulimia nervosa, and with a comparable length of history (Fairburn et al., 2007). Because between one-fourth and one-third of patients have had anorexia nervosa or bulimia nervosa in the past, their present state is simply the latest expression of an evolving eating disorder.   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  the “traNsDiaGNostic” PersPective  The DSM-5 scheme for classifying eating disorders encourages the view that anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa, and binge-eating disorder are distinct clinical states, each requiring its own form of treatment. It should be clear from consideration of their clinical features and course over time that the evidence does not support this (Fairburn & Harrison, 2003). With the possible exception of binge-eating disorder, the eating disorders have many features in common, most of which are not seen in other psychiatric disorders. Studies of their course indicate that patients migrate between these diagnoses over time: Indeed, temporal migration is the norm rather than the exception. This temporal movement, together with the fact that the disorders share the same distinctive psychopathology, suggests that common “transdiagnostic” mechanisms are involved in the persistence of eating disorder psychopathology (Fairburn, Cooper, & Shafran, 2003). If correct, this implies that treatments capable of successfully addressing these maintaining mechanisms should be effective with all forms of eating disorder rather than just one.  the coGNitive‑Behavioral theory  Bulimia Nervosa  In common with most evidence-based cognitivebehavioral treatments, the theory that underpins the cognitive-behavioral treatment for bulimia nervosa (CBT-BN) is primarily concerned with the processes that maintain the disorder rather than those responsible for its development. According to the theory, these patients’ dysfunctional scheme for self-evaluation is central to the maintenance of the disorder. As noted earlier, whereas most people evaluate themselves on the basis of their perceived performance in a variety of life domains, people with eating disorders judge themselves largely, or even exclusively, in terms of their shape and weight, and their ability to control them. As a result, their lives become focused on shape, weight, and eating, with dietary control, thinness, and weight loss being actively pursued, while overeating, “fatness,” and weight gain are assiduously avoided. Most of the other features of bulimia nervosa can be understood as stemming directly from this “core psychopathology,” including the weight control behavior, the various forms of body checking and avoidance, and the preoccupation  with thoughts about shape, weight, and eating. Figure  17.1 provides a schematic representation (or “formulation”) of the main processes involved. The only feature of bulimia nervosa that is obviously not a direct expression of the core psychopathology is these patients’ binge eating. The cognitivebehavioral theory proposes that the binge eating is largely a product of the particular way that these patients attempt to restrict their eating (i.e., their form of dietary restraint), irrespective of whether they actually undereat. Rather than adopting general guidelines about how they should eat, these patients try to adhere to multiple extreme, and highly specific, dietary rules. An accompanying tendency—one that involves reacting in an extreme and negative fashion to the frequent and almost inevitable breaking of these rules—leads to interpreting even minor dietary slips as evidence of lack of self-control. The result is that patients respond by temporarily abandoning their attempts to restrict their eating and instead give in to the urge to eat. This produces a highly distinctive pattern of eating in which attempts to restrict eating are repeatedly interrupted by episodes of binge eating. The binge eating maintains the core psychopathology by intensifying patients’ concerns about their ability to control their eating, shape, and weight, and it encourages yet greater  Binge eating Compensatory vomiting/laxative misuse Events and associated mood change Overevaluation of shape and weight and their control Strict dieting; noncompensatory weight-control behavior figUre 17.1. The cognitive-behavioral theory of the maintenance of bulimia nervosa. From Fairburn (2008,  p. 19). Copyright 2008 by The Guilford Press. Reprinted by permission. This figure may be downloaded from www. credo-oxford.com.  Eating Disorders  dietary restraint, thereby increasing the risk of further episodes of binge eating.  It should be noted that these patients’ dietary slips and binges do not come out of the blue; rather, they are particularly likely to occur in response to life difficulties and any associated mood change, in part because binge eating temporarily ameliorates negative mood states, and in part because it distracts patients from thinking about their difficulties.  A further process maintains binge eating in those patients who practice compensatory “purging” (i.e., those who induce vomiting or take laxatives in response to specific episodes of binge eating). Patients’ mistaken belief in the effectiveness of purging in preventing calorie (i.e., energy) absorption undermines a major deterrent against binge eating. They do not realize that vomiting only retrieves part of what has been eaten, and laxatives have little or no effect on energy absorption (Fairburn, 2013).  This well-established cognitive-behavioral account of the maintenance of bulimia nervosa has clear implications for treatment. It suggests that if treatment is to have a lasting impact on binge eating and purging, then it also needs to address these patients’ extreme attempts to restrict their eating, their overevaluation of shape and weight, and their tendency to eat in response to adverse events and negative moods.  Anorexia Nervosa and Other Specified Eating Disorders  The cognitive-behavioral account of the maintenance of bulimia nervosa can be extended to all eating disorders. As noted earlier, the “transdiagnostic” theory highlights the fact that anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa have much in common (Fairburn et al., 2003). They share essentially the same core psychopathology with both groups of patients who overevaluate shape and weight, and their control, and express this psychopathology in similar attitudes and behavior.2 Thus, patients with anorexia nervosa restrict their food intake in the same rigid and extreme way as patients with bulimia nervosa, and they, too, may vomit, misuse laxatives or diuretics, and overexercise. Binge eating does not distinguish the two disorders because there is a subgroup of patients with anorexia nervosa who binge-eat (with or without compensatory purging). The major difference between the two disorders lies in the relative balance of the undereating and overeating, and its effect on body weight. In bulimia nervosa, body  weight is usually unremarkable, whereas in anorexia nervosa, undereating predominates, resulting in body weight that is extremely low and features of starvation contributing to the clinical picture and its maintenance. Particularly important in this regard is the pronounced social withdrawal seen in starvation, since this encourages self-absorption while isolating patients from external influences that might diminish their overconcern with eating, shape and weight. Figure 17.2 shows the cognitive-behavioral formulation of the classic “restricting” form of anorexia nervosa.  The processes that maintain bulimia nervosa and anorexia nervosa also appear to maintain the clinical presentations seen in other specified eating disorders. Figure 17.3 shows a composite transdiagnostic formulation. It is essentially a combination of the bulimia nervosa and restricting anorexia nervosa formulations. In our experience, this composite formulation represents the core processes that maintain any eating disorder, whatever its exact form. The specific processes operating in any individual patient depend on the nature of the eating disorder psychopathology present. In some cases, only a limited number of these processes are ac-  Overevaluation of shape and weight and their control   Strict dieting; noncompensatory weight-control behavior   Significantly low weight  • preoccupation with eating • social withdrawal • heightened fullness • heightened obsessionality figUre 17.2. The cognitive-behavioral theory of the maintenance of anorexia nervosa. From Fairburn (2008,  p. 21). Copyright 2008 by The Guilford Press. Reprinted by permission. This figure may be downloaded from www. credo-oxford.com.  CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  Strict dieting; noncompensatory weight-control behavior Binge eating Compensatory vomiting/laxative misuse Significantly low weight Events and associated mood change Overevaluation of shape and weight and their control figUre 17.3. The “transdiagnostic” cognitivebehavioral theory of eating disorders. From Fairburn (2008, p. 21). Copyright 2008 by The Guilford Press. Reprinted by permission. This figure may be downloaded from www.credo-oxford.com.  tive (as in most cases of binge-eating disorder), whereas in others (e.g., cases of anorexia nervosa in which there is binge eating and purging) most of the processes are operating. In common with the cognitive-behavioral account of the maintenance of bulimia nervosa, this transdiagnostic account highlights the processes that need to be addressed in treatment, thereby helping the clinician design a bespoke treatment to fit the individual patient’s psychopathology.  the research oN treatMeNt  Consistent with the current way of classifying eating disorders, the research on their treatment has focused on the particular disorders in isolation. This research has been reviewed by Hay and Claudino (2010), and an authoritative meta-analysis has been conducted by the  U.K. National Institute for Clinical Excellence (NICE; 2004). The majority of the randomized controlled trials have focused on adults with bulimia nervosa, with the treatment of adolescents receiving far less attention. The findings indicate that there is a clear leading treatment, a specific form of cognitive behavior therapy for bulimia nervosa (CBT-BN). However, this treatment is far from being a panacea: At best, half the patients who start treatment make a full and lasting response. Interpersonal psychotherapy (IPT) is a potential alternative to CBT-BN, but it takes 8 to 12 months longer to achieve a comparable effect. Antidepressant medication (especially fluoxetine at a dose of 60 mg in the morning) also has a beneficial effect, but this is not as great as that obtained with CBT-BN, and the limited evidence available suggests it is often not sustained. Combining CBT-BN with antidepressant medication conveys little, if any, advantage over CBT-BN alone.  There has been much less research on the treatment of anorexia nervosa, with no treatment supported by robust research evidence. In this case, most of the work has focused on adolescents, and much of it has been concerned with a highly specific form of familybased treatment (FBT; Lock, le Grange, Agras, & Dare, 2001). Despite widespread enthusiasm for FBT (often described as the “Maudsley method” because it was devised at the Maudsley Hospital in London), it is not without its limitations (Lock, 2011; Lock et al., 2010): The treatment is not acceptable to some families and patients; it renders some patients unable to eat without the encouragement of their parents; and fewer than half the patients make a full treatment response.  There is a growing body of research on the treatment of binge-eating disorder. Various psychological treatments seem reasonably effective and more so than when they are used to treat bulimia nervosa or anorexia nervosa (Wilson, Grilo, & Vitousek, 2007). Three treatments have the greatest support, an adaptation of CBT-BN, IPT, and a simplified version of CBT-BN termed “guided self-help.” The effects of CBT-BN and IPT on binge-eating disorder are remarkably similar, both in their extent and time course, which is quite unlike the response seen in bulimia nervosa. Overall, it appears that binge-eating disorder is more treatmentresponsive than the other eating disorders, and that shared “nonspecific” psychotherapeutic processes may have a potent influence. Perhaps most remarkable is the effect of guided self-help (Wilson & Zandberg, 2012). This brief intervention (typically 8–10, 20-minute sessions delivered by a nonspecialist “facilitator”) has been shown to be as effective as 20, 50-minute sessions of IPT both at the end of treatment and at 2-year followup (Wilson, Wilfley, Agras, & Bryson, 2010). There is no drug treatment for binge-eating disorder. Finally, it should be noted that none of these treatments has a significant effect on comorbid obesity. This is not altogether surprising given that much of these patients’ excess calorie intake comes from overeating outside their binges rather than the binges themselves.   Eating Disorders  There has been just one study of the treatment of the residual eating disorders, a remarkable omission given their prevalence. The findings of this study are discussed below.  The Research on Enhanced Cognitive Behavior Therapy  Relatively recently a transdiagnostic form of cognitive behavior therapy has been developed that is designed for the full range of clinical eating disorders seen in adults, including other specified eating disorders (Fairburn, 2008; Fairburn et al., 2003). It is based on the transdiagnostic theory outlined earlier and was derived from CBT-BN. The treatment—enhanced cognitive behavior therapy (CBT-E) —is described as “enhanced” because it uses a variety of new strategies and procedures intended to improve treatment adherence and outcome. In addition, it has modules designed to address certain obstacles to change that are “external” to the core eating disorder, namely, clinical perfectionism, low self-esteem, and interpersonal difficulties. Thus, there are two forms of CBT-E, a focused form that focuses exclusively on the eating disorder psychopathology, and a broad form that also addresses the three external obstacles to change.3 The treatment also exists in two lengths, a 20-week version for patients who are not significantly underweight, defined as having a BMI of  18.5 or more, and a version that can be up to double this length for patients with a BMI below 18.5. CBT-E, primarily an outpatient treatment, is designed to be delivered on an individual rather than a group basis, although day patient and inpatient versions have been developed (Dalle Grave, 2012). It has also been adapted for adolescents (Cooper & Stewart, 2008; Dalle Grave, Calugi, Doll, & Fairburn, 2013).  Research on CBT-E is still at a relatively early stage. In the first study of its kind, Fairburn and colleagues (2009) recruited from two community-based National Health Service centers in the United Kingdom a transdiagnostic sample of patients with eating disorders, all of whom had a BMI over 17.5 (i.e., in DSM-IV terms, they either had bulimia nervosa or eating disorder NOS). The patients were randomized to a waiting-list control condition, or to either the focused or the broad form of CBT-E, and they then entered a closed, 60-week period of follow-up. There were two main findings:  1. The two forms of CBT-E were equally effective overall. The size of treatment response suggested that CBT-E was more effective than its predecessor, CBT-BN, especially in light of the use of few trial exclusion criteria (Crow & Peterson, 2009).  2. There was no difference in treatment response between the patients with bulimia nervosa and those with eating disorder NOS. A second (unpublished) study from Oxford has replicated these findings. In addition, an open transdiagnostic study from Australia obtained very similar results, at least among treatment completers (Byrne, Fursland, Allen, & Watson, 2011). Unfortunately, the therapists in this study were not trained or supervised by anyone expert in CBT-E, so it is difficult to have complete confidence in its findings.  The original U.K. study also included a planned moderator analysis (Fairburn et al., 2009). Its findings suggested that the broad version of the treatment was more effective with patients who had extreme external psychopathology of the type it was designed to target, whereas the focused version was more effective with the remaining patients.  One other study is worth mentioning. It involved a remarkable comparison of CBT-E (focused form, 20 sessions over 20 weeks) with a longer-term psychoanalytic treatment (about 100 sessions over 2 years) in the treatment of bulimia nervosa (Poulsen et al., in press). Two sets of therapists were used, and each was well trained and supervised. The findings were striking in that CBT-E was found to be far superior to the psychoanalytic treatment both after 20 weeks (the end of CBT-E) and at 2 years (the end of the psychoanalytic treatment). This was despite the marked discrepancy in the number of sessions received and the duration of treatment; moreover, it was contrary to any allegiance effect because the principal investigators were psychoanalysts. The finding is one of the clearest refutations of the so-called “dodo bird verdict,” which concludes that all psychotherapies are equivalent in their effects (Luborsky, Singer, & Luborsky, 1975).  Until recently, the major outstanding question about CBT-E was whether it could be used to treat underweight patients (i.e., those with anorexia nervosa or underweight forms of other specified eating disorders). It is now clear that it can. Thus, it has been shown to be associated with a good outcome in three cohorts of patients with the disorder, two adult cohorts (total N =  99) (Fairburn, Cooper, Doll, Palmer, & Dalle Grave, 2013), and one adolescent cohort (N = 49) (Dalle Grave et al., 2013), all of whom were seriously underweight.  CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  To conclude, there are three main points to note from the research on CBT-E:  1. CBT-E can be used to treat all forms of eating disorder in adults. Thus, CBT-E is truly transdiagnostic in its scope. This applies to no other evidence-based treatment for the eating disorders. Therefore, the availability of CBT-E renders redundant the need to learn different treatments for the different eating disorders (Fairburn & Wilson, 2013). 2. It needs emphasizing that there are good data on the use of CBT-E to treat adults with anorexia nervosa given that this is sometimes questioned. Indeed, there are more data on this application of CBT-E than on any other treatment. 3. CBT-E can also be used to treat adolescents with anorexia nervosa. This makes it a potential alternative to FBT. A comparison of the two approaches is definitely indicated (Dalle Grave et al., 2013). The remainder of this chapter is devoted to a description of the main form of CBT-E, the focused version. This is the core version of the treatment, and it forms the basis of the variants of CBT-E. It is the version used to treat the great majority of adults with an eating disorder, so long as they can be managed on an outpatient basis. A full description of the focused treatment is provided in the complete treatment guide (Fairburn, 2008; Fairburn, Cooper, Shafran, et al., 2008b) together with details of the broad version (Fairburn, Cooper, Shafran, Bohn, & Hawker, 2008). A book by Dalle Grave (2012) describes how CBT-E may be modified to make it suitable for inpatient, day patient, and intensive outpatient settings, and there are two descriptions of the modifications needed for adolescents (Cooper & Stewart, 2008; Dalle Grave et al., 2013).  the coNtext of treatMeNt  The Patient  CBT-E is a treatment for patients with an eating disorder of clinical severity (i.e., the eating disorder psychopathology is persistent and significantly interferes with the patient’s psychosocial functioning or physical health). It is designed for patients age 18 years or more, and it is equally suitable for men or women. Because  it is an outpatient-based treatment, it is essential that it be safe for the patient to be managed this way, both in physical terms and from the psychiatric point of view. In practice this means that the patient’s physical state must be stable and that he/she must not be at risk of suicide. The treatment is designed for patients with a BMI between 15 and 40. Although some patients with a BMI below 15 can be treated using outpatient CBT- E, this is probably best left to experienced therapists. The management of such patients is discussed by Dalle Grave (2012). The book edited by Mitchell and de Zwaan (2012) addresses the management of patients with a BMI over 40.  The Therapist  There are no specific professional qualifications needed to practice CBT-E, but certain background knowledge and experience are desirable. First, ideally, the therapist should be well informed about psychopathology in general and about eating disorder psychopathology in particular, and he/she should have experience working with patients with eating disorders. Second, therapists should also be aware of the medical complications of eating disorders and be able to manage them appropriately (Fairburn, Cooper, & Waller, 2008b). Third, therapists should be happy to implement a short-term, psychopathology-focused, treatment and, preferably, should have some experience working this way.  In contrast with many other applications of CBT, the gender of the therapist is of some relevance to the treatment of patients with eating disorders. Most of these patients are female; as a result, female therapists may have certain advantages. They may be viewed by patients as being more likely to understand their difficulties and, in addition, may serve as a role model in terms of the acceptance of shape and weight. These considerations are minor, however, in comparison with being competent at delivering the treatment. Our experience indicates that both women and men are capable of being excellent CBT-E therapists.  assessiNG PatieNts aND PrePariNG theM for treatMeNt  The Initial Evaluation Interview(s)  The initial assessment interview has three interrelated goals. The first is to put the patient at ease and begin to   Eating Disorders  forge a positive therapeutic relationship. This is important for a number of reasons. First, many patients with an eating disorder are highly ambivalent about treatment because of the “ego-syntonic” nature of their psychopathology (especially true of underweight patients), because of shame (especially true of those who are binge eating), or because they have had adverse treatment experiences in the past. The assessing clinician needs to be sensitive to the patient’s attitude to the assessment interview and ask directly about it. The goal is that it be a collaborative enterprise ending with the clinician being able to give the patient an expert opinion as to the nature of his/her problems and, if indicated, the treatment options.  The second goal is to establish the diagnosis. An apparent eating disorder may, for example, turn out to be an anxiety disorder (e.g., difficulty eating with others due to a social phobia), a presentation of a mood disorder (e.g., severe weight loss resulting from a clinical depression), or simple overeating (in cases of obesity). It is therefore critical to diagnose the problem or problems (if there is comorbidity) accurately and evaluate their severity in order to decide on the most appropriate next step.  The third goal is to ensure that the patient is safe to manage on an outpatient basis. This requires checking that there are no reasons to be concerned about the patient’s physical health or the risk of suicide. Guidance for doing so is provided in the complete treatment guide (Fairburn, Cooper, Shafran, et al., 2008b; Fairburn, Cooper, & Waller, 2008b).  Patients are invited to bring others to the appointment if they wish. They may simply provide moral support (and stay in the waiting area) or also serve as informants. The informant’s view is of interest, since it can provide a different perspective on the patient’s difficulties. Problems may be described that were not disclosed by the patient (e.g., that the patient takes an inordinate time to eat meals or has extremely small portions). However, it is not appropriate to insist that informants attend given that some adult patients will have kept their eating problem hidden from others and would not attend if disclosure were required. The situation is different with younger patients when involvement of the parents is generally essential.  Toward the end of the first interview, we weigh patients and measure their height. This is an extremely sensitive matter for most patients, and some are resistant to it. As the patient must be weighed for the assessment to be complete, we explain this. We do  not regard it as appropriate to rely on patients’ selfreported weight or height, which can be inaccurate. In our experience, patients expect their weight to be measured, although many prefer that this not happen. At this stage we do not insist on patients knowing their weight if they do not wish to, but we like to tell them their BMI when discussing the outcome of the assessment.   We are not in favor of lengthy assessment appointments because they are exhausting for the patient. On the other hand, we routinely see patients twice as part of the assessment process, since we find that a second appointment, a week or two later, often adds new information of value. On the second occasion patients are more relaxed; they sometimes disclose material previously withheld; and there is an opportunity to pursue matters that require particularly careful exploration (e.g., the nature and extent of any comorbid depressive features). The second appointment is also a good time to discuss treatment options.  We routinely ask patients to complete certain questionnaires prior to the initial appointment. This is useful, since it gives us standardized information on the nature and severity of patients’ eating problems. The two questionnaires we favor are the Eating Disorder Examination Questionnaire (EDE-Q; Fairburn & Beglin, 2008) and the Clinical Impairment Assessment (CIA; Bohn & Fairburn, 2008). The EDE-Q provides a measure of the severity of current eating disorder features, and the CIA assesses the impact of this psychopathology on psychosocial functioning. Both questionnaires are short and easy to fill in, and both focus on the previous 28 days and are sensitive to change. In addition, we include one of the well-established measures of general psychiatric features.  Outcome of the Evaluation  By the end of the second appointment it should be possible to decide on the best course of action. Generally there are five possible next steps:  1. Do “nothing.” This is appropriate with minor eating problems that are likely to be self-limiting. 2. Observe. This is appropriate if the nature or severity of the problem is not clear; for example, if it seems to be remitting. 3. Recommend outpatient-based CBT-E. This is appropriate for the vast majority of patients. We recommend CBT-E for virtually all patients with  CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  an eating disorder who have a BMI between 15.0 and 40.0.  4. Recommend more intensive treatment. We recommend more intensive treatment (mainly day patient or inpatient treatment) for patients whose BMI is below 15.0 and for those whose physical state is not stable. This can be followed by outpatient-based CBT-E. We may also recommend more intensive treatment when CBT-E fails to be of benefit. 5. Recommend referral elsewhere. This is appropriate when the problem is not an eating disorder (e.g., an anxiety or mood disorder). If patients have not benefited from CBT in the past, it merits thought whether it is appropriate to offer them the same treatment a second time. On the other hand, it is possible that a patient’s circumstances may now be more conducive to a good outcome than in the past, or the patient may be more motivated than before. It is important to note that while patients may report having had CBT before, it often emerges that it was quite different in character from CBT-E. It is always worth finding out exactly what the prior treatment involved.  Contraindications to Starting CBT‑E Immediately  There are certain contraindications to embarking upon CBT-E straightaway. Most of these apply to any psychological treatment for an eating disorder. The main contraindications are as follows:  Comorbid Clinical Depression  Most patients with an eating disorder have secondary depressive features but a sizable subgroup has an independent, but interacting, clinical depression. The identification and management of clinical depression in patients with eating disorders is discussed in detail in the complete treatment guide (Fairburn, Cooper, & Waller, 2008a). The presence of a clinical depression interferes with psychological treatment in a number of ways. Depressive thinking results in patients being unduly negative about the possibility of change and the reduction in drive has a similar effect. Concentration impairment is also a problem, since it results in information not being retained. Once the depression has been treated, however, CBT-E can start and such patients are often particularly highly motivated.  It is important to add that other, co-occurring forms of psychopathology (e.g., anxiety disorders, personality disorders) are not contraindications to CBT-E. Thus, the research on CBT-BN has typically included patients with comorbid Axis I and Axis II disorders, neither of which has been shown to be consistent predictors of outcome.  Significant Substance Misuse  Intoxication in treatment sessions renders the sessions virtually worthless, and persistent intoxication outside sessions severely undermines the patient’s ability to utilize CBT-E. Once the substance misuse has been addressed CBT-E can start.  Major Life Difficulties or Crises  These are distractions that interfere with treatment. It is often best to delay treatment until the crisis has passed.  Inability to Attend Regularly  A central feature of CBT-E is establishing and maintaining “therapeutic momentum.” This requires that appointments be frequent (especially in the early stages) and regular. We ask patients to guarantee that there will be no breaks in their attendance in the first 6 weeks and no breaks of longer than two consecutive weeks throughout the rest of treatment. If this is impossible, say, because of a prebooked vacation, we prefer to defer starting treatment. Patients generally understand and respect the rationale behind this stance. They can see that we are taking their treatment seriously and do not want them to have a “false start.”  Therapist Absence  The need to establish and maintain therapeutic momentum also places an obligation on the therapist. If the therapist is going to be away in the first 6 weeks of treatment, it is best to delay its start. Ways of minimizing the impact of therapist absence are discussed in the treatment guide (Fairburn, Cooper, Shafran, et al., 2008b).  Describing CBT‑E to the Patient  If CBT-E is to be recommended, it is important that it be accurately portrayed. Once this has been done, pos    Eating Disorders  sibly with the aid of an information sheet (obtainable from www.credo-oxford.com), and patients have had an opportunity to ask questions, it is our practice to ask them to think over what has been proposed and let us know within a week what they have decided. In our experience, virtually all of them say that they would like to proceed with the treatment.  overview of the treatMeNt  Length of Treatment  CBT-E is a short-term, time-limited, highly individualized psychological treatment, which is why it is best delivered on a one-to-one basis. For patients who are not significantly underweight (which may be defined in this context as having a BMI above 18.54) an initial assessment appointment followed by 20 fifty-minute treatment sessions over 20 weeks is generally sufficient. For patients below this weight, treatment needs to be longer, often involving about 40 sessions over 40 weeks. In this chapter, we describe the 20-week treatment first, then the adaptations needed for underweight patients.  The fact that CBT-E is usually time-limited might be thought to be inconsistent with the claim that it is individualized. To an extent this is true, but our experience is that the recommended number of treatment sessions is sufficient, but not excessive, for the great majority of patients. There are major advantages to working within a fixed time frame, and in our view these outweigh the potential disadvantage of standardizing the length of treatment. The main advantage is that a fixed time frame concentrates the minds of both patient and therapist. It encourages the establishment of the therapeutic momentum that is needed early on, and it helps to ensure that therapist and patient keep working hard to help the patient change. It also makes it much more likely that treatment will have a formal ending rather than fizzling out, as sometimes happens when treatment is open-ended. Having a definite endpoint is important, as it ensures that important future-oriented topics (e.g., how to minimize the risk of relapse) are covered in the final part of treatment.  There are circumstances under which it is appropriate to adjust the length of treatment. It rarely needs to be shortened, although this does apply in occasional cases in which change is so profound and rapid that there is little or no remaining psychopathology to address. Somewhat more often there is a case for extend   ing treatment. The indications for doing this are described briefly towards the end of the chapter.  Structure of the Treatment  The 20-week version of the treatment has four stages:  •• Stage 1. This is most important. The aims are to engage the patient in treatment and change, jointly create a formulation of the processes maintaining the eating disorder, provide education, address weight concerns, and introduce a pattern of regular eating. Following the initial preparatory session, the appointments are twice weekly for 4 weeks.  •• Stage 2. The aims of this stage is to take stock, review progress, identify barriers to change, modify the formulation as needed, and plan Stage 3. This stage generally comprises two appointments, each a week apart.  •• Stage 3. This is the main body of treatment. The aim is to address the key mechanisms that are maintaining the patient’s eating disorder. There are eight weekly appointments.  •• Stage 4. This is the final stage of treatment, and the focus is on the future. There are two aims: The first is to ensure that the changes made in treatment are maintained over the following months, and the second is to minimize the risk of relapse in the long term. Typically there are three appointments, each 2 weeks apart.  In addition, there is a single review appointment 20 weeks after treatment has finished.  The Implementation of CBT‑E  CBT-E is designed to be a complete treatment in its own right. In our view it should not be combined with other forms of therapy, nor should it coexist with them. Both can detract from the treatment.  CBT-E should remain focused on the eating disorder, more or less, whatever happens. If the patient experiences a crisis during treatment that cannot be ignored— for example, the parents of one of our younger patients disappeared unexpectedly, leaving the patient at a loss as to what to do—we arrange one or more “crisis sessions” in addition to the CBT-E sessions to address the problem in question. This rarely happens, however. Very occasionally we suspend CBT-E for a few weeks if continuing seems inappropriate.   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  We have observed that some therapists are tempted to change therapeutic tack if progress is slow or difficult. We think that this is rarely appropriate. Although it might be tempting to switch over to another therapeutic modality, or add or try to “integrate” other techniques, we recommend that the therapist continues to work within the framework of CBT-E while trying to understand the basis of the relative lack of progress. Indeed, this is the strategy that led to the development of CBT-E and its broad form in particular (Cooper & Fairburn, 2011).  the treatMeNt Protocol  Stage 1: Starting Well  This is the initial intensive stage of treatment. There are a number of interrelated goals, all of which apply, regardless of the exact nature of the patient’s eating problem.  The Initial Preparatory Session  The initial session is typically up to two hours long and has four major goals.  engAging THe PATienT in TreATMenT AnD THe ProsPeCT of CHAnge  A particular challenge in working with patients with eating disorders is engaging them in treatment. Many come to treatment with misgivings and varying degrees of reluctance. It is essential that the therapist understand this and be sensitive at all times to the patient’s likely ambivalence.  The initial session is especially important in this regard. The patient is evaluating the therapist just as much as the therapist is evaluating the patient. Some clinicians advocate an initial phase of “motivational enhancement.” We agree that engagement in treatment, and more especially, in change, is crucial, but contend that competently administered CBT-E enhances motivation for change and overlaps significantly with the strategies of motivational interviewing (Wilson & Schlam, 2004). We do not view special non-CBT procedures as being required.  Integral to engaging patients is explaining what treatment will involve. With this in mind, it is important that patients be fully informed about the treatment on which they are embarking. Various topics need to be covered:  1. The nature and style of the treatment. Clearly, patients need to be told the name, nature, and style of the treatment. 2. Treatment practicalities. They should also be told the number, duration, and frequency of the treatment sessions. 3. In-session weighing. Patients need to be forewarned about the in-session weighing that is an element of treatment from Sessions 1 or 2 onward. The rationale needs to be explained (see “Establishing Collaborative Weighing”). We are often asked whether patients ever refuse to be weighed. The answer is that the occasional patient is very reluctant, but in the context of an “engaging” initial session and the rationale being well explained, we find that refusal is not a problem. Our experience is that if one accedes to the patient’s fear of in-session weighing, it is difficult to introduce the procedure later. 4. Instillation of “ownership,” enthusiasm, and hope. The notion that it is the patient’s treatment, not the therapist’s, also needs to be stated. Throughout treatment, patients should feel clear about what is happening and why. While many patients are keen to overcome their eating problem and eager for treatment to start, it is important to maximize enthusiasm and hope. Part of this involves conveying that one is knowledgeable about eating disorders in general and the patient’s type of eating problem in particular. Not infrequently we come across patients who have been told that they will never overcome their eating disorder. Rarely have we felt that such a statement was warranted. Saying something like this sets up a selffulfilling prophecy because it undermines any hope of recovery that the patient might have had. Research has not generated reliable predictors of treatment outcome, and our experience over the years has taught us not to trust our clinical judgement in this regard. We are continually surprised (usually favorably) at our patients’ response to treatment.  Assessing THe nATUre AnD seVeriTy of THe PsyCHoPATHology PresenT  Depending on the context within which one works, the person who conducts the initial evaluation interview(s) may or may not be the person who subsequently treats the patient. In our context, the therapist is often seeing   Eating Disorders  the patient for the first time. This means that a second assessment of the eating disorder needs to take place, so that the therapist is fully in the picture. Inevitably, this assessment overlaps to an extent with the initial one. This cannot be avoided.  This particular assessment is treatment-oriented rather than diagnostic, so it differs somewhat from the one conducted when the patient was first seen. While a broad range of topics is covered, the main focus should be on the patient’s present state. Mainly, an informationgathering style of interviewing is used, but the therapist remaining aware of the patient’s likely sensitivity to certain topics (e.g., binge eating, self-induced vomiting).  JoinTly CreATing THe forMUlATion  The next step is the creation of the “formulation,” that is, a personalized visual representation (i.e., a diagram) of the processes that appear to be maintaining the patient’s eating problem. This is done in the initial session unless the patient is significantly underweight (see below) or the eating disorder is unusual and difficult to understand, in which case it is best delayed until the next session, so that the therapist has ample time to think over its likely form.  The creation of the formulation has a number of purposes: It helps to engage the patient in treatment; it involves “decentering,” which is central to helping patients change; it conveys the notion that eating problems are understandable and maintained by a variety of interacting self-perpetuating mechanisms; and by highlighting the maintaining mechanisms, it provides a guide to what needs to be targeted in treatment.  A composite transdiagnostic formulation was shown in Figure 17.3. This should be used by the therapist as a template from which the personalized formulation can be derived, one that matches the particular clinical features present. The more familiar the therapist becomes with the template formulation, the easier it is to create an individualized one. We have not encountered any patients whose eating problems cannot be formulated in this way.  The formulation should focus on the main mechanisms that appear likely to be maintaining the patient’s eating problem. It does not need to be comprehensive (as this risks the formulation being over-detailed and confusing), and it is not concerned with the origins of the problem.  The formulation, usually referred to as the “diagram” or “picture,” should be drawn out, step by step,  in an unhurried manner, with the therapist taking the lead but with the patient’s active involvement. It is best to start with something that the patient wants to change (e.g., binge eating) or something that is clearly a problem (e.g., very low weight). Whenever possible and appropriate, the patient’s own terms should be used. Since the formulation is based on information only just obtained, the therapist should make clear that it is provisional and will be modified as needed during treatment. It is important that patients accept the formulation as a credible explanation of their eating problem. Most resonate with it.  Once the formulation has been created, the therapist should discuss its implications for treatment. The points to be made are that to overcome the eating disorder, the patient will need to address not only the things that he/she would like to change (e.g., loss of control over eating) but also the mechanisms responsible for maintaining them (the “vicious circles”). Thus, for example, with patients who binge-eat, treatment commonly needs to focus on more than simply stopping binge eating; instead, it may also need to address the patient’s various forms of dieting, his/her ability to deal with adverse events and moods without binge eating, and his/her concerns about shape and weight. Not addressing the range of maintaining processes markedly increases the likelihood of relapse.  esTABlisHing reAl‑TiMe self‑MoniToring  The final task in the initial session is to establish real- time self-monitoring. This is the ongoing, “in-themoment” recording of relevant behavior, thoughts, feelings, and events. It needs to be initiated from the outset of treatment and fine-tuned in Session 1. It continues throughout treatment and is central to it. It has two main purposes: First, it helps the patient identify precisely what is happening on a day-to-day basis; second, by gaining such awareness of their thoughts, feelings, and behavior at the time it happens, patients learn that they have choices, and that many things they thought were automatic and beyond their control can be changed.  The monitoring record that we employ is simple for patients to complete and to use. Exactly what is recorded evolves during treatment. At the beginning, the emphasis is largely on the patient’s eating habits. When describing how to monitor eating habits, it is our practice to go over an example (created for this purpose) that roughly matches in form the eating habits of the   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  patient in question. Table 17.1 shows our instructions especially in Session 1, when the patient brings them for monitoring, and Figure 17.4 shows a completed back for the first time. Reviewing the records should monitoring record. be a joint process, with the patient taking the therapist  We do not recommend using smartphone apps for through each day’s record in turn. There are two asrecording. In our experience they provide a far less pects to the review in Session 1: assessing the quality of rich source of information and as a result they impede monitoring and assessing the information gained about therapy. the patient’s eating habits. In subsequent sessions, the  Fundamental to establishing accurate real-time re-focus is largely on what has been recorded, although the cording is going over the patient’s records in detail, therapist should intermittently ask the patient about the  table 17.1. instructions for self-Monitoring  During treatment, it is important that you record everything that you eat or drink, and what is going on at the time. We call this “self-monitoring.” Its purpose is twofold: First, it provides a detailed picture of how you eat, thereby bringing to your attention and that of your therapist the exact nature of your eating problem; and second, by making you more aware of what you are doing at the very time that you are doing it, self-monitoring helps you change behavior that may previously have seemed automatic and beyond your control. Accurate “real-time” monitoring is central to treatment. It will help you change.  At first, writing down everything that you eat may be irritating and inconvenient, but soon it will become second nature and of obvious value. We have yet to encounter anyone whose lifestyle made it truly impossible to monitor. Regard it as a challenge.  Look at the sample monitoring record to see how to monitor. A new record (or records) should be started each day.  •• The first column is for noting the time when you eat or drink anything, and the second is for recording the nature of the food and drink consumed. Calories should not be recorded: Instead, you should write down a simple (nontechnical) description of what you ate or drank. Each item should be written down as soon as possible after it is consumed. Recalling what you ate or drank some hours afterwards will not work, since it will not help you change your behavior at the time. Obviously, if you are to record in this way, you need to carry your monitoring sheets with you. It does not matter if your records become messy or if the writing or spelling is not good. The important thing is that you record everything you eat or drink, as soon as possible afterwards.  •• Episodes of eating that you view as meals should be identified with brackets. Snacks and other episodes of eating should not be bracketed. •• The third column should specify where the food or drink was consumed. If this was in your home, the room should be specified.  •• Asterisks should be placed in the fourth column, adjacent to any episodes of eating or drinking that you felt (at the time) were excessive. This is your judgment, regardless of what anyone else might think. It is essential to record all the food that you eat during “binges.”  •• The fifth column is for recording when you vomit (write “V”) or take laxatives (write “L” and the number taken) or diuretics (water tablets; write “D” and the number taken).  •• The last column is used in various ways during treatment. For the moment it should be used as a diary to record events and feelings that have influenced your eating: For example, if an argument precipitated a binge or led you not to eat, you should write that down. Try to write a brief comment every time you eat, recording your thoughts and feelings about what you ate. You may want to record other important events or circumstances in this column, even if they had no effect on your eating. The last column should also be used to record your weight (and your thoughts about it) each time you weigh yourself.  Every treatment session will include a detailed review of your latest monitoring sheets. You must therefore remember to bring them with you!  Note. From Fairburn (2008, p. 61). Copyright 2008 by The Guilford Press. Reprinted by permission. This table may be downloaded from www.credo-oxford.com.   Eating Disorders  Day ......Thursday........... Date .....March 21...........   Time Food and drink consumed Place * p Context and comments 7.30 8:10 10:35 11:45 6:40 to 7:30 9:30 Glass water Whole cinnamon raisin bagel Light cream cheese Black coffee Half banana Black coffee Smoked turkey on wheat bread Light mayo Diet coke Piece of apple pie 1/2 gallon ice cream 4 slices of toast with peanut butter Diet coke Raisin bagel 2 slices of toast with peanut butter Diet coke Peanut butter from jar Raisin bagel Snickers bar Diet coke—large Rice cake with fat-free cheese Diet coke Kitchen Cafe Work—at desk Cafe Kitchen Kitchen * * * * * * * * * V V [118 pounds—really gross] Thirsty after yesterday Should have only had half the bagel. Must not binge today. Better—on track Usual lunch Help—I can’t stop eating. I’m completely out of control. I hate myself. I am disgusting. Why do I do this? I started as soon as I got in. I’ve ruined another day. Really lonely. Feel fat and unattractive. Feel like giving up.   figUre 17.4. A completed self-monitoring record. V, vomiting. A blank monitoring record may be downloaded from www.credo-oxford.com.  process of recording and the accuracy of the records. In these subsequent sessions the review of the records generally takes no longer than 10 minutes. Therapists need to remember not to address identified problems while doing this, but to acknowledge the problems and put them on the session agenda.  The Main Body of Stage 1  Following the initial preparatory session, there are eight twice-weekly appointments. We find that twiceweekly appointments are needed in order to build up therapeutic momentum and to begin making inroads  into the patient’s disturbed way of eating. Once-weekly sessions are simply not sufficient for most patients. Stage 1 has four distinct elements.  esTABlisHing CollABorATiVe WeigHing  The collaborative weighing intervention has a number of purposes. First, as the patients’ eating habits will be changing in treatment they are likely to be anxious about any resulting change in their weight. In-session weighing provides good, week-by-week data on their weight. Second, regular in-session weighing provides an opportunity for the therapist to help patients inter    CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  pret the number on the scale, which they otherwise are prone to misinterpret. Third, collaborative weighing addresses one form of body checking, namely, weight checking. Many patients with eating disorders weigh themselves at frequent intervals, sometimes many times a day. As a result they become concerned with day-to-day weight fluctuations that would otherwise pass unnoticed. Others actively avoid knowing their weight but remain highly concerned about it. Generally these patients weighed themselves frequently in the past but switched to avoidance when they found frequent weight checking too aversive. Avoidance of weighing is as problematic as frequent weighing, since it results in patients having no data to confirm or disconfirm their fears about weight gain.  Patients need to learn how to assess and interpret their weight. They should be informed that body weight fluctuates throughout the day and from day-to-day according to their state of hydration, the state of their bowels and bladder, their point in the menstrual cycle, and other factors, too. (All this information may be found in the second edition of Overcoming Binge Eating [Fairburn, 2013]; see the next section.) Frequent weighing results in preoccupation with inconsequential weight fluctuations that tend to be misinterpreted. This leads many patients to restrict their eating, whatever the reading on the scales. This important maintaining process is disrupted by the collaborative weighing intervention.  Collaborative weighing involves the therapist and patient together checking the patient’s weight at the outset of the session. This is done once a week (for underweight patients, see below). Therapist and patient then plot the latest data point on an individualized weight graph and jointly interpret the emerging pattern, placing particular emphasis on trends over the past 4 weeks rather than focusing on the latest reading. A crucial element of the intervention is that patients do not weigh themselves outside these times.  Patients are also educated about the BMI. They are told their BMI and its significance from a health point of view. They are advised against having an exact desired weight, since this does not allow for natural, dayto- day fluctuations. Instead they are advised to accept a weight range of approximately 6 lb (or 3 kg) in magnitude.   Almost all patients are anxious about the effects of treatment on their weight. Patients with bulimia nervosa or other specified eating disorders (who are not underweight) generally do not change much in weight. Patients should be told that the aim of treatment is to give them control over their eating, and thus they will  have as much control over their weight as possible. It is best that patients postpone deciding upon a specific goal weight range until near the end of treatment, when their eating habits should have stabilized and they should be less sensitive about their weight and shape. Later in treatment patients are advised against having a goal weight (range) that necessitates anything more than slight dietary restraint, since dietary restraint will maintain preoccupation with food and eating and increase their risk of binge eating.  eDUCATing THe PATienT ABoUT eATing ProBleMs  Myths abound about eating and weight control, and some serve to maintain many patients’ eating problem. To ensure that they have a reliable source of information, we recommend that they read one of the authoritative books on eating disorders. We use Overcoming Binge Eating because it provides all the information needed and it is popular with patients.5 In addition, it has a CBT-E orientation and so is highly compatible with the treatment—indeed, some therapists use it as a workbook for patients as they progress through CBT-  E. It should be noted that Overcoming Binge Eating is relevant to all patients with eating disorders, whether or not they binge-eat because it discusses and addresses all eating disorder psychopathology and not just binge eating. It is our practice to provide the patient with a copy of the book; this way we can ensure that they have it at exactly the right point in treatment (generally Week 2). We ask patients to annotate the book in the margins, putting ticks by sections that particularly apply to them, crosses by sections that do not, and question marks by sections that they do not understand or would like to discuss. We term this procedure “guided reading.” It allows patients to be educated in an efficient, thorough, and personalized way.  esTABlisHing “regUlAr eATing”  Regular eating is fundamental to successful treatment, whatever the form of the eating disorder. For patients who binge-eat, it reliably results in a rapid decrease in frequency. For patients who have a high level of dietary restraint, it addresses an important type of dieting, socalled “delayed eating,” that is, putting off eating during the day. And for patients who are underweight, it introduces regular meals and snacks that can be subsequently increased in size (see below).   Eating Disorders  Regular eating is introduced around Session 3. It is the first time that patients are asked to change the way that they eat. There are two aspects to the intervention: First, the patient should eat at regular intervals through the day (usually three planned meals each day, plus two planned snacks); second, patients’ eating should be largely confined to these meals and snacks. A number of points about the intervention need to be stressed:  1. Patients should be allowed to choose what they eat in their planned meals and snacks. The only condition is that the meals and snacks must not be followed by vomiting, laxative misuse, or any other compensatory behavior. 2. Patients should not be put under pressure to change what, or how much, they eat at this point in treatment, since doing so tends to result in being unable to adopt the pattern of regular eating. 3. If patients seek advice on what to eat, they should be told that the priority is their pattern of eating and not what they eat. Nevertheless, if patients want guidance, they should be told that it would be ideal if they adopted a varied diet with the minimum number of avoided foods. 4. While the new eating pattern should be adhered to whatever the patients’ circumstances or appetite, it should be adjusted to suit patients’ day-today commitments. 5. Patients should plan ahead. They should always know when they are going to have their next meal or snack, and there should rarely be more than a 4-hour interval between the meals and snacks. If the day is going to be unpredictable, they should plan ahead as far as possible and identify a time when they can take stock and if necessary replan the rest of the day. 6. Patients whose eating habits are either chaotic or highly restrictive may need to introduce this pattern in stages. Patients should be told that their sensations of appetite, hunger, and fullness are all likely to be disturbed at present and for the time being should not be used to determine what they eat. Instead, they should adhere to the agreed pattern of eating. Two rather different strategies may help patients resist eating between the planned meals and snacks. The first is to help them identify activities that are incompatible with eating or make it less likely. They should try to predict when difficulties are likely to arise and  intervene early by arranging activities that are likely to help them adhere to the regular eating pattern. Advice on how to do this is contained in Overcoming Binge Eating. The other strategy is very different. It involves asking patients to focus on the urge to eat, recognize that it is a temporary phenomenon, and that one does not have to give in to it. In this way patients can learn to decenter from the urge and simply observe it rather than try to eliminate it. As with feelings of fullness, they will find that the urge dissipates over time. This latter strategy is a difficult one for most patients, especially in the early stages of treatment. If it is to be used at all, it is best left until later on in treatment, when urges to eat between meals and snacks are intermittent and less overwhelming.  inVolVing signifiCAnT oTHers  CBT-E was developed as an individual treatment for adults; hence, it does not actively involve others. Despite this, it is our practice to see “significant others” if this is likely to facilitate treatment and the patient is willing for this to happen. We do this with the aim of creating the optimum environment for the patient to change. There are two specific indications for involving others:  1. If others can be of help to the patient in making changes. 2. If others are making it difficult for the patient to change, for example, by commenting adversely on his/her appearance or eating. Typically the sessions with others last about 45 minutes and take place immediately after a routine session. We hold up to three such sessions with about three-fourths of our patients (with underweight patients there may be more such sessions, as we discuss below). Topics other than the eating disorder are not usually addressed. With adolescent patients there is far greater involvement of others (Cooper & Stewart, 2008; Dalle Grave et al., 2013).  Stage 2: Taking Stock  Stage 2 is a transitional stage in treatment. It has three aims:  1. To conduct a joint review of progress. 2. To revise the formulation, if need be. 3. To design Stage 3.  CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  At the same time the therapist continues to implement the procedures introduced in Stage 1. The sessions are now held once weekly.  The reason for conducting this formal review of progress is that there is strong evidence across a variety of psychiatric disorders (Wilson, 1999), including bulimia nervosa (Fairburn, Agras, Walsh, Wilson, & Stice, 2004) and binge-eating disorder (Masheb & Grilo, 2007), that the degree of change during the first few weeks of treatment is a potent predictor of outcome. Thus, if progress is limited, this needs to be recognized early on, and its explanation sought, so that treatment can be adjusted as needed.  Conducting a Joint Review of Progress  The review of progress is best done systematically, with the patient completing once again the EDE-Q, the CIA, and the measure of general psychiatric features. In this way patient and therapist can both review the extent of change. Reviewing the patient’s monitoring records can also be helpful. In addition, patient and therapist should consider the degree to which the patient has been complying with the various elements of treatment.  Generally patients’ views on their progress are unduly negative. An important task for the therapist is therefore to help the patient arrive at a balanced appraisal of what has changed and what has not. Typically there will have been a decrease in the frequency of any binge eating and compensatory purging, and an improvement in the pattern of eating, whereas concerns about shape will not have changed (to a large extent because they have not been addressed).  One important, and sometimes overlooked, reason for progress not being as great as might be expected is the presence of a clinical depression. Ideally, such depressions should be detected and treated before treatment but inevitably some are missed and others develop afresh. If there appears to be a clinical depression, it is our practice to treat it with antidepressant medication (Fairburn, Cooper, & Waller, 2008a) and consider suspending CBT until the patient has responded.  Revising the Formulation  It is important to review the formulation in light of what has been learned during Stage 1. Often no change is indicated, but sometimes problems and processes are detected that were not obvious when the formulation was originally created. For example, it may have emerged  that overexercising is a far greater problem than had been thought. If so, the formulation may need to be revised. Also, if the patient is receiving the “broad” form of CBT-E, it is at this point that the contribution of clinical perfectionism, core low self-esteem, and interpersonal difficulties is considered (see Fairburn, Cooper, Shafran, Bohn, & Hawker, 2008a).  Designing Stage 3  Last, Stage 2 is the time when Stage 3 should be designed. It is at this stage the treatment becomes highly individualized. The therapist has to decide which elements of Stage 3 will be of most relevance to the patient and in what order they should be implemented (see below).  Stage 3: Addressing the Key Maintaining Mechanisms  This is the main part of treatment. The focus is on addressing the key mechanisms that are maintaining the patient’s eating problem. These may be categorized under six headings:  1. Overevaluation of shape and weight 2. Overevaluation of control over eating 3. Dietary restraint 4. Event- and mood-related changes in eating 5. Dietary restriction 6. Being underweight The relative contributions of these mechanisms vary from individual to individual. Only a few of the mechanisms operate in those with binge-eating disorder, whereas most operate in cases of anorexia nervosa in which there is binge eating and purging. The first four are considered here. Dietary restriction and being underweight are addressed separately, when we discuss the adaptations required for those who are underweight. The order in which these mechanisms are addressed depends on their relative importance in maintaining the patient’s psychopathology and the length of time it takes to address them. Generally it is best to start by addressing the concerns about shape and weight because this is the most complex mechanism, and it takes the longest.  At the same time the therapist needs to continue implementing the procedures introduced in Stage 1. If the patient is receiving the broad form of CBT-E, one   Eating Disorders  or more of the additional treatment modules will also be employed (Fairburn, Cooper, Shafran, et al., 2008a).  Addressing the Overevaluation of Shape and Weight  At the heart of most eating disorders is the distinctive “core psychopathology,” the overevaluation of shape and weight, that is, the judging of self-worth largely, or even exclusively, in terms of shape and weight, and the ability to control them. As described earlier, most of the other features of these disorders are secondary to this psychopathology and its consequences. This psychopathology occupies a central place in most patients’ formulation and is a major target of treatment. Clinical experience and research evidence suggest that unless this psychopathology is successfully addressed, patients are at substantial risk of relapse. There are five aspects to this process:  1. Identifying the overevaluation and its consequences 2. Developing marginalized self-evaluative domains 3. Addressing body checking 4. Addressing body avoidance 5. Addressing “feeling fat” Other than the initial aspect, they are not necessarily introduced in this order. In addition, towards the end of Stage 3 it is important to develop patients’ skills at dealing with setbacks.   iDenTifying THe oVereVAlUATion AnD iTs ConseqUenCes  The starting point is educating the patient about the notion of self-evaluation. The therapist then helps the patient identify his/her scheme for self-evaluation. Finally, the implications of this scheme are discussed and a plan for addressing the expressions of the overevaluation is devised. Because therapists are often unsure how to broach the subject of self-evaluation, the complete treatment guide provides a detailed dialogue demonstrating how to explain this to patients.  Briefly the therapist starts by explaining that most people tend to judge themselves on the basis of meeting personal standards in the areas of life they value. The patient is then helped to generate a list of areas in his/ her life that make an important contribution to his/her self-evaluation. Almost invariably this will include appearance and perhaps also controlling eating. The therapist then goes on to explore the relative importance of these domains of self-evaluation; the clue to their relative importance is the magnitude (in terms of intensity and duration) of the patient’s response to things going badly in the area. In this way the various areas of life that have been listed can be ranked and represented by means of a pie chart, which the therapist and patient draw together. The pie chart of someone without an eating disorder is shown in Figure 17.5 and this may be contrasted with one typical of someone with an eating problem (Figure 17.6), in which there is a large “slice” representing the overevaluation of shape and weight.   Family Work Shape, weight,  and eating Other Friends Sport Music  figUre 17.5. The pie chart of a young woman without an eating problem. From Fairburn (2008, p. 99). Copyright 2008 by The Guilford Press. Reprinted by permission.   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers   Family  Work  Shape, weight and eating Other  figUre 17.6. The pie chart of a young woman with an eating problem. From Fairburn (2008, p. 98). Copyright 2008 by The Guilford Press. Reprinted by permission.  It is useful for the patient to review his/her pie chart on several occasions before the next session, so that it can be discussed further and adjusted as needed. Generally, any revision takes the form of expanding the size of the slice representing the importance of shape and weight.  The next step is to ask the patient to consider the implications of his/her scheme for self-evaluation (as represented by the pie chart) and reflect on whether there might be any problems inherent to it. This discussion generally leads to the identification of three main problems:  1. Having a pie chart with a dominant slice is “risky.” A dominant slice makes people particularly vulnerable should anything threaten their ability to meet their personal standards in the area concerned. 2. Judging oneself largely on the basis of appearance is particularly problematic because this aspect of life is only controllable to a limited extent. It therefore results in the person feeling like a failure at times. 3. Placing great importance on shape and weight drives people to diet, and in the patient’s case, this maintains his/her eating problem. This discussion naturally leads to the final step in the examination of self-evaluation, namely, the creation of a formulation that includes the consequences of the overevaluation (the “extended formulation”). The ther   apist starts by asking the patient what he/she does, or experiences, as a result of the importance placed on shape and appearance. The goal is to derive a figure resembling that in Figure 17.7, with the therapist adding the upward feedback arrows and explaining that these consequences of the overevaluation also serve to maintain the overevaluation.  Having done this, the therapist needs to devise with the patient a plan to address the concerns about shape and weight, with two overarching strategies:  1. To develop new domains for self-evaluation. 2. To reduce the importance attached to shape and weight. Both are important and they complement one another.  DeVeloPing MArginAlizeD DoMAins for self‑eVAlUATion  Tackling expressions of the overevaluation of shape and weight gradually reduces the extent of the overevaluation: The shape and weight-related “slice” of the pie chart begins to shrivel. But, at the same time, it is most important to increase the number and importance of other domains for self-evaluation to diminish the relative importance of shape and weight. To achieve this, patients need help to begin to get actively involved with other aspects of life. There are six steps to this process, which needs to be a running theme throughout the rest of the treatment:   Eating Disorders   Overevaluation of shape and weight and their control   Dietary restraint   Shape and weight checking and/or avoidance   Preoccupation with thoughts about shape and weight  Mislabeling adverse states as “feeling fat” Marginalization of other areas of life  figUre 17.7. The overevaluation of shape and weight: an “extended” formulation. From Fairburn (2008, p. 101). Copyright 2008 by The Guilford Press. Reprinted by permission. This figure may be downloaded from www.credooxford. com.  1. Explaining the rationale for developing new domains for self-evaluation. 2. Helping the patient identify new activities that might be engaging. 3. Agreeing on one, or possibly two, activities that the patient can try. 4. Ensuring that the patient actually does try the activity identified, often using a problem-solving approach (described later in the chapter). 5. Reviewing progress each week, with the therapist being encouraging and facilitative. 6. Simultaneously, directly targeting the patient’s overevaluation of shape and weight, usually starting with body checking, which is often of central importance in maintaining the patient’s concerns. ADDressing BoDy CHeCking  The importance of body checking and avoidance has only recently been appreciated. The reason is quite simple: Few clinicians know about it. This is because patients do not disclose the behavior unless asked, and many are not even aware of it.  The first step in addressing body checking is to provide information about body checking, body avoidance, and their consequences, stressing the following two points:  1. Everyone checks his/her body to some extent but many people with eating problems repeatedly check their bodies and often in a way that is unusual. Such checking can become “second nature,” so that patients may not be aware they are doing it. In people with eating problems this checking can maintain dissatisfaction with appearance. 2. Some people with eating problems avoid seeing their bodies and dislike other people seeing them too. Usually these people engaged in body checking in the past but switched over to avoidance because the repeated checking became intolerable. Body avoidance is problematic because it allows concerns and fears about shape and appearance to persist in the absence of any accurate information. Therefore it too needs to be tackled. Next, the therapist needs to find out what checking and avoidance the patient engages in. A specific monitoring record may be used for this purpose (see www.credooxford. com). Since recording body checking is highly distressing for some patients, it is best to ask patients to do it for only two 24-hour periods, one on a working day and the other on a day off work. It may be useful to forewarn patients that although it might be distressing, it will yield information that is helpful in overcoming   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  their eating disorder. It is common for patients to be taken aback by how often they check their shape.  Having identified patients’ various forms of body checking, they are then best divided into two groups, according to whether they are “normative.”  Unusual Forms of Body Checking. Unusual forms of body checking are best stopped altogether. Examples include measuring the dimensions of certain body parts and photographing oneself. Patients can usually do this if the rationale is well explained and they are provided with support. There are two points to emphasize:  1. Body checking usually involves focusing on aspects of one’s appearance that one dislikes, and it generally has adverse effects. 2. Stopping unusual forms of checking is generally experienced (after a week or so) as a relief. Addressing More Normative Forms of Body Checking. A different strategy needs to be adopted with more normative forms of body checking. Here the problem is the frequency of checking, the way that it is done, and patients’ interpretations of what they find. The therapist needs to help patients consider the following questions each time that they are about to check themselves:  •• What are they trying to find out? •• Can checking in this way produce the information they are seeking? •• Might there be adverse effects from such checking? •• Is there a better alternative?  Mirror use deserves particular attention because mirrors have the potential to provide misleading, but highly credible, information and as a result they are likely to play an important role in the maintenance of many patients’ body dissatisfaction. Education about mirrors and mirror use is therefore of importance. One point to stress is that apparent flaws that would normally go unnoticed become the focus of attention when people study in detail aspects of their appearance that they dislike. Another is that scrutiny is prone to magnify apparent defects. Patients therefore need to question their use of mirrors as they are the main way that we determine how we look. Mirrors are useful for applying makeup, brushing/styling hair, shaving, and so forth. Full-length mirrors are helpful to see whether clothes go well together. But the therapist should ask patients whether there is ever a case for looking at themselves  naked in a full-length mirror. If they are already dissatisfied with their appearance, doing so is likely to risk increasing their dislike of their shape through the magnification process mentioned earlier. This is not to say that total avoidance of mirrors is recommended; rather, the advice is (for the time being) to restrict the use of mirrors to the purposes listed earlier.  Another form of body checking that actively maintains dissatisfaction with shape involves comparing oneself with other people. The nature of these comparisons generally results in the patient concluding that his/ her body is unattractive relative to those of others. As noted earlier, the patient’s appraisal of his/her shape often involves scrutiny and selective attention to body parts that are disliked. The scrutiny is liable to result in the magnification of perceived defects, and the selective attention increases overall dissatisfaction with shape. In contrast patients’ assessment of others is very different. They tend to make superficial and often uncritical judgements about other people. Furthermore, when making these comparisons, they tend to choose a biased reference group, generally people who are thin and attractive.  The steps involved in addressing comparisonmaking are as follows:  1. The therapist helps patients identify when and how the patient makes comparisons. 2. Once this information has been collected, the therapist helps the patient consider whether the comparison was inherently biased in terms of the person chosen and how their shape was evaluated. Two points are worth highlighting: •• Body checking provides patients with a perspective on their bodies that is difficult, if not impossible, to get on someone else’s body. For example what they see when looking at themselves in the mirror is quite unlike what they see when looking at someone else.  •• Comparing themselves with people portrayed in the media (models, film stars, and other celebrities) is problematic since they are an unrepresentative subgroup and images of them may well have been manipulated.  3. Certain homework tasks usefully complement these discussions; for example, patients may be asked to be more scientific when choosing someone to compare themselves with. Instead of selecting thin people, the therapist may ask them to select every third person (of their age and gender) they walk past in a busy street. They can  Eating Disorders  also experiment with scrutinizing other people’s bodies. One way of doing this is for the patient to go to a changing room (e.g., of a swimming pool or gym), select someone nearby of about the same age and gender who seems at first glance attractive, then unobtrusively scrutinize their body, focusing exclusively on the parts that the patient is personally most sensitive about. What patients discover is that even attractive people have apparent flaws when scrutinized.  4. Assuming the patient’s comparison-making is biased (as it almost invariably is), the therapist should explore the implications of this bias in terms of the validity of the patient’s views relative to his/her appearance. The goal is that patients become aware that their checking and making comparisons has yielded misleading information about other peoples’ bodies and their own. ADDressing BoDy AVoiDAnCe  “Exposure” in its technical and literal sense is the strategy here. Therapists need to help patients get used to the sight and feel of their bodies and to learn to make even-handed comparisons of their own bodies with those of others. They need to get used to seeing their own bodies and letting others see them, too. Dressing and undressing in the dark needs to be phased out, and patients should gradually abandon wearing baggy, shape-disguising clothes. Participation in activities that involve a degree of body exposure can be helpful (e.g., swimming). Depending on the extent of the problem, tackling body avoidance may take many successive sessions. As there is a risk of a patient returning to repeated body checking, the therapist needs to help the patient adopt normative and risk-free forms of checking.  ADDressing “feeling fAT”  “Feeling fat” is an experience reported by many women, but the intensity and frequency of this feeling appears to be far greater among people with eating disorders. It is an important target for treatment, since it tends to be equated with being fat, whatever the patient’s actual weight or shape. Hence, feeling fat is not only an expression of overconcern with shape and weight but it also maintains it.  There has been almost no research on feeling fat, and little has been written about it. What is striking is that it tends to fluctuate markedly from day-to-day  and even within a single day. This is quite unlike many other aspects of these patients’ core psychopathology, which is relatively stable. It is our impression that in people with eating disorders, feeling fat is a result of the mislabeling of certain emotions and bodily experiences. It is important to stress that “feeling fat” and “being fat” are quite different, but they can co-occur. Many people with obesity are not troubled by feeling fat, despite being dissatisfied with their shape, but some are dissatisfied, and in the same way as people with an eating disorder. Since feeling fat contributes to the maintenance of their body dissatisfaction, it is essential that this be addressed in these patients, too.  In general it is best to focus on feeling fat once one has begun to make inroads into body checking and avoidance, but this is not invariably the case. In patients in whom feeling fat is a particularly prominent feature, it is advisable to address it before tackling body checking and avoidance.  There are five steps in addressing “feeling fat”:  1. The therapist should first explain that “feeling fat” should not be equated with “being fat,” and that feeling fat may mask other feelings or sensations occurring at the same time. 2. Patients should be asked to record times when they have particularly intense feelings of fatness. This can be done as part of the normal recording process, using the right-hand column of the recording sheet for this purpose. This requires accurate real-time recording. When patients record feeling fat, they should also think (and record) what else they are feeling at the time. 3. Once patients have mastered this, they should ask themselves two questions each time they feel fat: •• What has happened in the last hour that might have triggered this feeling? •• What else am I feeling just now?  4. It usually emerges that the patient’s experiences of feeling fat are triggered either by the occurrence of certain negative mood states or physical sensations that heighten body awareness. Examples of these two types of stimulus include the following: •• Feeling bored, depressed, lonely, or tired.  •• Feeling full, bloated, or sweaty; feeling one’s body wobble or one’s thighs rubbing together; clothing that feels tight.  5. Over subsequent weeks patients should continue to do this whenever they have strong feelings  CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  of fatness. In addition, they should address any masked problem (e.g., feeling bored) using the problem-solving approach (described later in this chapter). In some patients, problem solving will already have been taught in the context of addressing event-triggered changes in eating. In others, the approach needs to be introduced at this point. With regard to tackling patients’ response to heightened body awareness, therapists should help them appreciate that the problem is their negative interpretation of these sensations rather than the sensations themselves.  Addressing feeling fat typically takes many weeks and will be a recurring item on the session agenda. What generally happens is that the frequency and intensity of feeling fat progressively decline, and patients’ “relationship” to the experience changes, such that it is no longer equated with being fat. This metacognitive change is important, since once it happens, feeling fat ceases to maintain body dissatisfaction.  Addressing Dietary Restraint and Food Avoidance  Dieting is one of the most prominent features of patients with eating disorders. A major goal of treatment is to reduce, if not eliminate altogether, the strong tendency of these patients to diet. As noted earlier, attempts to restrict eating (“dietary restraint”) may or may not be successful. Thus, it is far from inevitable that they result in true undereating in physiological terms (“dietary restriction”) and weight loss. In this section we focus on addressing dietary restraint and dietary rules. The tackling of dietary restriction is addressed in a later section on treatment of those who are underweight.  The dietary restraint of patients with eating disorders is both extreme in intensity and rigid in form. These patients set themselves multiple demanding dietary rules. These may concern when they eat (e.g., not before 6:00 P.M.), how much they should eat (e.g., less than 600 kcal per day) and, most especially, what they should eat, with most patients having a large number of foods that they are attempting to avoid (“food avoidance”). Many have all three types of dietary rule. As a result of these rules, patients’ eating is inflexible and restricted in nature. Despite this, dietary restraint is valued, and patients tend to be oblivious to its adverse effects.  When addressing dietary restraint, an important first step is for the therapist to help patients to see that their  dieting is indeed a problem. This can be done with reference to their formulation, which in most cases shows that dieting plays a central role in the maintenance of their eating problem. If this is the case, it will need to be addressed to overcome the problem. Second their dieting may well have many adverse effects on their day-to-day life. These may be uncovered using the CIA (Bohn & Fairburn, 2008); for example, it may preclude eating out; it may result in tension about mealtimes; and it may cause preoccupation with thoughts about food and eating.  Once it has been agreed that dietary restraint is a problem, therapist and patient need to identify the various dietary rules present. Many will be evident by this stage in treatment. The principles that underlie addressing these rules are as follows:  1. Identifying a specific rule and what is motivating it. 2. Exploring with the patient the likely consequences of breaking the rule. The patient may believe that breaking the rule will lead to weight gain or invariably result in binge eating. 3. Devising a plan with the patient for breaking the rule in question in order to explore the consequences of doing so, and helping the patient implement this plan. 4. Analyzing the implications of the planned rulebreaking. 5. Planning further occasions of breaking the same rule, until the rule ceases to have significance. With patients who binge-eat it is important to pay particular attention to food avoidance. The first step is to identify any foods being avoided. A good way of doing this is to ask patients to visit a local supermarket and write down all foods they would be reluctant to eat because of their possible effect on their shape or weight, or because they fear that eating them might trigger a binge. The patient and therapist should rank these foods (often comprising 40 or more items) according to the difficulty the patient would experience eating them. Patients should be helped to introduce these foods progressively into their diet, starting with the easiest and gradually moving on to the most difficult. The amount eaten is not important, although the eventual goal is that the patient should be capable of eating normal quantities with impunity. The systematic introduction of avoided foods should continue until patients are no longer anxious about eating them. Often   Eating Disorders  this will take the remainder of treatment and sometime beyond it.  Other dietary rules should be tackled in a similar fashion, with a focus on both the belief that is maintaining the rule and breaking the rule itself. It is especially important to address rules that interfere with social eating.  Addressing Event- and Mood-Related Changes in Eating  In patients with eating disorders, eating habits may change in response to outside events and moods. This is particularly true of binge eating. The variety of different mechanisms involved include the following:  •• Binge eating or vomiting, or both, to cope with negative events or adverse moods. Binge eating has two relevant properties: It is distracting and may take the patient’s mind off aversive thoughts, and it has a direct mood-modulatory effect, in that it dampens strong mood states. The latter property is also true of vomiting and intense exercising.  •• Eating less or stopping eating to gain a sense of personal control when external events feel outside the patient’s control. This is seen most often in underweight patients.  •• Eating less to influence others; for example, it may be a way of exhibiting feelings of distress or anger, or it may be an act of defiance.  If in Stage 3 events and moods appear to contribute to the maintenance of the eating disorder, this contribution needs to be assessed and in all likelihood addressed, with the goal of helping patients deal with events and moods directly and effectively, without influencing patients’ eating. With most patients, the first step is to identify such changes in eating through real-time recording, and in the following session go over in detail one or more examples in an attempt to identify the triggers involved. Then, the patient should be trained in a variant of standard cognitive-behavioral technique of problem solving, termed “proactive problem solving.” The distinctive feature of this approach is its emphasis on spotting problems early. It is described in detail in the complete treatment guide and it is also covered from the patient’s perspective in Overcoming Binge Eating. The approach, if well taught, is remarkably effective in most cases. The exception is those patients who have difficulty tolerating mood states that  involve arousal. These patients (who tend to attract the diagnosis of borderline personality disorder) have what we term “mood intolerance.” They benefit from proactive problem solving, but they also need more direct help coping with their moods. To this end we use an approach that overlaps with elements of dialectical behavior therapy (Linehan, 1993) and is described in the treatment guide.  Setbacks and Mindsets  The core psychopathology of eating disorders may be viewed as a “mindset” or frame of mind. While normally one’s “mind-in-place” varies with changing circumstances, in people with eating disorders it tends to get locked in, and patients’ thinking becomes persistently dominated by eating disorder thoughts. It leads patients to filter both internal and external stimuli in a distinctive way; it leads to the forms of behavior characteristic of eating disorders; and it results in the mislabeling of various physical and emotional experiences as “feeling fat.”  The cognitive-behavioral strategies used in CBT-E are designed to address both the key features of the eating disorders and, most importantly, the processes that are maintaining them. In patients who are making good progress these mechanisms gradually erode during Stage 3, with the result that healthier and situationally more appropriate mindsets start to move into place, albeit temporarily at first. Such shifts in mindset usually become evident during the last third of treatment. They are reported by patients with surprise, using statements such as “On Sunday evening I forgot I had an eating disorder!” At first, the eating disorder mindset is prone to come back into place with even minor provocations (e.g., a friend discussing a diet she has just started) and with it returns the patient’s eating disorder behavior, thoughts, and feelings. These “setbacks” can readily escalate into full-blown relapse unless they are promptly nipped in the bud. It is therefore import to raise the topic of mindsets at this stage in treatment so that patients can learn to spot their eating disorder mindset coming into place by detecting the characteristic early changes in their behavior. Once patients can do this, they can then go on to learn how to “eject” the mindset, thereby preventing the setback from becoming established. Practice spotting the mindset coming back into place and dealing with it effectively is of great value, as this skill—intervening very early at the beginnings of a setback—may account for the low relapse rate fol    CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  lowing CBT-E. It is therefore helpful if patients experience occasional setbacks later in treatment because this gives them the opportunity to utilize these strategies and procedures while still in treatment. Full details of how to help patients manipulate their mindset and address setbacks are provided in the treatment guide.  Stage 4: Ending Well  This is the final stage in treatment. With patients who are receiving 20 sessions of treatment, it comprises three sessions over 5 weeks (i.e., the sessions are 2 weeks apart). It has two broad aims:  1. To ensure that the changes made in treatment are maintained and built upon 2. To minimize the risk of relapse in the future At the same time, patients discontinue self-monitoring and transfer from in-session weighing to weighing themselves at home.  Ensuring that the Changes Made in Treatment Are Maintained  The first step in doing this is to review in detail the patient’s progress and what problems remain. This can be done in much the same way as in Stage 2, using the EDE-Q and CIA as a guide. Then, depending on what problems remain, therapist and patient jointly devise a specific short-term plan for the patient to follow until the posttreatment review appointment in 5 months’ time. Typically, this includes further work on body checking and food avoidance, as well as encouraging the patient to maintain efforts to develop new interests and activities.  Minimizing the Risk of Relapse in the Future  Relapses are not all-or-nothing phenomena. They occur in degrees and may start as a “slip” or setback that then becomes established. Commonly, the slip comprises the resumption of dietary restraint, often triggered by an adverse, shape-related event (e.g., a critical comment, clothes feeling tighter than usual). In patients who were previously prone to binge-eat, this return of dietary restraint may lead to an episode of binge eating through the mechanisms described earlier, which in turn will encourage yet greater dietary restraint, thereby increasing the risk of further episodes of binge eating. Within  days, most aspects of the eating disorder may have returned. The patient’s reaction to this sequence of events is crucial in determining what happens. If it is detected early on, as discussed earlier, it is relatively easy to intervene, but if it is not, it becomes progressively more difficult to deal with the setback.  To minimize the risk of relapse in the long term, the therapist needs to do the following:  1. Educate the patient about the risk of relapse, highlighting common triggers and the likely sequence of events in the patient’s case. There is in some patients a tendency to hope that they will never have an eating problem again. This is especially common in those who have ceased to binge-eat, but it is seen in other patients, too. Without casting a negative light on patients’ hopes for the future, therapists need to ensure that patients’ expectations are realistic; otherwise there is a risk that patients will not take seriously the need to devise a “maintenance plan.” Also, they will be vulnerable to react negatively to any emerging setback. Patients should learn to view their eating disorder as their Achilles’ heel: that is, their responses to stress in general and to certain triggers. 2. Stress the importance of detecting problems early, before they become entrenched. With this in mind, therapist and patient should identify likely early warning signs of an impending relapse. For patients who are prone to binge or purge, these forms of behavior occur early on in the course of any setback and are readily noticeable. Patients whose eating disorder is primarily characterized by dietary restriction may need help to spot ominous signs. 3. Construct with the patient a plan of action (a written personalized “long-term maintenance plan”) for use in the future should problems arise. There are two important elements: focusing on the emerging eating problem and correcting it, and addressing the trigger of the setback. In general the former is achieved by doing what was learned in treatment (doing the right thing), possibly following the guidance in Overcoming Binge Eating, while the latter is achieved using problem solving. 4. Discuss when the patient should seek further help. It is important that patients seek further help if it is needed. The strategy described earlier should get patients back on track within a few weeks. If, after some weeks of trying to correct matters, the problem has  Eating Disorders  not substantially resolved, we suggest that the patient should seek outside help.  Ending or Extending Treatment  It is unusual not to end CBT-E as planned. So long as patients have got to the point where the central maintaining mechanisms have been disrupted, treatment can and should finish. Otherwise, patients (and therapists) are at risk of ascribing continued improvement to the ongoing therapy rather than natural resolution of the eating disorder. In practice, this means that it is acceptable to end treatment with patients who are still dieting to an extent, perhaps binge eating and vomiting on occasions, and having residual concerns about shape and weight.  At times there are grounds for extending treatment. In our view, the main indication for doing this is the presence of eating disorder features that continue to interfere significantly with the patient’s functioning and are unlikely to resolve of their own accord. Another reason to extend treatment is to compensate for the deleterious impact of disruptions to treatment, generally due to the emergence of a clinical depression or the occurrence of a life crisis.  The occasional patient benefits little from CBT-E. It is our practice to refer such patients for day patient or inpatient treatment.  The Posttreatment Review Appointment  We routinely hold a posttreatment review appointment about 20 weeks after the completion of treatment. During the intervening period, patients do not receive any further therapeutic input. The review session has several purposes:  1. To reassess the patient’s state and need for further treatment. If residual eating disorder features are significantly interfering with the patient’s functioning, then further treatment should be considered. If there has been a setback, a few brief sessions may be needed to get the patient back on track. 2. To review the patient’s implementation of the short-term maintenance plan. The therapist should review the plan with the aim of identifying residual eating disorder features that the patient needs to continue to address. 3. To discuss how any setbacks have been handled. The patient’s ability to detect and address setbacks should be reviewed in detail.  4. To review the long-term maintenance plan. cBt‑e for uNDerweiGht PatieNts  The great majority of patients with an eating disorder undereat at some stage and many may become underweight for a time. Generally this does not last, and they regain the lost weight, but a minority maintain strict control over their eating and stay underweight. A proportion of these patients meet current diagnostic criteria for anorexia nervosa, whereas others are eligible for one or other of the two residual eating disorder diagnoses.   CBT-E for underweight patients does not require major modifications because the core psychopathology and behavior of these patients is very similar to that of the majority of patients with an eating disorder. However, it does need to be adjusted to accommodate three problems seen in this group, but not necessarily confined to it:  1. Limited motivation to change 2. Being underweight 3. Undereating (“dietary restriction”). To do this, CBT-E needs to be extended in length because it takes time to engender motivation to change and even more time to regain weight. Hence, as mentioned earlier, for those with a BMI between 15.0 and 18.5, treatment generally takes up to 40 weeks, with sessions generally held twice weekly until the patient is consistently gaining weight. Once this is happening, sessions are weekly; then, toward the end of treatment, they are every 2–3 weeks.  Patients’ health and safety are always of paramount importance, and this is especially true of patients who are underweight because their physical health is invariably compromised. Therapists need to be aware of potential physical complications, and those who are not medically qualified should have good access to a physician who can advise on the management of medical problems.  Overview  The four stages of the 20-week version of CBT-E do not neatly map onto the version for underweight patients.   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  Treatment for these patients may be thought of as having three phases:  •• Phase I. This lasts up to 8 weeks and the focus is on engaging patients and helping them arrive at the decision that they need to regain weight.  •• Phase II. This is the weight-gain phase. The goal is that patients gain weight at the rate of about 0.5 kg per week. Therefore, the length of this phase is determined by the amount of weight to be regained. During this phase the patient’s eating disorder psychopathology is addressed.  •• Phase III. This is the weight-maintenance phase, in which patients practice maintaining their new healthy weight. It lasts about 8 weeks.  As a result of the particular emphases of these phases, patients’ weight graphs generally have a distinct threephase pattern to them, as shown in Figure 17.8.  Phase I  The first two treatment sessions are similar to those of the 20-week treatment, although there are certain modifications to accommodate education about the ef   170 160 150 140  Weight (lbs) 130 120 110 100  fects of being underweight and to incorporate this information in the formulation. In practice this involves the following:  •• Inquiring carefully in the initial assessment about the features that are likely to being underweight. This inquiry should be embedded within the usual assessment.  •• Providing personalized education about the effects of being underweight before jointly creating the formulation. This involves delaying the formulation to the second treatment session rather than creating it in the initial session as in the 20-week version.  •• Jointly creating a formulation that highlights the likely contribution of being underweight to the maintenance of the patient’s eating problem (e.g., preoccupation with food and eating, increased need for routines and predictability, indecisiveness, heightened feelings of fullness, low mood, social withdrawal). A patient-oriented description of these features is provided in the second edition of Overcoming Binge Eating (Fairburn, 2013).  •• Discussing the implications of the formulation for treatment. The major point is that almost all of the  Weeks  BMI 20.0 (126 lbs) BMI 25.0 (157 lbs) BMI 19.0 (120 lbs) 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40   figUre 17.8. The weight graph of a patient with anorexia nervosa. From Fairburn (2008, p. 180). Copyright 2008 by The Guilford Press. Adapted by permission.   Eating Disorders  effects identified will resolve if the patient regains weight, and at the same time patients will discover their true personality, which has been masked by being underweight. Simultaneously it is emphasized that treatment will involve much more than mere weight regain.  The emphasis then moves on to helping patients decide to change. The goal is that patients make this decision themselves rather than having the decision imposed on them. The aim is to interest the patient in the benefits of change and the possibility of a “fresh start.” There are five steps in this process:  1. Creating a “Current Pros and Cons of Change” table. 2. Creating a “Future Pros and Cons of Change” table. 3. Creating a “Conclusions” table. An example is shown in Table 17.2. 4. Helping the patient identify and accept the implications of these conclusions. 5. Helping the patient decide to act and “take the plunge.” At the same time, collaborative weighing and regular eating are also introduced, much as in the 20-week treatment. One difference is that weighing takes place every session because patients’ low weight is a significant health problem and a major target of treatment. Another is that the pattern of regular eating should include three meals and three snacks; that is, patients should have six episodes of eating rather than five, as in the 20-week treatment.  If the patient decides to regain weight, then Phase II begins. If, however, the patient never reaches this decision despite extensive nondirective exploration of the topic (over at least 8 weeks), then CBT-E has failed and other treatment options should be considered. This applies in about one in five cases.  Phase II  In Phase Two the focus is on weight regain while at the same time addressing the patient’s eating disorder psychopathology in much the same way as described earlier. Thus, there will be emphasis on modifying the overevaluation of shape and weight, dietary restraint, and event- and mood-related changes in eating.  table 17.2. Pros and Cons of Change: a Patient’s “Conclusions”  I want to get better and regain weight because . . .  •• I will be able to have a full-life not one that is just about eating and weight.  •• I will be healthier: my bones and heart will be stronger; I won’t be cold and faint and will be able to sleep properly. I won’t be ill!  •• I will be able to have good relationships with other people and hopefully a partner and children who I can be a good role model to.  •• I will be able to enjoy my job and be successful at it.  •• At the moment the eating problem stops me from being able to do things well. When I am better I won’t need an excuse.  •• Regaining weight will mean that I will become slim and healthy. It does not mean that I will become fat.  •• Getting better won’t be giving in. Not getting better would be giving in. Getting better is about choosing to give myself a life.  •• I want to show how strong I can be by eating as right now not eating is the easy thing. •• Eating enough food to be a healthy weight isn’t greedy. It is being normal.  •• Being a healthy weight and eating enough will help to give me true control over my eating. I will be able to make choices about what I eat. At the moment the eating problem has control over me. Becoming well will protect me from out-of-control eating and uncontrolled weight gain.  •• Being well will enable me to develop my talents as a person and to discover my true self.  •• Getting better will give me choices in life. The eating problem has been holding me back. Change can only be good.  Note. From Fairburn (2008, p. 167). Copyright 2008 by The Guilford Press. Reprinted by permission.  Weight regain is very difficult for these patients. It is a long and laborious process. It requires that patients maintain an energy surplus each day of about 500 kcal if they are to regain weight at a rate of about 0.5 kg per week.  It is our practice to have as a goal a BMI over 19.0. This figure ensures that the great majority of patients are free from the psychobiological effects of being underweight, while still being slim. It is important not to compromise on this figure. Many female patients want   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  to stop regaining weight when their BMI is in the 17.0–  18.0 range, possibly because this is when their shape begins to become more feminine. This is a serious mistake because they are still experiencing the adverse effects of being underweight and have experienced few of the advantages of the weight regain. Patients with a BMI at this level also tend to go on to lose weight. Full details of how to help patients regain weight are provided in the complete treatment guide.  Phase III  The goal of this phase is to help patients maintain a weight, such that their BMI fluctuates between 19.0 and  20.0. Patients and therapists have opposite concerns at this point. While patients are afraid that their weight will continue to rise, therapists fear that it will fall. The therapists’ fears are usually the more realistic ones. The risks and dangers of weight loss should be discussed openly with patients. This phase of treatment usually runs smoothly, and certainly so in comparison with Phase II. Therapists should encourage patients to live life fully now that they are free from the debilitating effects of being underweight. Patients should be helped to flourish, take risks, and enjoy themselves, while not forgetting the importance of maintaining their new healthy weight.  The final few sessions need to cover the same topics as those covered in the 20-week version. Thus, they address (along the same lines):  1. Mindsets and setbacks. 2. Ensuring that achieved changes achieved are maintained. 3. Procedures for minimizing the risk of relapse in the future. coNcluDiNG reMarks  Myths and misconceptions concerning CBT abound. Two are particularly prevalent. The first is that treatment is diagnosis-driven; that is, the form of the treatment is almost exclusively determined by the patient’s DSM diagnosis. The second is that the treatment is rigidly structured. We hope that it is clear that neither criticism applies to CBT-E. In CBT-E, the form of the patient’s treatment is dictated by a highly personalized formulation that is diagnosis-independent. It is based on patients’ eating disorder psychopathology, not their  DSM diagnosis. Moreover, this formulation is modified and further personalized as treatment progresses and the patient’s psychopathology evolves. What happens in Session 10 with Patient A may bear little relation to what happens in Session 10 with Patient B. What is specified in CBT-E are the strategies and substrategies used, and the procedures employed to bring about change, but how and when they are applied varies markedly from case to case. As a result, CBT-E is more of a challenge to learn than more prescriptive treatments, but the compensation is that it is more rewarding to implement, not least because of its effectiveness.6  aCknowledgMents  We are grateful to the Wellcome Trust for its support: Christopher G. Fairburn is supported by a Principal Research Fellowship (046386), and Zafra Cooper is supported by a strategic award (094585). Our research on eating disorders is supported by a programme grant from the Wellcome Trust (046386). Sarah Collins provided valuable feedback on the manuscript.  notes  1. Body mass index (BMI) is a widely used way of representing weight adjusted for height. It is weight in kilograms divided by height in meters squared [i.e., wt/(ht)2]. The BMI applies to adults of both sexes between the ages of 18 and 60. The healthy range is 18.5–25.0. 2. If there is a difference in their core psychopathology, it is that some patients with anorexia nervosa are primarily concerned with controlling their eating per se, rather than their shape and weight. This is especially true of younger cases of short duration. 3. Originally, the broad version of the treatment addressed a fourth obstacle to change, termed “mood intolerance.” This has subsequently been incorporated into the focused form of CBT-E. 4. Our research on the 20-week version of CBT-E has included patients with a BMI over 17.5, but our clinical experience suggests that patients who are somewhat underweight do better with a longer treatment. We are therefore recommending a lower BMI threshold of 18.5. 5. C. G. F. acknowledges the obvious conflict of interest. 6. The website www.credo-oxford.com provides up-to-date information on the empirical status of CBT-E and opportunities to obtain training. All the materials needed to implement CBT-E may be downloaded free of charge from this website.  Eating Disorders  referenCes  American Psychiatric Association. (1994). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (4th ed.). Washington, DC: Author.  American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.). Arlington, VA: Author.  Bohn, K., & Fairburn, C. G. (2008). The Clinical Impairment Assessment Questionnaire (CIA 3.0). In C. G. Fairburn, Cognitive behavior therapy and eating disorders (pp. 315–317). New York: Guilford Press.  Byrne, S. M., Fursland, A., Allen, K. L., & Watson, H. (2011). The effectiveness of enhanced cognitive behavioural therapy for eating disorders: An open trial. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 49, 219–226.  Cooper, Z., & Fairburn, C. G. (2011). The evolution of “enhanced” cognitive behavior therapy for eating disorders: Learning from treatment non-response. Cognitive and Behavioral Practice, 18, 394–402.  Cooper, Z., & Stewart, A. (2008). CBT-E and the younger patient. In C. G. Fairburn, Cognitive behavior therapy and eating disorders (pp. 221–230). New York: Guilford Press.  Crow, S., & Peterson, C. B. (2009). Refining treatments for eating disorders. American Journal of Psychiatry, 166, 266–267.  Dalle Grave, R. (2012). Intensive cognitive behavior therapy for eating disorders. New York: Nova Science.  Dalle Grave, R., Calugi, S., Doll, H. A., & Fairburn, C.  G. (2013). Enhanced cognitive behaviour therapy for adolescents with anorexia nervosa: An alternative to family therapy? Behaviour Research and Therapy, 51, R9– R12. Fairburn, C. G. (2005). Evidence-based treatment of anorexia nervosa. International Journal of Eating Disorders, 37, S26–S30.  Fairburn, C. G. (2008). Cognitive behavior therapy and eating disorders. New York: Guilford Press.  Fairburn, C. G. (2013). Overcoming binge eating (2nd ed.). New York: Guilford Press.  Fairburn, C. G., Agras, W. S., Walsh, B. T., Wilson, G. T., & Stice, E. (2004). Early change in treatment predicts outcome in bulimia nervosa. American Journal of Psychiatry, 161, 2322–2324.  Fairburn, C. G., & Beglin, S. J. (2008). Eating Disorder Examination Questionnaire (EDE-Q 6.0). In C. G. Fairburn, Cognitive behavior therapy and eating disorders (pp. 309–313). New York: Guilford Press.  Fairburn, C. G., & Bohn, K. (2005). Eating disorder NOS (EDNOS): An example of the troublesome “not otherwise specified” (NOS) category in DSM-IV. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 43, 691–701.  Fairburn, C. G., & Cooper, Z. (2011). Eating disorders, DSM-5 and clinical reality. British Journal of Psychiatry, 198, 8–10.  Fairburn, C. G., Cooper, Z., Bohn, K., O’Connor, M. E., Doll,  H. A., & Palmer, R. L. (2007). The severity and status of eating disorder NOS: Implications for DSM-V. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 45, 1705–1715. Fairburn, C. G., Cooper, Z., Doll, H. A., O’Connor, M. E., Bohn, K., Hawker, D. M., et al. (2009). Transdiagnostic cognitive-behavioral therapy for patients with eating disorders: A two-site trial with 60-week follow-up. American Journal of Psychiatry, 166, 311–319.  Fairburn, C. G., Cooper, Z., Doll, H. A., Palmer, R. L., & Dalle Grave, R. (2013). Enhanced cognitive behaviour therapy for adults with anorexia nervosa: A UK–Italy study. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 51, R2–R8.  Fairburn, C. G., Cooper, Z., & Shafran, R. (2003). Cognitive behaviour therapy for eating disorders: A “transdiagnostic” theory and treatment. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 41, 509–528.  Fairburn, C. G., Cooper, Z., & Shafran, R. (2008). Enhanced cognitive behavior therapy for eating disorders (“CBT- E”): An overview. In C. G. Fairburn, Cognitive behavior therapy and eating disorders (pp. 23–34). New York: Guilford Press.  Fairburn, C. G., Cooper, Z., Shafran, R., Bohn, K., & Hawker, D. M. (2008a). Clinical perfectionism, core low self-esteem and interpersonal problems. In C. G. Fairburn, Cognitive behavior therapy and eating disorders (pp. 197–220). New York: Guilford Press.  Fairburn, C. G., Cooper, Z., Shafran, R., Bohn, K., Hawker,  D. M., Murphy, R., et al. (2008b). Enhanced cognitive behavior therapy for eating disorders: The core protocol. In C. G. Fairburn, Cognitive behavior therapy and eating disorders (pp. 47–193). New York: Guilford Press. Fairburn, C. G., Cooper, Z., & Waller, D. (2008a). “Complex cases” and comorbidity. In C. G. Fairburn, Cognitive behavior therapy and eating disorders (pp. 245–258). New York: Guilford Press.  Fairburn, C. G., Cooper, Z., & Waller, D. (2008b). The patients: Their assessment, preparation for treatment and medical management. In C. G. Fairburn, Cognitive behavior therapy and eating disorders (pp. 35–44). New York: Guilford Press.  Fairburn, C. G., & Harrison, P. J. (2003). Eating disorders. Lancet, 361, 407–416.  Fairburn, C. G., & Wilson, G. T. (2013). The dissemination and implementation of psychological treatments: Problems and solutions. International Journal of Eating Disorders, 46, 516–521.  Hay, P. J., & Claudino, A. M. (2010). Evidence-based treatment for the eating disorders. In W. S. Agras (Ed.), The Oxford handbook of eating disorders (pp. 452–479). Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.  Linehan, M. M. (1993). Cognitive behavioral treatment of borderline personality disorder. New York: Guilford Press.  Lock, J. (2011). Evaluation of family treatment models for   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  eating disorders. Current Opinion in Psychiatry, 24, 274– 279.  Lock, J., le Grange, D., Agras, W. S., & Dare, C. (2001). Treatment manual for anorexia nervosa: A family-based approach. New York: Guilford Press.  Lock, J., le Grange, D., Agras, S., Moye, A., Bryson, S. W., & Jo, B. (2010). Randomized clinical trial comparing family-based treatment with adolescent-focused individual therapy for adolescents with anorexia nervosa. Archives of General Psychiatry, 67, 1025–1032.  Luborsky, L., Singer, B., & Luborsky, L. (1975). Comparative studies of psychotherapies. Archives of General Psychiatry, 32, 995–1008.  Lundgren, J. D., Allison, K. C., & Stunkard, A. J. (Eds.). (2012). Night eating syndrome: Research, assessment, and treatment. New York: Guilford Press.  Masheb, R. M., & Grilo, C. M. (2007). Rapid response predicts treatment outcomes in binge eating disorder: Implications for stepped care. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 75, 639–644.  Mitchell, J. E., & de Zwaan, M. (2012). Psychosocial evaluation and treatment in bariatric surgery. New York: Routledge.   National Institute for Clinical Excellence. (2004). Eating dis   orders: Core interventions in the treatment and management of anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa and related eating disorders. London: Author.  Poulsen, S., Lunn, S., Daniel, S. I. F., Folke, S., Mathiesen,  B. B., Katznelson, H., et al. (in press). A randomized controlled trial of psychoanalytic psychotherapy versus cognitive behavior therapy for bulimia nervosa. American Journal of Psychiatry. Wilson, G. T. (1999). Rapid response to cognitive behavior therapy. Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 6, 289–292.  Wilson, G. T., Grilo, C. M., & Vitousek, K. M. (2007). Psychological treatment of eating disorders. American Psychologist, 62, 199–216.  Wilson, G. T., & Schlam, T. R. (2004). The transtheoretical model and motivational interviewing in the treatment of eating and weight disorders. Clinical Psychology Review, 24, 361–378.  Wilson, G. T., Wilfley, D. E., Agras, W. S., & Bryson, S. W. (2010). Psychological treatments of binge eating disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry, 67, 94–101.  Wilson, G. T., & Zandberg, L. (2012). Cognitive-behavioral guided self-help for eating disorders: Effectiveness and scalability. Clinical Psychology Review, 32, 343–357.   C H a P t e rC H a P t e r 1 8 Couple Distress  aNDrew christeNseN JeNNifer G. wheeler BriaN D. Doss Neil s. JacoBsoN  The second edition of this book presented, for the first time, a substantially different approach to couple therapy—different both in conceptualization and in treatment strategies. it was noted that these changes in technique and conceptualization were profound enough to warrant a new name for the approach: “integrative behavioral couple therapy” (iBCT). As described in this fifth edition, iBCT has matured into a sophisticated and intuitively appealing set of strategies. These strategies are very nicely illustrated in this chapter in the context of the comprehensive treatment of one couple in substantial distress. Because these strategies require considerable clinical skill and talent, beginning therapists in particular should learn much from the case descriptions presented in this very readable and engaging chapter.—D. H. B.  Unlike other chapters in this Handbook, the term “couple distress” does not refer to a specific clinical or personality disorder. In DSM-5, couple distress is handled as it was in DSM-IV-TR: not considered a “mental disorder” but relegated to the category of “other conditions that may be a focus of clinical attention” and assigned a lesser “V code” of “relationship distress with spouse or intimate partner.” Yet it is certainly arguable that couple distress creates as much psychological and physical pain as many, if not most, of the DSM disorders (e.g., Beach et al., 2006). Furthermore, couple distress can initiate, exacerbate, and complicate DSM disorders such as depression, or trigger their relapse (Whisman, 2007; Whisman & Bruce, 1999). Additionally, couple distress can have a major impact on children, and can trigger or exacerbate externalizing and internalizing disorders (Buehler et al., 1997). Indeed, there was a push to give relationship processes such as couple distress greater attention in DSM-5, and perhaps  include some relationship problems as disorders; however, such efforts seem to have faltered (American Psychiatric Association, 2013; Beach et al., 2006). Whatever the merits and outcome of these efforts, there is no doubt that couple distress has serious psychological consequences and is deserving of therapeutic attention.  In this chapter we describe one promising approach to the treatment of couple distress called integrative behavioral couple therapy (IBCT; Christensen & Jacobson, 2000; Christensen, Jacobson, & Babcock, 1995; Jacobson & Christensen, 1998). We briefly review the development of this approach from its origins in traditional behavioral couple therapy, followed by a description of IBCT theories and techniques. Then we describe the application of IBCT, including the stages of therapy and the use of specific interventions. Finally, we discuss the empirical evidence in support of IBCT and provide a case example to demonstrate the application of IBCT to the treatment of couple distress.  703   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  traDitioNal Behavioral couPle theraPy  The term “couple therapy” (as opposed to “individual” or “group” therapy) refers to clinical approaches for improving the functioning of two individuals within the context of their romantic relationship to one another.1 Although couple therapy is unique in its emphasis on a specific dyad, by its very definition, it is a contextual approach to the treatment of two individuals. Accordingly, successful treatments for couple distress have emphasized the assessment and modification of each individual’s contribution and response to specific interactions in their relationship (e.g., Baucom & Hoffman, 1986; Gurman, Knickerson, & Pinsof, 1986; Holtzworth-Munroe & Jacobson, 1991; Jacobson, 1978a, 1984; Jacobson & Holtzworth-Munroe, 1986; Jacobson & Margolin, 1979; Stuart, 1980; Weiss, Hops, & Patterson, 1973).  For over three decades, the “gold standard” for the treatment of couple distress has been behavioral couple therapy (for reviews of couple therapies, see Baucom, Shoham, Kim, Daiuto, & Stickle, 1998; Christensen & Heavey, 1999; Jacobson & Addis, 1993; Snyder, Castellani, & Whisman, 2006). First applied to couple distress by Stuart (1969) and Weiss and colleagues (1973), traditional behavioral couple therapy (TBCT) uses basic behavioral principles of reinforcement, modeling, and behavioral rehearsal to facilitate collaboration and compromise between partners. With an eye toward facilitating changes in the partners’ behavior, TBCT teaches them how to increase or decrease target behaviors (behavior exchange), to communicate more effectively (communication training), and to assess and solve problems (problem solving) to improve overall relationship satisfaction. The monograph by Jacobson and Margolin (1979) is a commonly used treatment manual for TBCT.  In early studies, TBCT demonstrated significant empirical success (Jacobson 1977, 1978b) and soon became the focus of numerous treatment manuals, programs, and publications supporting the application of behavioral techniques to the treatment of couple distress (e.g., Floyd & Markman, 1983; Gottman, Notarius, Gonso, & Markman, 1976; Jacobson & Margolin, 1979; Knox, 1971; Liberman, 1970; Liberman, Wheeler, deVisser, Kuehnel, & Kuehnel, 1981; Stuart, 1980). Subsequent outcome research has consistently supported the efficacy of behavioral approaches for the treatment of couple distress (Baucom & Hoffman, 1986; Gurman  et al., 1986; Jacobson, 1984; Jacobson, Schmaling, & Holtzworth-Munroe, 1987). Research has even shown the positive impact of TBCT for couples in which one partner has an individual disorder, such as depression (Gupta, Coyne, & Beach, 2003), alcoholism (O’Farrell & Fals-Stewart, 2000), and/or anxiety (Baucom et al., 1998).  Despite the apparent success of TBCT, however, outcome research also revealed some limitations in its efficacy and generalizability. For example, approximately one-third of couples failed to show measurable improvement in relationship quality following treatment with TBCT (Jacobson et al., 1987). Furthermore, many couples who initially responded to treatment relapsed within 1 or 2 years after therapy (Jacobson et al., 1984, 1987). Four years after therapy, Snyder, Wills, and Grady-Fletcher (1991) found a divorce rate of 37% in couples treated with TBCT.  Findings about the limited effectiveness of TBCT encouraged the development of additional therapeutic approaches. Various modifications and enhancements have been made to TBCT in an effort to improve its effectiveness (e.g., Baucom & Epstein, 1990; Baucom, Epstein, & Rankin, 1995; Epstein & Baucom, 2002; Floyd, Markman, Kelly, Blumberg, & Stanley, 1995; Halford, 2001), yet the existing comparative treatment studies have failed to demonstrate any incremental efficacy in various enhancements to TBCT. For example, the addition of cognitive strategies created a treatment that was as good as but not better than TBCT (e.g., Baucom et al., 1998).  In addition to examining treatment outcome, couple therapy research aimed at understanding how “treatment successes” differ from “treatment failures.” Early research on treatment response identified several factors that appear to affect the success of TBCT. Compared to couples who responded positively to TBCT, couples who were regarded as “treatment failures” or “difficult to treat” were generally older, more emotionally disengaged, more polarized on basic issues, and more severely distressed (Baucom & Hoffman, 1986; Hahlweg, Schindler, Revenstorf, & Brengelmann, 1984; Jacobson, Follette, & Pagel, 1986; see Jacobson & Christensen, 1998, for a review). Despite the fact that these couples arguably had the greatest need for effective treatment, each of these factors has an obvious deleterious effect on their ability to collaborate, compromise, and facilitate behavioral change. Older couples, for example, have had more time than younger couples to become “stuck” in their destructive behavioral pat    Couple Distress 705  terns; couples who are more polarized on fundamental issues (e.g., how traditional they are with respect to their gender roles) may never be able to reach a mutually satisfying compromise; and extremely disengaged couples may be unable to collaborate. Each of these factors is likely to be associated with long-standing, deeply entrenched, and seemingly “unchangeable” behavioral patterns. Thus, it should come as no surprise that the change-oriented techniques of TBCT are ineffective for these couples.  aN “iNteGrative” theraPy  These findings served as the impetus for the development of IBCT. Evidence on the limited success of TBCT, particularly during follow-up, spurred an effort to find a treatment with more enduring effects. Evidence on TBCT’s failures spurred efforts to find treatments that would be applicable even to these difficult cases. Three developments in IBCT are directed toward making treatment more enduring and more broadly applicable: (1) a focus on the couple’s relational “themes” rather than on specific target behaviors; (2) an emphasis on “contingency-shaped” versus “rule-governed” behavior; and (3) a focus on emotional acceptance.  The first aspect that is intended to make IBCT’s effectiveness more broadly applicable and more enduring is its focus on a couple’s relational “themes,” that is, their long-standing patterns of disparate yet functionally similar behaviors. Although this focus is similar to TBCT in that it requires a comprehensive assessment of the couple’s behavioral patterns, it differs from TBCT in that multiple and complex behavioral interactions— and not just specific behavioral targets—are considered for therapeutic intervention.  A highlight of all behavioral approaches, and certainly of TBCT, is an assessment process that transforms broad, global complaints into specific, observable behaviors. For example, a wife may come into therapy complaining that her husband does not love her, while her husband complains that his wife does not believe in him. The TBCT therapist would assist the wife in defining her general complaint into specific behavioral targets for her husband, such as kissing and hugging her more often. The therapist would also assist the husband in defining his general complaint into specific behavioral targets for his wife, such as complimenting his achievements more often. However, IBCT suggests that valuable information may be lost in the transfor   mation of a global complaint into a specific behavioral target. By quickly narrowing down global complaints into specific behavioral targets, TBCT inadvertently limits the means by which partners may satisfy each other. For example, if “feeling loved” is defined solely in terms of physical affection and the husband has difficulty in increasing and/or sustaining a higher level of physical affection, then his wife’s desires to feel loved will not be satisfied. Indeed, the husband could perform a variety of other behaviors in addition to physical affection that function to make his wife feel loved, such as calling her during work to see how she is doing, listening to her troubles with her family, or noticing that the air in her car tires is dangerously low. She may not be able to articulate many behaviors that might function in ways to make her feel loved, either because she is not aware of the desired behaviors or perhaps she feels too vulnerable to express this need. Without more elaborate exploration of and functional analysis of the wife’s and husband’s thoughts, feelings, and behaviors, such important opportunities for facilitating therapeutic change may be lost. Furthermore, these very specific behavioral definitions may have iatrogenic effects. In the previous example, the wife may begin to define her husband’s love more and more in terms of his limited ability to be affectionate because this is how “love” was operationalized in the context of the TBCT intervention. If the husband is unable to make her feel “loved” via physical affection alone, then her anger and sense of loss could be heightened rather than ameliorated by the treatment.  In contrast to TBCT’s emphasis on specific behavioral targets, IBCT focuses on broader “themes” in the couple’s history, that is, developing a shared understanding of the many circumstances in which the wife has felt loved and unloved, and in which the husband has felt that his wife believed or did not believe in him. Certainly this shared understanding includes some specific behavioral examples illustrating what makes the wife feel unloved and what would make her feel loved, and what makes the husband feel that his wife does not believe in him and what would make him feel that she does. However, IBCT tries to keep open all possibilities of behaviors that function to provide each spouse with his/her desired emotional state. Thus, if one partner has difficulty performing a particular behavior (e.g., physical affection), he/she may still be able to perform other, perhaps less obvious behaviors that serve the same function (e.g., calling one’s wife from work). By focusing on the broader emotional “theme”   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  (her history of feeling unloved, his history of feeling not believed in), rather than attempting to operationalize that theme completely into one or more specific behaviors, IBCT maintains its functional roots, while increasing the chances that each partner is able to meet the other’s needs.  A second development that is designed to make IBCT applicable to more couples and to create more enduring change is based on the distinction between “rule-governed” versus “contingency-shaped” behavior (Skinner, 1966). In the former, an individual is provided with a rule to guide his/her behavior and is then reinforced when he/she follows the rule. Using the previous example, a therapist could develop a list of possible affectionate behaviors for the husband, such as giving his wife a kiss when he leaves for work and when he returns, then encourage the husband to implement these behaviors. Upon implementing them, the husband would be reinforced by both his wife and the therapist. TBCT is largely based on employing “rulegoverned” strategies to create positive change. Not only is behavioral exchange a “rule-governed” strategy, but even more importantly, the TBCT strategies of communication training and problem-solving training are also dominated by “rule-governed” strategies. In both, the TBCT therapist teaches the partners certain rules of good communication or good problem solving to use during their discussions of problems. The guidelines to use “I statements” and to “define the problem clearly before proposing solutions” are examples.  With “contingency-shaped” behavior, naturally occurring events in the situation serve to elicit and reinforce the desired behavior. For example, the husband would be affectionate with his wife when something in their interaction triggered a desire for him to hug or kiss her; the experience of closeness or physical contact in the affectionate gesture itself, or his wife’s response to his gesture, would serve to reinforce his affectionate behavior. In contrast to TBCT, IBCT engages in “contingency-shaped” behavior change. IBCT therapists try to discover the events that function to trigger desired experiences in each partner, then attempt to orchestrate these events. For example, IBCT therapists might hypothesize that a wife’s criticisms push her husband away, but that her expressions of loneliness could bring him toward her. The IBCT therapist listens to her criticisms (e.g., that her husband ignores her), suggests that she may be lonely (as a result of feeling “ignored”), and, if she acknowledges such a feeling, encourages her to talk about it. The therapeutic goal is that this “shift”  in her conversation (from criticism to self-disclosure) might also “shift” her husband’s typically defensive posture in listening to (or ignoring) his wife. Although such a strategy of emphasizing “contingency-shaped” behavior makes intervention more complicated and less straightforward than a purely “rule-governed” approach, IBCT suggests that a “contingency-shaped” approach leads to more profound and enduring changes in the couple’s relational patterns.  A third development in IBCT that is designed to make it applicable to more couples and to create more enduring change is its focus on emotional acceptance. In TBCT, the approach to solving couple problems is to create positive change. If the husband in the couple we discussed could be more physically affectionate, and the wife more verbally complimentary, then the couple’s problems would presumably be solved. However, if the husband is unable or unwilling to be more physically affectionate, and if the wife is unable or unwilling to be more complimentary, then the case will be a treatment failure. If the husband and wife are able to make these changes initially but are unable to maintain them over the long run, then the case becomes a temporary success followed by relapse.  In contrast to TBCT, the focus of IBCT is on emotional acceptance, as well as change. Unlike the change-oriented goal of TBCT, the primary goal of IBCT is to promote each partner’s acceptance of the other and their differences. Rather than trying to eliminate a couple’s long-standing conflicts, a goal of IBCT is to help couples develop a new understanding of their apparently irreconcilable differences, and to use these differences to promote intimacy, empathy, and compassion for one another. With its focus on acceptance rather than change, IBCT creates an environment for couples to understand each other’s behavior before deciding whether and how they might modify it. In the earlier example, IBCT would explore the husband’s difficulties in expressing affection and the wife’s difficulties in giving him compliments—difficulties that may have little to do with how much love they feel for one another. Through this exploration of the individuals, the partners may come to a greater understanding of one another and experience more emotional closeness, thus achieving the feelings of love they previously pursued by requesting changes in each other’s behavior (i.e., increased physical affection and verbal compliments).   While there is an expectation of “change” in IBCT, this expectation differs significantly from that of TBCT   Couple Distress  in regard to which partner and what behavior is expected to change. In TBCT, the “change” involves Partner A changing the frequency or intensity of a specified behavior in response to a complaint from Partner B. But in IBCT, the therapeutic “change” also involves Partner B modifying his/her emotional reaction to Partner A’s “problem” behavior. When a difference between partners is identified to be “irreconcilable,” the therapeutic strategy of IBCT is to change the “complaining” partner’s response to the “offending” partner’s behavior rather than directing all therapeutic efforts at attempting to change what has historically been an essentially “unchangeable” behavior. Ideally, through exploration of the thoughts and feelings underlying Partner A’s behaviors, Partner B develops a new understanding of his/her partner’s behavior, and the “complaint” is transformed into a less destructive response. In turn, this change in Partner B’s reaction often then has a salutary impact on the frequency or intensity of Partner A’s behavior. Using this approach, as opposed to an exclusively change-focused approach, even the most polarized, disengaged, and “unchangeable” couples have an opportunity to increase their overall marital satisfaction.  It is important to note that in this context acceptance is not confused with resignation. Whereas “resignation” involves one partner grudgingly giving in and giving up on the hope for a better relationship, “acceptance” involves one partner “letting go” of the struggle to change the other. Ideally, partners “let go” of the struggle not grudgingly but as a result of a new appreciation for their partner’s experience. By understanding their couple distress in terms of their individual differences, and by learning to accept each other’s differences, it is hoped that the distress that has historically been generated by their struggle to change one another will be reduced. Thus, for IBCT to be effective in treating couple distress, it is important for partners to understand the factors that have contributed to the development and maintenance of their distress.  the etioloGy of couPle Distress  According to IBCT, relationship distress develops as a result of two basic influences—decreases in reinforcing exchanges, such as through reinforcement erosion, and the development of punishing exchanges, such as through conflict development. “Reinforcement erosion” refers to the phenomenon whereby behaviors that were once reinforcing become less reinforcing with repeated  exposure. For example, demonstrations of physical affection may generate powerful feelings of warmth and pleasure for each partner during the early stages of their relationship. But after partners have spent many years together, the reinforcing properties of these affectionate behaviors may disappear. For some couples, oncereinforcing behaviors may become “taken for granted,” whereas for others, once-reinforcing behaviors may actually become aversive. In some cases, behaviors that were once considered attractive, endearing, or pleasing become the very same behaviors that generate or exacerbate the couple’s distress.  As with the erosion of reinforcing behaviors, conflicts may emerge as couples spend more and more time together. In the early stages of a relationship, differences in partners’ backgrounds, goals, and interests may initially be downplayed or ignored. For example, if Partner A prefers to save money and Partner B prefers to spend money, this difference may not be apparent during courtship, when spending money is a tacit expectation of both partners. If this difference is detected early on, perhaps it is be regarded as a “positive” difference, in that each partner is encouraged to be a little more like the other in his/her spending habits. Or perhaps each partner expects the other to eventually compromise or change to his/her way of doing things. But over time, these incompatibilities and their relevance to the relationship are inevitably exposed. Differences that were once regarded as novel, interesting, or challenging may ultimately be perceived as impediments to one’s own goals and interests. Furthermore, in addition to any extant incompatibilities, other unanticipated incompatibilities may emerge with new life experiences (e.g., having children, changing careers). Thus, even those couples who had initially made a realistic appraisal of their differences may discover unexpected incompatibilities over time.  These incompatibilities, while challenging in their own right, can be further exacerbated by each partner’s emotional sensitivities or vulnerabilities. Returning to our earlier example, if our “saver” comes from a background of economic deprivation and has developed a justifiable fear of being destitute, then the issues related to saving may be motivated by powerful emotions, which may impair his/her ability to understand the partner’s desire to spend and enjoy what they have. Incompatibilities can also be exacerbated by external stressors. For example, if one member of our “saver– spender” couple loses his/her job, that might put their differences into even sharper relief. Efforts by the part    CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  ners to deal with their struggle over money might paradoxically make the problem worse. If the saver, for example, engages in behaviors such as investigating and interrogating the spender while the spender avoids and hides his/her purchases from the other, their problem might increase in intensity. One goal of IBCT is to help the partners identify and reframe their incompatibilities in a way that minimizes the destructive nature of these incompatibilities, by encouraging a more effective way of communicating about them, while maximizing their level of intimacy and relationship satisfaction.  aPPlicatioN of iBct  The Formulation  The most important organizing principle of IBCT is the “formulation,” a term used to describe how the therapist conceptualizes and describes the couple’s problems. The formulation is based on a functional analysis of the couple’s problems and comprises three basic components: a theme, a DEEP analysis, and a mutual trap. The therapist refers back to the formulation and its components throughout the treatment process, whenever couples have conflicts during or between therapy sessions.  One of the most basic goals of IBCT is for the partners to adopt the formulation as part of their relationship history. From that point forward, they can use the formulation as a context for understanding their relationship and their conflicts. The formulation also gives couples a language to discuss their problems, and allows partners to distance themselves from their problems. It is important to remember, however, that the formulation is a dynamic concept that may require alteration and modification (or “reformulation”) throughout treatment.  The Theme  The “theme,” the description of the couple’s primary conflict, is usually described by a word or phrase that captures the issues with which the couple struggles. For example, a common theme of many distressed couples is that of “closeness–independence,” in which one partner seeks greater closeness, whereas the other seeks greater independence. Other common themes center around trust, sexuality, money, and parenting. A couple may struggle about any particular topic and cer   tainly with many issues, but often their struggles center around one or two broad themes.  The DEEP Analysis  In IBCT, therapists conduct a DEEP analysis of the couple’s theme or issue, an acronym that outlines the four major factors contributing to a couple’s problems: Differences, Emotional sensitivities, External circumstances, and Patterns of interaction. IBCT suggests that partners have their primary conflict, or theme, because of Differences between them and because of each partner’s Emotional sensitivities or vulnerabilities linked to those differences, both of which can be exacerbated by External circumstances. For example, in the theme of closeness–independence, Partner A may want more closeness and connection, and Partner B may want more independence simply because they are different people with different genes and different social learning histories. Perhaps this difference was not readily apparent early on because both partners were enchanted by their developing relationship. Or perhaps there really was little difference in their desires for closeness and independence until they had children, or until one partner’s career took off. Whatever the basis for the difference, it creates problems for the couple as Differences are perceived as deficiencies. For example, the closeness seeker may see the other as being “afraid of intimacy”; the independence seeker may see the other as being “neurotically dependent.” Partners find that they cannot both get their needs fully satisfied. Compromise may be relatively easy unless Emotional sensitivities or vulnerabilities are also present, which provide emotional fuel for the differences. If Partner A wants greater closeness than Partner B and is emotionally vulnerable to easily feeling abandoned, then negotiations about closeness may be threatening to Partner  A. Similarly, if Partner B wants greater independence and is emotionally vulnerable to easily feeling controlled and restrained, then negotiations about closeness may be threatening for Partner B as well. External circumstances may conspire to make the problem even greater. If the couple lives in an area where Partner A, who wants more closeness, is far away from other sources of social support, and where Partner B, who wants more independence, is close to leisure activities in which he/she wants to engage independently, the struggle between them will be even greater. The combination of their differences (D), their emotional sensitivities (E), and the external circumstances (E) may  Couple Distress 709  lead the two to engage in a destructive pattern (P) of interaction that can polarize them even further.  The “pattern of interaction” refers to the often frustrating and destructive communication that ensues when a distressed couple enters into a theme-related conflict. A natural response for partners confronted with their differences is for each partner to try to change the other. In many cases these efforts at changing each other may be successful. However, many times the result may be that their differences are exacerbated and the two partners become polarized in their conflicting positions. When partners have become polarized on an issue, further attempts to change each other only increase the conflict and perpetuate their polarized stance. For example, in a couple whose theme is closeness–independence, the polarization process is likely to occur when the independence seeker “retreats” from attempts by the closeness seeker to gain more intimacy, which then creates more “intrusive” efforts by the closeness seeker. The more the one partner “advances,” the more the other partner “retreats”; the more that partner “retreats,” the more the other partner “advances.” Furthermore, being deprived of a desired goal can make that goal seem even more important: Partners can become desperate, escalating their futile efforts, and their differences become magnified. It can begin to look like the closeness seeker has no needs for independence and the independence seeker has no needs for closeness. Through their interaction, they have become more different than they were originally.  The Mutual Trap  The mutual trap, which describes the outcome of the polarization process, is called a “trap” because it typically leaves the partners feeling “stuck” or “trapped” in their conflict. Partners in a mutual trap feel that they have done everything they can to change the other, and nothing seems to work. But they are reluctant to give up their efforts to change each other because this would mean resigning themselves to a dissatisfying relationship. As a result, they become more entrenched in their respective positions.  The experience of partners who are so polarized is one of helplessness and futility, and this experience is rarely discussed openly between them. As a result, each partner may be unaware that the other also feels trapped. Making each partner aware of the other’s sense of entrapment is an important part of acceptance work, and encouraging each partner to experience the  other’s sense of “stuckness” can sometimes be the first step toward promoting empathy and intimacy between partners.  Stages of Therapy  In IBCT there is a clear distinction between the assessment phase and the treatment itself. The assessment phase comprises at least one conjoint session with the couple, followed by individual sessions with each partner. It is followed by a feedback session, during which the therapist describes his/her formulation of the partners and their problems as well as the therapist’s plan for their treatment. The feedback session is followed by the treatment sessions, the exact number of which should be determined on a case-by-case basis depending on each couple’s treatment needs. However, the protocol used in a recent clinical trial of IBCT for seriously and chronically distressed couples (discussed below) was a maximum of 26 sessions, including both the assessment and treatment phases.  The Use of Objective Measures  Objective assessment instruments (see Table 18.1) may be useful for both initial assessment and for monitoring a couple’s progress at various points throughout treatment. Although such objective measures are not necessary to conduct IBCT, they may provide additional information about areas of disagreement that have not been covered in the session, or they may provide objective data about a couple’s levels of distress and satisfaction. Additionally, research has shown that sharing and actively discussing a couple’s progress (or lack thereof) in therapy can improve therapy outcomes (e.g., Halford et al., 2012). For example, a couple’s relationship satisfaction can be assessed using the Couples Satisfaction Index (Funk & Rogge, 2007); partners’ commitment to the relationship and steps taken toward separation or divorce can be assessed using the Marital Status Inventory (Crane & Mead, 1980; Weiss & Cerreto, 1980); partner’s areas of conflict and troubling behaviors can be assessed with the Problem Areas Questionnaire (Heavey, Christensen, & Malamuth, 1995) and the Frequency and Acceptability of Partner Behavior Inventory (Christensen & Jacobson, 1997; Doss & Christensen, 2006), and the couple’s level of physical violence, with the Revised Conflict Tactics Scales (CTS2; Straus, Hamby, Boney- McCoy, & Sugarman, 1996).   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  table 18.1. Useful assessment and screening instruments  •• Couples Satisfaction Index (Funk & Rogge, 2007): Measures relationship distress. (To obtain this freely available measure, go to www.courses.rochester.edu/ surveys/funk.)  •• Couple Questionnaire (Christensen, 2009): Brief screening assessment for couple satisfaction, intimate partner violence, and commitment, as well as open-ended descriptions of typical positive and negative interactions. (To obtain this freely available measure, go to http://ibct. psych.ucla.edu.)  •• Frequency and Acceptability of Partner Behavior Inventory (Christensen & Jacobson, 1997; Doss & Christensen, 2006): Assesses frequency and acceptability of behavior for 24 categories of spouse behavior. (To obtain this freely available measure, go to http://ibct. psych.ucla.edu.)  •• Marital Status Inventory (Crane & Mead, 1980; Weiss & Cerreto, 1980): Assesses commitment to the relationship and steps taken toward separation or divorce. (To obtain this measure, contact Robert L. Weiss, PhD, Oregon Marital Studies Program, Department of Psychology, University of Oregon, Eugene, OR 97403-1227; darkwing. uoregon.edu/~rlweiss/msi.htm.)  •• Problem Areas Questionnaire (Heavey, Christensen, & Malamuth, 1995): Assesses common problem areas or areas of disagreement in couples. (To obtain this freely available measure, go to http://ibct.psych.ucla.edu.)  •• Revised Conflict Tactics Scales (Straus, Hamby, Boney- McCoy, & Sugarman, 1996): Assesses domestic violence. (To obtain this measure, contact Multi-Health Systems,  P.O. Box 950, North Tonawanda, NY 14120; www.mhs. com.) •• Weekly Questionnaire (Christensen, 2010): Assesses significant positive and negative events since the last session and includes a brief form of the Couples Satisfaction Index. (To obtain this freely available measure, go to http://ibct.psych.ucla.edu.)  We recommend that, at a minimum, clinicians administer measures that assess relationship satisfaction, intimate partner violence, commitment, and problem areas. The measure of relationship satisfaction serves as a measure of outcome and should be repeated periodically. Measures of violence, commitment, and problem areas are needed because partners may indicate concerns on a questionnaire that they do not bring up spontaneously. For example, couples often do not mention topics such as violence or sexual problems during therapy, even when these are present. Christensen  (2010) has developed a brief Couple Questionnaire (Christensen, 2010) that clinicians can use to assess baseline satisfaction, violence, and commitment. Typically, partners are given questionnaires at their first session to complete then return at their individual sessions. In addition to being part of the assessment phase, the questionnaires can be administered later in treatment, at the end of treatment, and at follow-up to assess changes from partners’ presenting baseline levels of distress and satisfaction.  Assessment of Domestic Violence  Objective measures are particularly useful in assessing a couple’s history of physical violence. Assessing for domestic violence is a critical part of every couple’s intake—not only to determine whether the personal safety of either partner is in imminent danger but also because couple therapy may actually be contraindicated for some violent couples (Jacobson & Gottman, 1998; Simpson, Doss, Wheeler, & Christensen, 2007). Couple therapy requires that both partners take some degree of responsibility for their problems, but such a perspective is inappropriate when a couple’s problems include domestic violence because perpetrators of violence must assume sole responsibility for their behavior. Furthermore, because therapy sessions can elicit strong emotions, the couple therapy itself may trigger postsession violence in some couples. In such cases, treatment that focuses on the violent behavior of the perpetrator—and not the interactive distress of the couple—is indicated. The CTS2 (Straus et al., 1996) and the Couple Questionnaire (Christensen, 2010) are useful screening tools for evaluating the frequency and severity of a couple’s physical aggression, and to determine whether couple therapy is contraindicated. Finally, a couple’s history of violence should be directly addressed during the assessment phase, primarily during the individual sessions, when each partner can talk freely without fearing consequences from the other.  Assessment  The assessment phase typically comprises one joint session with the partners (Session 1), followed by individual sessions with each partner (Sessions 2 and 3). The primary goal of the assessment phase is for the therapist to evaluate whether the couple is appropriate for therapy and, if so, to develop the formulation. However, the therapist should also use the assessment   Couple Distress  period to orient the couple to the therapy process. In addition, although the IBCT therapist is not actively intervening during the assessment phase, it is possible for the therapist to have a therapeutic impact in these first few sessions.  Orientation (Session 1)  After greetings and introductions, the couple is oriented to the upcoming therapy process. This orientation likely includes reviewing and signing an informed consent form, which explains billing procedures, defines confidentiality and its exclusions, and outlines the possible risks and benefits of participating in IBCT.  In addition to the general information provided during informed consent, the couple is also oriented to the specific process of IBCT. Therapists should explain the difference between the assessment and treatment phases of therapy, and ask the couple whether this is different from the couple’s expectations in coming to therapy. Therapists should be prepared for couples’ disappointment when they learn that therapy is not going to begin immediately. Therapists may need to explain to couples why an assessment period is needed before therapists can provide any useful help to them.  Also during the first session, couples are introduced to their manual, Reconcilable Differences (Christensen, Doss, & Jacobson, 2014; Christensen & Jacobson, 2000). Couples are asked to complete Part I of this book prior to the feedback session. Ideally, this reading helps couples begin to conceptualize their problems in a way that is similar to how their therapist will frame them during the feedback session.  Therapists should be aware that at least one partner, if not both, may likely be ambivalent about participating in therapy. Such ambivalence should be normalized and validated, and the therapist should explain to partners that the assessment period is also their opportunity to get to know the therapist and to determine whether this treatment is going to be a “good match” for them.  Problem Areas (Sessions 1, 2, and 3)  After the couple has been oriented to the therapy process, the therapist begins the evaluation by reviewing the couple’s presenting problem(s). Much of this information can be gathered from objective measures and also during each partner’s individual session, so this discussion during Session 1 should not consume the entire session. However, it is important during the first  session that the partners feel heard and validated, and that their problems and distress are clearly understood by the therapist.  From the information gathered from objective measures and during the evaluation sessions, therapists should be able to describe the partners’ problem areas and develop their formulation. The following six questions provide a guideline for this assessment, and each should be answered by the end of the assessment period.   1. How distressed is the couple? 2. How committed is this couple to the relationship? 3. What issues divide this couple? 4. Why are these issues a problem for them (the DEEP analysis)? 5. What strengths keep this couple together? 6. What can treatment do to help them? The first three questions can be addressed with objective questionnaires. However, even questions that can be addressed with questionnaires should usually be explored in further detail in interviews. For example, the individual sessions may be particularly useful for assessing whether distress is so great that separation is imminent, for assessing each partner’s level of commitment to the relationship and the possible presence of affairs, and for assessing the couple’s history of physical violence.  The assessment of problem areas should also include a determination of the couple’s “collaborative set” (Jacobson & Margolin, 1979). This term refers to the couple’s joint perspective that they share responsibility for the problems in their relationship, and that both will have to change if the relationship is to change. The strength of this set determines whether change- or acceptance-oriented interventions are indicated. The stronger the couple’s collaborative set, the more successful initial change-oriented interventions are likely to be. But partners who lack this collaborative set—who enter therapy believing they are the innocent victim of the other’s behavior—first need to focus on acceptance work.  The fourth question—why the partners’ issues are a problem for them—requires a functional analysis along the lines of the DEEP analysis described earlier. It is usually possible to obtain initial information about all four aspects of the DEEP analysis in the joint interview, but more nuanced understandings about these factors,   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  particularly Emotional sensitivities and Patterns of interaction, are typically best left to the individual interviews. Because adults are often unaware of the contingencies controlling their behavior, or may be embarrassed to admit those contingencies even if they know them, a functional analysis of emotions and patterns involves much more than a simple, straightforward inquiry. The therapist must be particularly sensitive to the emotional reactions of partners, which may indicate important reinforcers and punishers. For example, let us assume that our partners with the closeness– independence theme argue frequently about the amount of time they spend together. However, that specific issue may not be where the most powerful contingencies are found. Perhaps the wife’s history includes having been abandoned by her family members at a time when she was in particular need of their support and comfort. Her fear in her marital relationship is that her husband may do likewise. For her, the time they spend together is simply a poor proxy for her concerns that he may not always be there when she needs him. If she felt confident of that, then she could tolerate much less time together. For her husband’s part, let us assume that his social learning history has led him to be especially sensitive to being controlled or restricted by another person. Therefore, he battles his wife over their time together not so much because he does not want the time together, but because he feels controlled by her and naturally resists. In such a situation, the IBCT therapist needs to move the discussion away from the repetitive arguments about time spent together, toward the more important contingencies that affect each spouse’s behaviors, for example, the emotional sensitivities that each partner brings to the relationship and the pattern of interaction that triggers their emotional responses.  Answers to the fifth question, about the couple’s strengths, also come from the joint and individual interviews. It is helpful for couples to keep their strengths in mind even as they focus on their difficulties. Sometimes there is an interesting relation between a couple’s strengths and its problems, in that the latter may involve some variation of the former. For example, let us assume that two partners were initially attracted to each other in part because of their different approaches to life. He is much more spontaneous; she is more deliberate and planful. Those differences may be attractive and helpful at times, but they can also be a source of irritation and conflict.  In answering the final question, what treatment can do to help, the therapist must first be sure the couple is  appropriate for couple therapy. If the couple has serious violence or a substance dependence problem, for example, then couple therapy as usual will not be the recommendation. Treatment directed at those particular problems will be necessary. If the couple is appropriate for couple therapy, the therapist will need to outline the focus of the therapy and what it comprises.  The Couple’s History (Session 1)  After the partners have been oriented to therapy and their problem areas have been assessed, the therapist then takes the history of the couple’s relationship. The therapist’s obvious objective for taking this history is to gain a good understanding of the partners’ attachment to one another. Often the distress has escalated to the degree that it has overshadowed the reasons the two became a couple in the first place. In addition, this history can provide some immediate therapeutic benefit to the couple. Generally, when partners discuss the earlier (and usually happier) stages of their relationship, their affect is likely to become more positive. They have been focused for so long on the negative aspects of their relationship that they probably have not thought about their early romance, courtship, and attraction to each other for a very long time. In this way, having couples describe the evolution of their relationship can be therapeutic in and of itself. Although some couples may be in too much pain to discuss their history without blaming and accusatory remarks (in which case the therapist should abandon the following guidelines and instead use the session to validate their pain), most couples enjoy reminiscing about their happier times.  The following series of questions provides the therapist with useful information about the couple’s history and allow the partners an opportunity to reflect on the reasons they fell in love in the first place:  •• “How did you get together?”  •• “What was your courtship like?”  •• “What attracted each of you to the other?”  •• “What was your relationship like before your  problems began?”  •• “How is your relationship different now on days  when you are getting along?”  •• “How would the relationship be different if your  current problems no longer existed?  These and other, related questions may also reveal useful information about each partner, such as his/her   Couple Distress  hopes and dreams for the future. Information about the couple’s history is useful for the therapist in developing the couple’s formulation, which is presented to the partners during their feedback session.  Individual History (Sessions 2 and 3)  Each partner’s individual history can often provide useful information for the formulation, in that it provides a context for each partner’s behavior and illuminates possible emotional vulnerabilities in each. For example, perhaps the husband experienced his mother as very demanding of him and learned to cope with this through withdrawal, so the withdrawal continues in response to his wife’s demands. Or perhaps the wife had two previous boyfriends who cheated on her, so she is sensitive to any indication of betrayal by her husband.  The following questions may be useful in guiding a discussion of each partner’s individual history:  •• “What was your parents’ marriage like?” •• “What was your relationship with your father like?” •• “What was your relationship with your mother like?” •• “What were your relationships with your siblings like?” •• “What were your relationships with previous important romantic partners like?”  Each of these questions could potentially take an inordinate amount of time. The IBCT therapist tries to elicit features of these early relationships that are similar to or may inform the current relationship. For example, if the therapist were aware of a difference between husband and wife in terms of how comfortable they were with conflict, he/she would guide the husband away from details about where his family lived and focus on the expression of conflict that occurred in his family.  Feedback  From the information gathered during the assessment sessions and from the questionnaires, the therapist develops the couple’s formulation, which is discussed with the couple in the feedback session (usually Session 4). The feedback session can follow the outline of the six questions above used to assess the couple’s problem areas. It is important that the feedback session  be a dialogue and not a lecture from the therapist— with the therapist continually getting feedback from the couple about the formulation being presented. The partners are the experts on their relationship and should be treated as such.  The feedback session is also used to describe the proposed treatment plan for the couples, based on the therapist’s formulation. The therapist describes for the couple the goals for treatment and the procedures for accomplishing these goals. The goals for therapy are to create an in-session environment in which the couple’s problems can be resolved through some combination of acceptance and change techniques. In relation to the DEEP analysis, IBCT promotes emotional acceptance for the partners’ Differences and Emotional Sensitivities, in that these factors are likely to change only slowly, if at all. External stressors can sometimes be changed but often they too require acceptance. It is the Pattern of interaction that can be changed and is the focus of change efforts in IBCT. The procedures for meeting these goals of acceptance and change are usually (1) insession discussions of incidents and issues related to the formulation, and (2) homework to be conducted outside the session to further the in-session work. During the feedback session, the therapist introduces the couple to the Weekly Questionnaire (Christensen, 2010), goes over it, and asks that each partner to complete it prior to each session. It provides information on the couple’s experiences since the last session and serves as the basis for treatment sessions. This questionnaire includes the four-item version of the Couples Satisfaction Index (Funk & Rogge, 2007), so therapists can monitor the couple’s relationship satisfaction on a weekly basis. The questionnaire asks whether there have been any major changes in the couple’s life, and whether any incidents of violence, or any problematic incidents of substance/drug use have occurred. Then the questionnaire asks each partner to describe the most positive or meaningful interaction they had in the last week, the most difficult or negative interaction in the last week, and whether they anticipate any upcoming, challenging events. Finally, the partners rank what they think would be most important to discuss: the positive, negative, or upcoming event, or some issue not tied to a particular incident (e.g., saving money). Finally there is a place for the couple’s homework assignment, if there is any. These positive, negative, and challenging upcoming events, as well as the general issues the partners indicate on their questionnaires, provide the usual content for the therapy sessions.   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  The purpose of the feedback session is to orient partners to the goals of change and acceptance through open communication and finding new ways of looking at their problems. In addition, the feedback session gives partners some idea of what they can expect from therapy, and it elicits their willingness to participate. Finally, the feedback session may be used to implement some interventions. The first intervention is the therapist’s description of the couple’s strengths. From this discussion, partners may be able to see some solutions to their problems. The therapist can begin assigning relevant chapters from Part II of Reconcilable Differences (Christensen & Jacobson, 2000; Christensen et al., 2014), which specifically addresses the topic of acceptance. After the formulation and treatment plan have been described and the partners have agreed to proceed with therapy, the remaining sessions are devoted to building acceptance between partners and promoting change in each partner.  Treatment  IBCT Techniques for Building Emotional Acceptance  Typically, treatment begins with a focus on promoting acceptance. The exception is when partners are able to collaborate with one another (“the collaborative set”) and both want to make specific changes in their relationship. In that case, the therapist begins with change strategies.  In the context of acceptance work, the actual content of each session is determined by the partners and what they “bring in” every week. The therapist looks for emotionally salient material that is relevant to the formulation. Recent negative or positive events listed on the Weekly Questionnaire and related to the formulation are often the topics of discussion. For example, a couple with a closeness–independence theme might discuss a difficult incident in which the independence seeker wanted to spend the night out with friends and the closeness seeker protested. Discussions also may be centered around upcoming events listed on the Weekly Questionnaire, such as a weekend trip for the couple, in which the independence seeker fears that there will not be space for him/her to be alone. Broad issues related to the formulation and listed on the questionnaire are also appropriate for discussion, such as whether separate weekend trips apart with friends are acceptable for the couple.  Sometimes salient events relevant to the formulation occur between partners during the session, and the therapist should generally make these the top priority because the emotions involving events during sessions tend to be more accessible than events that occur between sessions. For example, when the independence seeker turns away as the closeness seeker gets emotionally agitated during a discussion, the IBCT therapist focuses on this “in the moment” example of their closeness–independence theme and explores and frames it using the DEEP analysis. The therapist might also structure interactions during the session that mimic their difficulties or create possibilities for a different kind of interaction. For example, the therapist may have the couple replay a recent, difficult interaction to learn from it, or encourage the couple to attempt a different and more positive interaction around the topic. All of these topics are useful means for implementing the three acceptance-building strategies of empathic joining, unified detachment from the problem, and tolerance building. Because they can create greater closeness, as well as greater acceptance, the first two strategies are more commonly employed than the last one.  eMPATHiC Joining  “Empathic joining” refers to the process by which partners cease to blame one another for their emotional suffering and instead develop empathy for each other’s experience. To foster empathic joining, the IBCT therapist reformulates the couple’s problem as a result of common differences rather than deficiencies in either partner, and highlights the emotional sensitivities that make these differences especially difficult to handle. Partners’ behaviors are described in terms of their differences from one another, and their responses to these differences are validated as normal and understandable, especially given the emotional sensitivities that each may possess.  In making this reformulation of each partner’s behavior, it is important that the IBCT therapist emphasize the pain that each partner is experiencing rather than the pain each has delivered. One strategy for building empathy between partners is through the use of “soft disclosures.” Often partners express their emotional pain by using “hard” disclosures of feelings such as anger or disgust. Although hard disclosures are easier to make because they do not reveal vulnerability, they are more difficult for the other partner to hear be    Couple Distress  cause they imply blame. It is the combination of “pain and blame” that results in discord. But if the therapist can encourage partners to express their pain without expressing blame, the result may be increased acceptance from the other partner. IBCT therapists often encourage soft disclosures by suggesting “soft” feelings, such as the fear, hurt, and shame that may underlie each partner’s behavior. Although soft disclosures are more difficult to make because they reveal vulnerability, they are easier for the other partner to hear and arouse more empathy. Thus, empathic joining is promoted by (1) reformulation of a couple’s discord as a result of partners’ common differences and their understandable emotional reactions to those differences, and (2) the use of soft disclosures to express painful emotions. These disclosures can come through interaction between the therapist and each partner or the therapist can prompt the partners to make these disclosures directly to each other, increasing the emotional intensity of the disclosure and allowing the partners to have the conversation they did not have but could have had (Wile, 2008).  UnifieD DeTACHMenT froM THe ProBleM  This IBCT technique allows partners to “step back” from their problems and describe them without placing blame—or responsibility for change—on either partner. In this way, partners engage in “unified detachment” from their problems. This strategy can be used to engage a couple in a DEEP discussion about their Differences (how these differences resulted from their backgrounds), their Emotional sensitivities (what past experiences may have understandably led to these sensitivities), their External stressors (how these stressors came to be), and their Patterns of interaction (how each interacts in ways that make sense from his/her perspective). However, most often it is used to help the couple understand, accept, and eventually alter their Patterns of interaction. For example, the therapist may engage partners in a dialogue in which they use nonjudgmental terms to describe the sequence of a particular conflict, including what factors typically trigger their reactions, how specific events are connected to one another, and how they can defuse or override the conflict in the future. The approach is an intellectual analysis of the problem that is described in an emotionally detached manner as a third-party “it” rather than in terms of “you” or “me.” When possible, the therapist should give the couple’s theme, pattern of interaction, or mutual trap a name, and use this to define the prob   lem further as an “it.” By detaching themselves from the problem, partners have an opportunity to discuss their conflict without becoming emotionally “charged” by it. In this way, they can try to understand the conflict from a more neutral, objective stance. They engage in a kind of joint mindfulness about their problem. The therapist can also use metaphor and humor to distance the couple emotionally from the problem, as long as the humor does not in any way belittle either partner.  TolerAnCe BUilDing  Building acceptance may be most challenging when one partner experiences intense emotional pain as a result of the other partner’s behavior. In these circumstances, the IBCT therapist must help one partner build tolerance for the other partner’s “offending” behavior. By building tolerance, the partner ideally experiences a reduction in the pain caused by the behavior. To build tolerance, however, the partner must cease efforts to prevent, avoid, or escape the “offending” partner’s behavior. Instead, by exposing him/herself to the behavior without the associated struggle, the partner reduces his/her sensitivity to the behavior and, ideally, experiences the “offending” behavior as less painful.  One strategy for building tolerance is through “positive reemphasis,” or focusing on the positive aspects of a partner’s negative behavior. This strategy may be relatively easy when a negative behavior is in some way related to a quality the partner once found attractive about the other. For example, what she sees as her partner’s “uptightness” might be the “stability” that first attracted her. Alternatively, what he sees as her “flakiness” or “irresponsibility” might be the “freespiritedness” or “rebelliousness” that so attracted him in the beginning of their relationship. The positive reemphasis does not deny the negative qualities of the behavior in question, but it helps partners gain the perspective that any quality often has both good and bad features.  Another strategy for building tolerance for differences is to focus on the ways these differences complement each other, and to present these differences as part of what makes the relationship “work.” One partner’s stability might balance the other’s free-spiritedness. The therapist might describe for the partners the ways they would be “worse off” if those differences did not exist. The differences can become a positive aspect of the relationship, something in which the partners take pride rather than something they see as a destructive threat.   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  A third technique for building tolerance to a partner’s behavior is to prepare couples for inevitable slipups and lapses in behavior. This is especially important when the partners first begin to detect changes in their behavior and begin to feel positive about the progress they are making in therapy. It is during this time that the therapist should congratulate them for their hard work and progress, then warn them that “backsliding” is still a likely occurrence. The partners should be asked to imagine some of the circumstances in which a slipup is likely to occur, and to consider possible responses to the slipup in advance. Working out how they will face such lapses helps partners build their tolerance for them.  A related strategy for building tolerance is to instruct couples to fake negative behavior while they are in session or at home. Each partner is instructed to engage in a designated “bad behavior”—with the stipulation that he/she is to engage in this behavior only when he/she does not feel like doing so. The instructions are given to the couple, so that each partner knows that a bad behavior he/she is about to witness in session or may see in the future might actually be faked. Ideally this introduces an ambiguity about future negative behaviors that may mitigate the partner’s emotional response to them. More importantly, however, is that faking behavior gives both partners an opportunity to observe the effects of their negative behavior on the other. Specifically, because they are performing the “bad behavior” during a time when they do not feel like it, they make these observations when they are in a calm emotional state that allows them to be more sympathetic. When done in session, the therapist can help debrief the reactions to the “bad” behavior. When done at home, the faker is instructed to let the other partner know about the faked behavior soon after is it performed, so the situation does not escalate and the partners have an opportunity to “debrief” following their “experiment.”  One unavoidable source of pain for many partners is the feeling that the other fails to meet their needs in some important way. However, rarely is a partner able to fulfill all of the needs of the other. An important aspect of acceptance building is for partners to increase their own self-reliance, or self-care, in getting their needs met. They should be encouraged to find alternative ways to care for themselves when their partners are not able to do so. Partners may need to learn to seek support from friends and family in times of stress, or to find new ways to define and solve a problem on their own. As their self-reliance increases, reliance on part   ners to meet all of their emotional needs decreases. Ideally, this results in decreased sensitivity to their partners’ failure to meet their needs, thereby reducing conflict.  Traditional Strategies for Promoting Change  For some couples, change interventions may be indicated. Whether an IBCT therapist begins by implementing “acceptance” rather than “change” techniques depends primarily on the couple’s collaborative set and the partners’ specific treatment needs. In general, however, change techniques are most effective if implemented later in therapy, after acceptance work has been done. Often acceptance work is sufficient for bringing about change by itself: Once the collaborative set is restored through acceptance, the couple is able to bring about change by applying skills and strategies they already possess. In these situations, no deliberate change strategies need to be employed.  BeHAVior exCHAnge  The primary goal of behavior exchange (BE) is to increase the proportion of a couple’s daily positive behaviors and interactions. These techniques are instigative, in that they are intended to increase each partner’s performance of positive behaviors. Because BE requires a great deal of collaboration between partners, it is best implemented later in therapy, after acceptance work has been done. In addition to using BE to increase a couple’s positive interactions, the IBCT therapist should also consider BE a diagnostic tool for assessing possible areas in need of more acceptance work.  The three basic steps in BE are (1) to identify behaviors that each partner can do for the other that would increase relationship satisfaction, (2) to increase the frequency of those behaviors in the couple’s daily behavioral repertoire, and (3) to debrief the experience of providing and receiving positive behaviors. Partners are often given a homework assignment to generate a list of actions to do for the other to increase his/her satisfaction. Partners are instructed not to discuss these lists with each other to reduce the threat of criticism from the other and to keep each partner focused on his/her own assignment. In the next session, partners’ lists are reviewed and discussed. Their next assignment might be to perform one or more of the actions on the list during the next week, but they are not to tell the partner which action they are performing. In the sub    Couple Distress  sequent therapy session, partners review the success of their assignment and whether it had the desired effect on the other. The list can be modified to eliminate items that do not seem to have an effect, and in later sessions each partner can elicit feedback from the other to optimize the benefit of the actions on the list.  CoMMUniCATion TrAining  Although many couples are effective communicators without having had any formal “training,” poor communication may exacerbate or even cause many problems for distressed couples. In their attempts to get the other to change, partners may resort to maladaptive communication tactics such as coercion (crying, threatening, withholding affection). Although coercion may be effective in the short term, in that the other may eventually comply with the demand, the use of coercion is likely to escalate such that increasingly coercive tactics are required to achieve the desired effect. Also, coercion tends to beget coercion, so that coercion by one partner leads to coercion by the other. The inevitable result of such interactions is that partners become extremely polarized. The goal of communication and problem-solving training is to teach couples how to discuss their problems and to negotiate change without resorting to such destructive tactics. Ideally, these skills will be useful to couples even after therapy has ended.  As part of communication training, couples are taught both “speaker” and “listener” skills. To become more effective “speakers,” couples are instructed to (1) focus on the self by expressing “I statements”; (2) focus on expressing emotional reactions, such as “I feel disappointed . . . ” or “I feel angry . . . ”; and (3) focus on the partner’s specific behaviors that lead to emotional reactions, such as “I feel disappointed when you don’t call me when you are away.” To become more effective listeners, partners are instructed to paraphrase and reflect what the other has just said. Paraphrasing ensures that neither partner is being misread during the conversation, and it decreases the tendency to jump to conclusions about what is being said, in addition to generally slowing down the interaction.  Once partners have been given some instruction in these communication skills, they are directed to use these skills in practice conversations in the therapy session. Communicating with these guidelines may feel awkward during practice conversations, so therapists should try to adapt the guidelines to the couple’s  style of conversation and explain that following the guidelines will feel more natural with increased use. The therapist should be prepared to interrupt and make corrections if the partners deviate from the guidelines and engage in destructive communication. The therapist should provide the couple with feedback after each practice session, and the exercise should be adequately debriefed. When the therapist is confident that the partners have improved their in-session communication skills, he/she then encourages them to practice these skills as homework.  These basic communication skills often enable partners to share their feelings with one another and to discuss difficult issues that arise, such as when one partner gets upset with the other’s action. However, sometimes partners need to do more than share feelings or debrief an event. They need to solve an upcoming or recurrent problem, which is the purpose of problem-solving communication skills.  ProBleM‑solVing TrAining  Often what is more damaging in partners’ struggles around daily problems than the problems themselves is their destructive attempts to solve them. These attempts may begin with an accusation by one partner, which is met by defensiveness and anger from the other. Soon the argument may escalate to counterblaming and character assassination—and the problem itself gets lost in the conflict around it. In problem-solving training, couples are taught to have constructive problem-solving discussions while employing three sets of skills: problem definition skills, problem solution skills, and structuring skills.  First, partners are taught to define the problem as specifically as possible by specifying the behavior of concern and the circumstances surrounding it. Partners are encouraged to describe some of the emotions they experience as a result of the problem, in an effort to increase emotional acceptance. Finally, both partners are asked to define their respective roles in perpetuating the problem.  Once the problem has been defined, the couple can begin working toward problem solution. The first step in problem solution is brainstorming, in which the couple tries to come up with as many solutions to the problem as possible. The couple is told that any and all solutions may be considered, even impossible or silly ones. Immediate evaluative comments about the brainstormed solutions are discouraged, and discus    CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  sions of which options are actually viable are held off for later. Suggestions are written down so that they can be reviewed later. This exercise can be lighthearted and playful, often generating positive affect during the session. After the list has been generated, the couple goes through the list, eliminating those suggestions that are obviously impossible, silly, or unlikely to be effective. After the list is pruned, each item is considered for its potential to solve the problem. For each item, the couple considers the pros and cons, and the list is further modified, until a final list of options has been generated. The remaining items are used to formulate a possible solution to the problem. The agreement that is made about this solution is written down and sometimes signed by each partner. Finally, the couple is asked to consider any obstacles to executing the agreement, and to work out strategies for combating these. The partners are told to post the agreement in a place where they both can see it often, and a date is set to review their progress in solving the problem. During the next few sessions, the therapist checks in with them on their progress, and the agreement may be renegotiated, if necessary.  Finally, the partners learn structuring skills for their problem-solving discussions. They structure these discussions by setting aside a specific time and place to have them. They are also instructed not to discuss the problem at the “scene of the crime,” that is, to hold off discussing a problem until the designated time. Finally, the couple is instructed to focus on only one problem at a time. Throughout their problem-solving discussions, partners are asked to follow the basic guidelines of paraphrasing each other’s statements, and to avoid both negative inferences about each other’s intent, and negative verbal and nonverbal communication.  The couple’s first attempts at using these problemsolving skills should occur in session, under the supervision of the therapist. But after the partners have practiced and received feedback about their problemsolving skills, they are encouraged to apply these techniques at home to help them discuss and negotiate their problems.  In implementing these behavior change skills, the IBCT therapist tries to adapt them to the particular needs of the couple. For example, if a couple finds it helpful to go back and forth between definition and solution while discussing a problem, the therapist would eliminate the guideline specifying that the problem be carefully defined before solutions are considered. Or if a couple finds it distracting to generate silly or impossible solutions, the therapist would not encourage that.  The therapist also tries to adapt these strategies to the formulation for the couple. For example, if the closeness seeker tends to dominate discussions and make proposals for solving a problem about time together, while the independence seeker tends to withdraw from the discussion, the therapist might shift the focus on problem solving to the independence seeker.  Therapist and Client Variables Relevant to IBCT  As in any therapy, it is important that IBCT therapists maintain a nonjudgmental stance toward their clients. But in the context of IBCT, it is particularly important that the therapist practice acceptance with both partners in the same way that partners are asked to practice acceptance with one another. The IBCT therapist must validate the experiences and responses of both partners, and find ways to develop empathy and compassion for them no matter how challenging this may be.  In addition to practicing acceptance, it is important that IBCT therapists listen carefully to couples’ in-session interactions and look for the functions of their various problematic behaviors. IBCT therapists must be particularly attentive to subtle verbal and nonverbal cues that may be relevant to the formulation of couples’ problems. IBCT therapists must also be prepared to abandon any prescribed agenda to address the immediate needs of the couple at any given time. When destructive interactions occur in session, the IBCT therapist must not only be able to maintain a nonconfrontational demeanor but also stop the interaction effectively. Other important IBCT skills include using couples’ language and jargon when making interventions. Finally, it is not a goal of IBCT therapists to “cheerlead” for the success of the relationship; rather, they create an environment in which couples can experience the hope of finding a different way of being, and safely discuss and evaluate their own relationships.  The Efficacy of IBCT  Three studies attest to the efficacy of IBCT—two small pilot investigations and one major outcome study. Wimberly (1998) randomly assigned eight couples to a group format of IBCT and nine couples to a waiting-list control group, and found superior results for the IBCT couples. Jacobson, Christensen, Prince, Cordova, and Eldridge (2000) randomly assigned 21 couples to either IBCT or TBCT. At the end of treatment, 80% of   Couple Distress  couples who had received IBCT showed clinically significant improvements in relationship satisfaction compared to 64% of couples who received TBCT.  To date, the largest study of couple therapy in general and of IBCT in particular was reported by Christensen and colleagues (2004). In a two-site clinical trial conducted at UCLA and the University of Washington, Christensen and colleagues randomly assigned 134 seriously and chronically distressed couples to either IBCT or TBCT. Couples received a maximum of 26 sessions of couple therapy delivered by professional PhD-level therapists, who provided both IBCT and TBCT treatments and were carefully supervised in both. Adherence and competence data provided evidence that treatments were delivered as expected. At termination, 70% of IBCT couples and 61% of TBCT couples had clinically significant improvements in relationship satisfaction. Pre- to posttreatment effect sizes on marital satisfaction were d = 0.90 for IBCT and d =  0.71 for TBCT (see Christensen, Atkins, Baucom, & Yi, 2010) Although the termination results were not significantly different, the trajectory of change was different for both IBCT and TBCT couples. IBCT couples improved steadily in satisfaction throughout treatment, but TBCT couples improved more rapidly early on in treatment, with their gains flattening out more than those of IBCT couples later in treatment. Atkins and colleagues (2005) examined the predictors of response to treatment in the previous study. A variety of interpersonal variables, such as quality of communication, predicted the initial status of couples, but precious few variables predicted change from intake to termination. Couples who were married longer showed greater improvements in satisfaction, and exploratory analyses indicated that sexually dissatisfied couples showed slower initial gains but overall more consistent gains in IBCT than in TBCT.  Doss, Thum, Sevier, Atkins, and Christensen (2005) analyzed the mechanisms of change in this study of couple therapy. Early in therapy, changes in the frequency of targeted behaviors were associated with increases in satisfaction for both treatment conditions. However, later in therapy, changes in the acceptance of targeted behaviors were associated with increases in satisfaction for both treatment conditions. TBCT generated significantly greater increases than IBCT in targeted behaviors early in treatment. However, IBCT generated significantly greater increases in the acceptance of targeted behaviors throughout treatment. Thus, the study validated some of the putative mechanisms of change  and differences between the treatments in their impact on these mechanisms.  Subsequently, studies have examined these couples over follow-up: Christensen, Atkins, Yi, Baucom, and George (2006) looked at relationship satisfaction data in couples every 6 months over a 2-year follow-up; Baucom, Sevier, Eldridge, Doss, and Christensen (2011) looked at observational data at 2-year follow-up; and Christensen and colleagues (2010) examined relationship satisfaction and relationship status approximately every 6 months over a 5-year follow-up. Couples generally maintained their treatment gains in satisfaction over 2 years, and IBCT couples had significantly superior relationship satisfaction compared to TBCT couples at each time point during the first 2 years of follow-up. Although TBCT couples, having been trained explicitly in communication, showed greater improvements in observed communication at termination than IBCT couples (Sevier, Eldridge, Jones, Doss, & Christensen, 2008), IBCT couples showed greater maintenance of gains over 2 years (Baucom et al., 2011). Over the subsequent 3 years, couples lost some of their gains, and results from IBCT and TBCT converged. At 5-year follow-up, results for marital satisfaction relative to pretreatment revealed effect sizes of d =  1.03 for IBCT and d = 0.92 for TBCT; 50.0% of IBCT couples and 45.9% of TBCT couples showed clinically significant improvement. Relationship status, obtained on all 134 couples, revealed that 25.7% of IBCT couples and 27.9% of TBCT couples were separated or divorced. None of these findings at 5-year follow-up were statistically significant. These follow-up data compared favorably to other, long-term results of couple therapy. Baucom, Atkins, Simpson, and Christensen (2009) examined predictors of 2-year follow-up. As in the earlier prediction study, there were few predictors of outcome. Perhaps because of greater commitment, length of marriage predicted better outcomes at 2-year follow-up. Two objective predictor variables not used in the earlier prediction study were used here: a measure of arousal obtained from voice recordings during the observational data, and measures of influence tactics obtained through linguistic analysis of transcribed observational data. Using these measures, moderately distressed couples in which the wife had lower levels of arousal during problem-solving discussions and in which hard influence tactics (that give the partner little room to respond) were used less frequently tended to perform better in treatment than moderately distressed couples with higher levels of arousal or those who used   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  more hard influence tactics. Couples in IBCT tended to do better than their counterparts in TBCT when the wife had higher levels of arousal and when couples used soft influence tactics. Clearly these findings need to be replicated, However, it may be that the strategies of IBCT, which emphasize emotional expression, work better than TBCT strategies when there is high emotional arousal and when partners are more open to influence.   It is important to note that this sample, although designed to include seriously and chronically distressed couples, excluded couples in which one or both partners were experiencing bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, or serious suicidality; met criteria for current drug or alcohol abuse or dependence; met criteria for borderline, antisocial, or schizotypal personality disorders; or had a history of severe physical violence. The rationale for these exclusionary criteria is that for such individuals, a primary treatment other than couple therapy is likely to be indicated. However, the sample did not exclude couples in which one or both partners suffered from other psychological disorders, such as anxiety or depression. The rationale for including these couples is that their relationship can still be treated despite partners having such individual problems. Furthermore, some of the couples’ relationship problems may even be contributing to these individual problems. Thus, preliminary data suggest that IBCT can be successfully applied to many couples, including those in which a partner has certain other psychological disorders. For example, the preceding predictor studies found that indices of mental illness, including Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV diagnoses, were not related to improvements during couple therapy. Furthermore, Atkins, Dimidjian, Bedics, and Christensen (2009) found that depression in this sample improved as relationship satisfaction improved.  Ongoing research with this sample will examine in greater detail the process of couple therapy, potential mechanisms of change as they relate to 5-year outcome, and predictors of 5-year outcome. Apart from research on this particular sample, additional research is being done to expand the reach of IBCT. Brian Doss and Andrew Christensen have adapted IBCT for an online treatment and with support from the National Institute of Child Health and Development are testing the efficacy of this treatment. Also, IBCT has been chosen as one of the evidence-based treatments that the U.S. Veteran’s Administration (VA) is implementing nation   wide. VA therapists throughout the country are being given intensive training that involves several days of workshop followed by 6 months of weekly supervision as therapists see two or more couples using IBCT. A trained IBCT consultant listens to therapists’ recorded sessions; therapists must reach proficiency on a rating scale of IBCT criteria in order to complete the training program successfully. Program evaluation data are being collected as part of that work, and initial results suggest positive outcomes for IBCT with this VA population of couples. For additional information on IBCT, including access to online research articles and a national database of therapists trained in the approach, see ibct.psych.ucla.edu.  case stuDy  We use the case example of Anne and Mark2 to demonstrate the application of IBCT. We have included excerpts from the assessment and feedback sessions, in addition to treatment sessions selected for their effective use of IBCT acceptance-building interventions.3  Anne and Mark were a middle-aged couple married for 10 years at treatment onset. Anne had three children from her previous marriage.  Assessment  Session 1  After greetings and introductions, Anne and Mark’s therapist (Dr. S) began Session 1 by orienting them to the assessment process as follows:  “We’ll be working together for the next 25 sessions. You have already done the first step of the assessment process by completing all of those questionnaires. Your next three visits, including today, will be the second step of the assessment phase. Today I’m meeting with the two of you to get to know you, to hear about your relationship . . . as you share some of the history about meeting and dating, and bring us up until today. Then over the next two visits, I’d like to meet with the two of you individually. After that, at the fourth visit, I’ll give you feedback. That’s where I’ll put together all of the information from the questionnaires and our time together today, as well as our time individually, to paint a picture to   Couple Distress  present some understanding of what could be going on.”  Particularly if the couple expresses hesitation or ambivalence about being in therapy, the therapist should include the following:  “This assessment period is also your opportunity to get to know me and the kind of therapy we’ll be doing, so that you can get a feeling for whether this is going to be a good match for your needs right now.”  After checking in with Anne and Mark to see whether they understood this explanation, Dr. S elicited from them a brief description of their presenting problems:  “Before we get into your history, maybe you could give me a sense of some of the problems that have been going on that led you to decide, “Let’s get some help.”  After Mark and Anne took turns describing their sides of the problems in the relationship, Dr. S gathered the couple’s developmental history, using probing phrases such as the following:  “Let’s start at the beginning. Why don’t you tell me where and how the two of you met?”  “Mark, what was it about Anne that attracted you initially? What about you, Anne?”  “Anne, how could you tell that Mark was interested in you? . . . What kinds of things did he say? . . . How did you flirt with him? Which one of you made the first move?”  “When you decided to go from living together to getting married, how did that happen?”  In the course of their description, Anne and Mark had many opportunities to say complimentary things about each other. Mark described Anne as sensual, a quality that he found very attractive, and Anne described Mark as very nice and easygoing. Dr. S was very thorough and specific when eliciting details of Mark and Anne’s behavior during courtship, such as the fact that both partners agreed that their first kiss was very good.  Even during this part of the assessment phase, opportunities for building acceptance may present them   selves. At one point during Session 1, Anne made a soft disclosure when she discussed a time when she had initially rejected Mark (who had asked her to dance). Anne said that when Mark did not get angry with her after she rejected him, she felt safe with him because she could be herself and he would not get mad at her. She reported that this quality about Mark attracted her to him. Mark, who had initially reported feeling humiliated by Anne’s rejection, responded to Anne’s soft disclosure by saying, “I’m kind of surprised by that. I know that is an important feeling for her, but I didn’t realize she was feeling that back then.” Anne said that she had not realized she felt that way either, until describing the incident in the therapy session.  By the end of Session 1, Dr. S had a good understanding of Anne and Mark’s history together, the qualities that first attracted each to the other, and some idea of their problem areas. The next two individual sessions helped Dr. S “fill-in” any missing information that he needed for their formulation.  Sessions 2 and 3  Dr. S introduced these individual sessions with a brief orientation, followed by an introduction to the ongoing assessment of the couple’s problem areas:  “There are a lot of different topics that we’ll be covering today as we go along. I’d like to spend some time clarifying some of the problems both you and [Anne/Mark] have had. In our first meeting, you described some problems that you’ve perceived about [problem area]. Can you tell me what you meant by that?”  In addition to the problems that Anne and Mark raised in their conjoint session, Dr. S used the individual sessions to address problem areas that Anne and Mark had indicated on the Frequency and Acceptability of Partner Behavior Questionnaire:  “When I looked over your list of problem areas, the item of most concern to you was [problem area]. Can you describe that to me?”  Dr. S was very specific in his efforts to get Anne and Mark to describe their disagreements and arguments. To encourage Mark and Anne to be behaviorally specific in these descriptions, Dr. S used probing questions:   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  “Do the two of you have fights about [problem area]? What do those fights look like?”  “When you are both angry, what do you tend to do?”  “Describe for me your most recent argument. Describe for me the worst argument you’ve ever had. If I had a video camera there with you, what would I have seen?”  In addition to understanding their conflict patterns, Dr. S also asked how problems were addressed in their families growing up (“How did your own parents deal with conflict?”). This information may be useful in understanding the developmental history and emotional vulnerabilities that each partner brings into a conflict, and the patterns that each may risk repeating or is trying to avoid (e.g., physical violence).  When eliciting descriptions of Anne and Mark’s arguments, Dr. S also assessed whether the couple had ever engaged in physical violence. This assessment is a critical part of every couple therapy evaluation, and it is a major rationale for conducting these individual interviews. A simple direct question is useful here:  “Have your arguments ever led to pushing, shoving, or any type of physical violence?”  If either partner endorses this question, or has indicated violence on a questionnaire such as the CTS2, a more thorough assessment of violence should be conducted, and appropriate referrals should be made as indicated (Jacobson & Gottman, 1998). In this case example, violence was not an issue for Anne and Mark.4  Finally, the individual sessions provide a good opportunity for the therapist to assess each partner’s level of commitment to the relationship. This assessment also includes inquiry as to whether one or both partners are engaging in extramarital affairs. Affairs require special treatment in IBCT (Jacobson & Christensen, 1998), which is beyond the scope of this chapter. Fortunately, Anne and Mark’s relationship was not troubled by affairs. With Anne and Mark individually, Dr. S asked:  “On a scale of 1 to 10, how would you rate your level of commitment to [Mark/Anne]?”  By the end of Anne’s and Mark’s respective assessment sessions, Dr. S had sufficient information about their problem areas, patterns of conflict (including their  lack of a history of violence), relevant family history, and level of commitment to come up with their formulation and proceed with their feedback session.  Feedback and Formulation  Session 4  Dr. S began the feedback session by orienting Anne and Mark about what to expect, and also eliciting their participation in giving him feedback about his formulation and description of their problem areas:  “During this session, I’d like to share with you some feedback, as I mentioned in our first session together. I’ve spent some time looking over your questionnaires, and we’ve spent some time talking, which has been very helpful in helping me get a better sense of the two of you. As I go along, I’d really like your input, your reactions, because that’s an important part of our work together—with you both responding, as opposed to me directing, interjecting any thoughts you have, as well as adding any information that fits or telling me when information doesn’t fit.”  Dr. S began giving Anne and Mark feedback by ex   plaining the information gathered from questionnaires  they completed:  “The measures we gave you were designed to give us a sense of where you are as a couple, in terms of the range of couples, from the very happily married to those with “everyday,” normal distress, to the other end of the spectrum—couples who are very similar to ones who have divorced. Both of you are in the area of couples who are experiencing distress, couples who would like things to be better. You are both distressed, although Anne reported higher levels of distress.”  Dr. S moved on to summarize Anne’s and Mark’s  levels of commitment, which he characterizes as a  strength for their work on therapy:  “With regard to commitment, both of you are committed to the relationship, which is very important to both of you. And that is very important in couple work—that in spite of everything that has gone on, there is still the commitment. That is very telling— you’ve both shown and expressed that.”   Couple Distress 723  Dr. S then moved on to summarize the content of Anne and Mark’s problem areas. Dr. S had distilled their questionnaire data and their in-session descriptions to the following three basic problem areas:  “So let’s talk about the areas of your relationship that are troubling. One area is finances; that tends to be an area of dispute. For you, Anne, feeling resentful sometimes, feeling the burden of the responsibility, and for you, Mark, feeling guilty about how things are financially. This area really brings out lots of different feelings—feelings of resentment, feelings of guilt, feelings of burden—and rather than feelings of closeness and togetherness, feelings of control. Does that sound accurate? Are there any other aspects of finances that the two of you can think of?  “The other area I saw was with regard to Anne’s children. You both feel very differently about the subject of Anne’s children: Anne, you feel like Mark is not involved with your children, and Mark, you feel as though you have not been invited. For you, Mark, the experience of being rejected [by the children] is Anne’s fault. This is an area that brings out very strong feelings for both of you, whether it gets expressed directly or not. You may not talk about it, but I definitely got the sense that this is a real pressure cooker for both of you. This is an area that I imagine will come up in different ways, especially with the holidays coming up.  “The third area I saw concerns responsiveness. ‘How responsive are you to me?’ Whether you are being physical (‘You’re not responsive enough’ or ‘You’re too responsive’), listening (‘Are you listening to me?’), touching, or asking a question, your actions can carry a message of what you want to express, or a feeling that you are having. So part of what we will work on is expressing those feelings you are having. Those may be a surprise for each of you.”  Throughout each of his descriptions, Dr. S checked in with Anne and Mark for their feedback about each problem area, and the ways that they might add to his description.  Even during this part of the feedback session, an opportunity for acceptance work presented itself. When Mark discussed his relationship with Anne’s children, he was initially making only “hard” disclosures, by describing her children as rude, and only able to talk about themselves. Because Mark made such critical statements about Anne’s children, Dr. S elicited from  Mark some softer disclosures about his emotions with regard to Anne’s children:  Dr. S: Besides them being rude, what is the feeling you are left with when [Anne’s children] don’t talk to you?  mark: The feeling I’m left with is being ignored.  Dr. s: Besides being ignored, how did it feel?  mark: Like I don’t matter, like I am only there to serve them.  Dr. s: Like you are not a part of the family.  mark: Yeah. I think I’ve just resigned myself to hoping that they’ll show their love for their mother.  Dr. s: So it upsets you that they don’t take an interest in their mother? So it isn’t just about you, you have some feelings about how Anne’s sons interact with her?  mark: Yeah, yeah, I do.  Dr. s: And that upsets you?  mark: Yeah, it does. I feel protective. I’d like them to show more appreciation to her. But then, I’d like myself to show more appreciation to her. I don’t think I show enough appreciation to her. Maybe they’re related . . . it’s a reminder of the things I’m not doing well.  By moving Mark from criticizing Anne’s children to  making softer statements about his feelings, Dr. S gave  Mark an unexpected opportunity to make important  realizations about his own behavior—his emotional  sensitivity. After reviewing their problem areas, Dr. S proceed   ed to describe the two themes he had observed from his  assessment of Anne and Mark:  “It seems to me from what you’ve both described in your individual sessions, your questionnaires, and even today, there are two themes that come up for you. When I say ‘theme,’ it’s like in our sessions; whatever the topic is for the day, there’s usually a theme. The theme is something I’ll bring up from time to time. Again, it’s clearly something that we’ll work on together. It may take a different form, so I want to share it with you to make sure that it’s on the mark, OK?  “I think the first theme is that you both have feelings of being unloved and unappreciated. You have   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  an idea of what it means to be loved. You have an idea of what it means to be appreciated. But your definitions are different. And because of those different definitions, because of your different experiences, if something does happen, it leaves you feeling unappreciated and unloved. Within the arguments about finances or children, there is something about that— about feeling unappreciated. How does that sound to you?  “The second theme is that you both have your insecurities. You both have feelings of insecurity, for whatever reason. Some of the arguments, the differences, the conflicts, the big fights, come from that also. That feeling comes up and can create the whole battle. A concrete example is that you, Anne, described feeling insecure about yourself in relation to some of your family members. That affects how you feel about yourself in comparison to other women. Mark, you described feeling insecure about the fact that Anne has not annulled her previous marriage. That may affect how confident you feel in comparison to other men. Again, these feelings of insecurity, feeling not loved, unappreciated—these are the themes.”  After Dr. S described each theme—some of the related differences, emotional sensitivities, and external stressors—and received feedback from Anne and Mark about these themes, he moved on to discuss their pattern of communication or polarization and the resultant mutual trap:  “Now, what is this thing we call the ‘trap’ that you both get into? You each have different ways of responding to feeling unloved and insecure. The sense that I get is that, Mark, when you start to feel those things, you use distance. The sense I get from you, Anne, is that you become critical. Put the two of you together, and you have a cycle: The feelings come up, Mark gets distant, and Anne gets critical. Mark feels criticism, he gets distant. Anne experiences the distance, she gets critical. Distance, criticism, criticism, distance. That’s what we call the trap. It may be that you take turns being critical and distant, and that each response makes the other person feel even more insecure.”  After reviewing the polarization process and mutual  trap, Dr. S proceeded to explain to Anne and Mark  what to expect from the upcoming therapy sessions:  “So this is what we’re going to do in the upcoming weeks, the kinds of things we’ve talked about today. We’ll talk about whatever is going on for the two of you on a given day. It isn’t going to be structured in terms of things we have to do each day—it’s up to you, whatever you bring in.  “What I hope to do is create in here a place of comfort, enough that you can both take risks in opening up, in sharing—sharing some of your reactions, your questions, your experiences. There is a desire for closeness here that is going to take some sharing and some risk taking. Now, there’s no guarantee about how the other person is going to react. It may not always be pleasant. But on the other hand, that’s the price we have to pay to get there, to open up. You can do some more thinking about this and from week to week we can reformulate, and we’ll keep getting a clearer, better picture.”  Having set the stage with the formulation, including the themes, the DEEP analysis, and mutual trap, Dr. S is prepared to begin work on building acceptance.  