Social Anxiety Disorder  nal response. The therapist reassures the client that a challenging, but not overwhelming, situation will be used for the first exposure. More experienced therapists often discuss a few possibilities for the first exposure during this session. Therapists new to this treatment approach often discuss details of the exposure with the client the following week, after the therapist has had supervision.  Segment 3: Exposures  Exposures should begin as early as Session 5 but no later than Session 8, depending on the rate at which the earlier material was covered. Chapter 7 from the client workbook reviews the rationale for exposures and introduces the concept of setting achievable behavioral goals. The content of Chapter 7 is briefly touched upon; many of these concepts have been covered earlier (e.g., why exposures are important), and the new material is demonstrated during the exposure itself. Similarly, therapists rarely devote an entire session to discussing Chapter 8 (Ongoing Exposures) or the specific topic chapters (Chapter 9, Interaction Fears; Chapter 10, Observational Fears; Chapter 11, Public Speaking Fears) assigned during this segment. Rather, the content is only briefly addressed during the homework review and an in-session exposure is conducted. During this phase of treatment, therapists strive to complete an exposure almost every session. To follow protocol in our research studies, a minimum of four in-session exposures must be completed. More commonly, at least six in-session exposures are completed, and the more the better. Therefore, although the protocol allows the therapist the freedom to a use a couple of sessions during this segment to do cognitive restructuring alone or to review a topic chapter in detail, our belief is that the time is best devoted to repeated in-session exposures integrating cognitive restructuring.  All exposure sessions follow the same basic format (see Table 3.1). The session begins with a homework review and ends with a homework assignment. The homework assignment typically comprises in vivo exposure tasks and associated cognitive restructuring that logically build upon the in-session exposure. The first in-session exposure typically includes a role play with the therapist of a situation that the client assigned a SUDS rating of at least 50. The rule of thumb is that clients should perceive exposures as challenging but not overwhelming or beyond their ability to use cognitive coping skills. Therapists make exposures as realistic  table 3.1. outline of exposure sessions  1. Review homework from previous week. 2. Complete in-session exposure. a. Exposure preprocessing •• Briefly negotiate details of exposure •• Elicit automatic thoughts •• Client rates belief in automatic thoughts •• Client labels thinking errors in automatic thoughts •• Client disputes one or two automatic thoughts •• Client develops rational response(s) and rates belief in rational response(s) •• Client sets nonperfectionistic, behavioral goals  b. Conduct role play for approximately 10 minutes •• Request SUDS and the rational response every minute •• Client uses disputing questions and rational responses as automatic thoughts occur •• Track client’s progress on behavioral goals  c. Exposure post-processing •• Review whether goals were attained •• Review occurrence of automatic thoughts •• Review use of rational response(s) •• Discuss any unexpected or new automatic thoughts •• Client, therapist, and role players react to client’s performance •• Graph and interpret SUDS ratings pattern •• Examine evidence in relation to automatic thoughts  and rational response(s) •• Client re-rates belief in automatic thoughts and rational response(s) •• Client summarizes what was learned from the exposure experience  3. Assignment of homework a. Related in vivo exposures with associated cognitive restructuring b. Other assignments as appropriate as possible by rearranging furniture, using props, and instructing role-play partners (i.e., therapist assistants brought into session to assist with exposures) to behave in particular ways. A bit of effort in making the situation more realistic may mean the difference between an exposure that elicits significant anxiety and one that is too artificial to be relevant. Commonly used props include food or drink for individuals with fears of eating, drinking, or serving food in front of others, and client-prepared notes for presentations. Careful attention should be paid to aspects that make the situation more or less anxiety-provoking. For example, a client who fears eating in front of others may be more anxious   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  when eating something that is easy to spill (e.g., soup) than when eating finger foods.  The essence of the treatment is the coordination between the cognitive restructuring work and the exposure (see Table 3.1). The therapist begins the exposure preprocessing by briefly describing an exposure situation. The client may suggest modifications or alternatives. However, the therapist needs to balance approaching the exposure task collaboratively with being highly vigilant for overly detailed discussions that largely serve to avoid getting started with the exposure. The therapist then elicits the client’s automatic thoughts regarding the chosen situation and records the thoughts on the easel. The therapist picks one or two automatic thoughts to dispute rather than attempting to help the client to dispute all automatic thoughts. The client rates his/her belief in the automatic thought and identifies the thinking errors it contains. To the extent possible, the client takes the lead in challenging the thoughts with disputing questions and developing a rational response. The therapist only assists as needed. The rational response is written on a fresh sheet of paper, so that the client may refer to it during the exposure, without being distracted by automatic thoughts listed on the same page.  Next, behavioral goals for the exposure are set. Without guidance, clients with social anxiety disorder tend to set unrealistic, perfectionistic goals (e.g., “I won’t get anxious” or “I will never stumble over my words”), or goals that are based on the reactions of other people and not under their control (e.g., to make a good impression). The therapist helps the client to develop two or three measureable and observable goals for the situation (e.g., asking at least three questions to get to know the person better, stating an opinion, talking about three different points during a speech). These goals are recorded below the rational response, so that the client can refer to them during the exposure.  During the exposure, the therapists requests SUDS ratings at 1-minute intervals and whenever anxiety appears to increase or decrease. At each SUDS prompt, the client also reads his/her rational response aloud. Clients quickly adjust to this disruption, particularly if the role player(s) help to reorient them with a verbal cue (e.g., “You were talking about .. . ”). The exposure should continue until anxiety has begun to decrease or plateau and the goals have been met, typically around 10 minutes. The therapist should be the one to end the exposure to help the client overcome any tendencies to escape the situation when it becomes difficult.  The postprocessing phase of the exposure includes a review of goal attainment, with the therapist noting the occurrence of automatic thoughts that were the focus of cognitive restructuring before the exposure, a discussion of the usefulness of the rational response, and identification of any unexpected automatic thoughts that should be addressed in the future. Rather than asking the client about how the role play went from his/ her perspective, the therapist asks the whether the client’s agreed-upon goals were accomplished, providing no opening for the client to revert to a discussion about failure to attain other goals, such as not becoming anxious. The therapist also shares his/her opinion on goal attainment, responding to concerns raised by the client and not allowing the client to disqualify the positive. In later exposures, outside role players may also be asked to share their reactions and answer any questions the client has about how the exposure went. Feedback from the therapist and role players should emphasize information that counters the client’s negative beliefs. For example, the client might believe that he blushes bright red, is boring, appears inadequate to others, and cannot carry on a 10-minute conversation. Perhaps, objectively, the client did blush at the beginning of the exposure, only responded to questions from the role player, and reported very high SUDS for the whole 10 minutes (90 or higher). However, the client met his goals of sharing something about himself and staying in the exposure until the therapist said to stop. In this situation, the therapist would point out how the client met his goals and how many of the client’s feared consequences (e.g., being too anxious to carry on a conversation) did not occur. Additionally, only in rare cases do clients look as anxious as they think they do, so it is often quite appropriate to acknowledge that the client showed some symptoms of anxiety, but that the anxiety was not as noticeable as the client’s SUDS ratings might suggest, the anxiety did not detract from enjoyment of the conversation, and so forth. Therapists who deny seeing any anxiety in a client who was obviously anxious risk damaging their credibility. Especially early in treatment, therapists should think seriously before providing a laundry list of client behaviors that detracted from the quality of the conversation (e.g., the client only responded to questions and did not ask any, the client could have engaged in more eye contact). Many clients discount the positive aspects of the exposure and focus only on the negative feedback. Therefore, it is better to set this information aside temporarily and to make sure that these behaviors are included as goals for the   Social Anxiety Disorder  next role play, particularly if the client does not spontaneously suggest one of these problematic behaviors as a goal. For clients who are self-critical during the post-processing for an objectively poor behavior such as never asking any questions, the most common strategy is to share with the client the conceptualization of the problematic behavior as an avoidance response to significant anxiety (rather than as evidence of poor social skills or some other inadequacy within the client). Working from this conceptualization, the therapist may then inquire about automatic thoughts leading to the problematic behavior. The client’s responses are often quite illuminating (e.g., “I might inadvertently ask a question about a sensitive subject that will offend the other person”). The therapist would then plan with the client to work on these automatic thoughts and approach the feared social behavior by including it as a goal in a future exposure.  Next, the pattern of SUDS ratings is quickly graphed for the client. Different SUDS patterns may be used to make different points. The most common pattern is for the initial SUDS ratings to be rather high, then to decline over time. In these cases, the therapist can point out that it seems like getting started is the hardest part, and that if the client hangs in there, things seem to get easier. If this pattern holds across future exposures, it can lead to a new rational response (e.g., “It gets easier”; “The hardest part is getting started”). For clients with high SUDS ratings throughout the entire exposure who still meet their goals, the therapist can point out that a person may simultaneously be quite anxious and still do what he/she needs to do in a given social situation (e.g., “I can be anxious and still share my opinion” might be a future rational response). The therapist also inquires about any automatic thoughts that may have interfered with habituation, so that these might be addressed prior to the next exposure. Another common pattern is decreasing or steady SUDS ratings that spike to a high level when the client perceives a difficulty arising during the exposure. Sometimes the therapist is able to observe what led to the spike in anxiety (e.g., a pause in the conversation). At other times, it may not be as obvious, and the client needs to explain what happened (e.g., there was no pause, but the client had an automatic thought that the discussion of the current topic had reached its limits and feared that he/she would be unable to continue the conversation). Such discussions may lead to new goals (e.g., “Allow yourself to pause twice during the conversation, so you learn that you can recover from pauses and not to fear them”) and targets  for cognitive restructuring (i.e., the belief that pauses reflect social incompetence might be challenged and lead to a rational response, such as “Pauses are a normal part of conversations” or “I am only 50% responsible for ending a pause”). Clients are then asked to rerate their degree of belief in their automatic thoughts and rational responses, based specifically on their experience of the in-session exposure. Finally, the client is asked what he/she has learned from the exposure that can be applied to life outside of the clinic.  Homework assignments are a very important part of treatment in this segment because the client is asked to enter situations similar to those that have been targeted during in-session exposures. To assist them in engaging in cognitive restructuring prior to the actual conduct of the homework exposure, clients are provided copies of the Be Your Own Cognitive Therapist (BYOCT) worksheet, which is also discussed in session and exemplified in the client workbook. This form leads clients through each of the steps of cognitive restructuring described earlier and is often used for in-session exposures, as well as those assigned for homework. After the homework exposure is completed, the second portion of the BYOCT assists clients in completing a cognitive debriefing and consolidating the learning that has occurred during and after the homework experience.  Segment 4: Advanced Cognitive Restructuring  After three or four exposure sessions, the therapist and client should begin to notice common themes in the client’s automatic thoughts. This is an indication that it will soon be time to move on to advanced cognitive restructuring (Chapter 12 of the client workbook). This segment assists the client in moving beyond situationspecific automatic thoughts by applying the downward arrow technique (see J. S. Beck, 1995) to thoughts that have frequently recurred over the course of treatment. To accomplish this task efficiently, client and therapist review all previous written homework assignments that involved the recording of automatic thoughts, as well as the thoughts recorded in advance of in-session exposures and work through the Peeling Your Onion worksheet from the client workbook, which provides a systematic approach to questioning automatic thoughts and further probing the responses to these questions, until the client’s core belief(s) have been identified.  The beginning of advanced cognitive restructuring does not signal the end to exposures. Rather, the therapist and client create in-session and in vivo exposures   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  to challenge core beliefs. For instance, if a client has a core belief along the lines of “I need to be perfect to be accepted by others,” the client might be engaged in exposures that involve making mistakes or social missteps (e.g., spilling a drink, turning in a report with an error) and noticing whether others continue to be accepting. Core beliefs may be challenged in other ways as well. For instance, in addition to exposures, the client may be asked to notice instances in which others’ mistakes actually make them easy to identify with or more endearing. One session is typically devoted completely to helping the client utilize the downward arrow technique and challenge core beliefs. Additional sessions not only continue to explore core beliefs but also include an in-session exposure.  Segment 5: Termination  As treatment approaches Session 16, the issue of termination and/or reevaluation of the treatment contract will have been raised informally by the therapist several times. After Session 15, Chapter 13 in the client workbook is assigned. Session 16 formally focuses on assessment of progress, relapse prevention, and the issue of termination. The therapist and client go over a worksheet in which the client reports things that he/she has learned during treatment (e.g., how to identify and challenge automatic thoughts, the importance of avoiding avoidance). The therapist asks the client to provide current ratings for all items from the fear and avoidance hierarchy developed earlier in treatment; a discussion follows regarding progress that has been made and where further work is needed. When the therapist and client mutually agree that termination is in order, risk factors for relapse are discussed (e.g., social pressure from others, new situations that arise as improvement continues). Plans to deal with signs of relapse are also made (e.g., the client can review chapters in the client workbook or call the therapist). Mixed emotions (e.g., pride, sadness over the termination of the therapeutic relationship) associated with termination are also processed.   In our clinic, the same measures administered at pretreatment are repeated after Session 16. The client is given feedback on these assessments, with data presented in the context of the initial pretreatment assessment results. At the end of 16 sessions, many clients still experience problematic social anxiety in a few domains. As we stated in the first session, elimination of social anxiety is not the criterion for termination. Instead, if  the client has stopped avoiding key social situations, has experienced a meaningful reduction of anxiety in a few areas, and believes that he/she can use the skills gained in therapy to continue to work independently, then the client is ready to stop treatment. Most individuals who respond to treatment in this way are likely to continue to make progress after termination. Follow-up appointments are recommended to monitor the client’s clinical status (e.g., 1- and 6-months posttreatment).  For some individuals, treatment gains will be evident, but the anxiety and avoidance continue to be too severe and pervasive for the client to continue on alone. This phenomenon is most common among clients with severe social anxiety at treatment onset, typically, clients with APD or those who fear many social situations. Clients with significant comorbidities may also take longer to make sufficient treatment gains. In such cases, continued treatment is recommended. The new treatment contract, as with the original one, should be for 16 sessions or less, at which point another assessment should occur. The treatment plan typically consists of more cognitive restructuring and exposures, although new domains are often introduced (e.g., moving from working on friendships to dating relationships).  case stuDy  To illustrate better how individual CBT for social anxiety disorder is implemented, a case example is presented. First, background and pretreatment assessment data are given, followed by a description of the client’s progress through 16 weeks of treatment and her status 1-year and 5-years posttreatment. Note that treatment was conducted in accordance with the first edition of the client workbook (Hope, Heimberg, Juster, & Turk, 2000) and therapist guide (Hope, Heimberg, & Turk, 2006), resulting in some differences in procedure from the updated version of the protocol presented earlier. We made this decision so that we could present a case example including an examination of longer-term follow-up information.  Josie, age 22, presented to treatment with significant anxiety concerning both social interaction and performance situations. She was a full-time student studying music at a local college and living with a roommate. She was not employed despite significant financial need. Josie described herself as shy and having trouble connecting with others. She socialized with her roommate and her boyfriend, but she often turned down op    Social Anxiety Disorder  portunities to socialize with their friends because of anxiety. Josie reported that she had no close friends of her own and that her anxiety kept her from forming close friendships, especially with women her age. Josie’s social anxiety had also resulted in occupational and academic impairment. For example, although Josie had gone on numerous job interviews and had even been offered positions, she was currently unemployed because she had difficulty accepting job offers due to her fears that she would get fired. She reported great anxiety in her classes and did not participate unless directly asked a question, even if participation was a significant part of her grade. She often declined to enroll in classes that interested her because of participation requirements. In addition, Josie was required to do recitals and in-class critiques of her music compositions several times a semester. Although she never avoided any of these events, she worried about them for weeks in advance and suffered through them with great anxiety. Josie feared that her social anxiety would cause her even greater difficulty after graduation, when she would need to go on job interviews and auditions.  Pretreatment Assessment  Josie came to the clinic seeking help for social anxiety, but she also had difficulties with general worry and tension, depression, and panic attacks. She was administered the ADIS-IV-L and a series of self-report measures. Based on this information, Josie was assigned a diagnosis of social anxiety disorder, with an ADIS-IV- L CSR of 5, which indicates moderate to severe symptoms. She received additional diagnoses of generalized  anxiety disorder, recurrent major depressive disorder of moderate severity, posttraumatic stress disorder related to a recent automobile accident, and panic disorder with agoraphobia.  With regard to measures of social anxiety, Josie’s scores indicated significant fear in both social interaction and performance/observation situations (see Table 3.2). Heimberg and colleagues (1992) suggested cutoff scores of 34 for the full 20-item version of the SIAS (interaction fears) and 24 for the SPS (performance/ observation fears) to differentiate between individuals with and without social anxiety disorder. Josie’s scores on both measures exceeded these cutoffs. Similarly, on the LSAS, Josie reported fear and avoidance of both social interaction and performance situations, and her total score was well above the empirically derived cutoff score for the presence of social anxiety disorder (Mennin et al., 2002).  Ideally, treatment should result in symptom reduction and improved functionality, as well as promote the client’s overall sense of well-being and life satisfaction. Safren, Heimberg, Brown, and Holle (1997) reported a mean score of 0.8 on the Quality of Life Inventory for clients with social anxiety disorder, which is significantly lower than the mean score of the nonclinical adult sample reported by Frisch (1994; M = 2.6, SD = 1.3). Josie’s score indicated that her degree of life satisfaction was very low but similar to that of others with social anxiety disorder.  The disruption in functioning caused by social anxiety and the associated poor quality of life frequently results in dysphoria. Josie’s score on the BDI-II indicated a level of depression more severe than is typically  table 3.2. self-report and Clinician-administered assessments at Pretreatment and 1-year and 5-year follow-Ups  Measure Pretreatment 1-year follow-up 5-year follow-up Self-report Brief Fear of Negative Evaluation Scale 49 23 29 Social Interaction Anxiety Scale 48 22 23 Social Phobia Scale 38 12 24 Beck Depression Inventory–II 25 8 8 Quality of Life Inventory –0.9 1.1 –0.6 Clinician-rated ADIS-IV-L Clinician Severity Rating 5 3 3 Liebowitz Social Anxiety Scale—Total 48 37 31  Note. ADIS-IV-L, Anxiety Disorders Interview Schedule for DSM-IV—Lifetime Version.   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  seen among individuals in our treatment program (Elting, Hope, & Heimberg, 1997). Josie did not endorse having any thoughts of suicide. Based on clinical interview, we determined that Josie’s current low mood was related to recurrent major depression. This most recent depressive episode had begun approximately 6 months prior to her assessment and was associated with negative social experiences while studying abroad. Josie reported that her depressed mood was slightly less distressing and impairing than her social anxiety. Thus, the depression was judged to be secondary to her social anxiety and unlikely to have an adverse impact on her treatment. Similarly, we determined that her other diagnoses, although clinically significant, did not rise to a level of concern that might interfere with or derail the treatment of her social anxiety disorder.  Treatment  Psychoeducational Segment  sessions 1–2  The first four sessions were devoted to laying the groundwork for treatment, establishing rapport, educating Josie about the cognitive-behavioral model of social anxiety disorder, and outlining her goals for treatment.  In the first two meetings, Josie was very soft-spoken, made little eye contact, and expressed feelings of hopelessness about her ability to get better. She asked many questions about how other clients had fared with the treatment program, and the therapist stressed that outcome is often dependent on the client’s ability to put in consistent effort throughout treatment. The therapist used some of Josie’s own experiences to parallel the challenges and rewards she might face in treatment, such as asking Josie how long she had been playing piano and whether she had noticed any changes over that time. Josie reported that when she started, the process was very effortful, challenging, and even disheartening, but that with ongoing practice and education, she had reached a point where it was enjoyable and easy for her. With this, Josie appeared to be very encouraged about her prognosis, reporting that she was eager to begin treatment and motivated to work very hard. The majority of the first session was spent establishing rapport and introducing psychoeducational material about social anxiety and the components of treatment. To encourage Josie to speak about her own experiences with social anxiety, the therapist employed open-ended questions, asked if the examples sounded familiar to  Josie, and requested that she describe some situations in which her anxiety was better or worse than others. For example, although Josie felt she had a significant amount of anxiety when performing in front of an audience, she felt that this anxiety was typical for most people in that situation. However, her anxiety while interacting with others at receptions before and after performances was severe, and she often avoided these situations by arriving at recitals at the last minute and leaving as soon as she finished. By participating in the session this way, Josie demonstrated an understanding of the important concept that social anxiety exists on a continuum.  session 3  In the third session, the development of Josie’s social anxiety and how it was maintained over the years was explored. After asking her mother, Josie learned that she was very shy even as a young child, and that her mother often had to push her to participate in social activities with other children. Josie also reported that her mother tended to keep to herself and limit interactions with others, which Josie may have modeled from a young age. In addition, Josie reported struggling with feelings of falling short from a young age. For example, she reported that she never qualified for elite youth soccer teams, although she was a skilled athlete, and never received more than third place or honorable mention in recitals and competitions. The therapist discussed with Josie how such experiences may have shaped her beliefs that she was not good enough and also highlighted how Josie’s tendency to view the negative aspects of situations (e.g., not getting first place) often led her to disqualify other successes (e.g., being among the top five performers in a large competition).  sessions 4–5  In the early part of the fourth session, the therapist and Josie completed a discussion from Session 3 on the role that perfectionistic standards and low self-efficacy played in Josie’s experience of social anxiety. The remainder of this session and the next were spent developing and refining Josie’s fear and avoidance hierarchy (see Table 3.3). Josie reported that interacting with people in person was easier than talking over the phone because face-to-face contact allowed her to interpret body language and facial expressions to determine how the interaction was going for the other person. In addi    Social Anxiety Disorder  table 3.3. fear and avoidance Hierarchy with Pretreatment, Posttreatment, and 1-year and 5-year follow-Up ratings  Situation Pretreatment Posttreatment 1-year follow-up 5-year follow-up 1 Riding public transportation alone Fear Avoidance 100 100 20 20 9 6 90 85 2 3 Staying after recitals to socialize Fear Avoidance Going to recitals Fear Avoidance 95 95 90 70 7 8 7 8 3 0 3 0 55 60 45 15 4 Making phone calls to people I used to be close with Fear Avoidance 75 60 5 5 3 1 65 60 5 Class critiques and talking about my compositions in class Fear Avoidance 65 50 6 1 1 0 60 20 6 Talking with professors and authority figures I respect Fear Avoidance 65 50 4 2 5 5 75 60 7 Making/maintaining conversations with friends and people I respect Fear Avoidance 60 60 3 1 4 2 25 10 8 Making the first phone call Fear Avoidance 55 5 2 0 4 1 65 35 9 Hanging out with boyfriend’s friends’ girlfriends Fear Avoidance 50 85 6 2 3 0 40 15 10 Talking with old friends I’ve lost touch with Fear Avoidance 40 70 7 4 4 2 30 45   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  tion, Josie felt that it was easier to interact with males than with females, who she believed were more critical. Josie was also more anxious around individuals she respected and admired than she was with strangers.  Cognitive Restructuring Training Segment  session 6  In this session, Josie was introduced to cognitive restructuring. Though she demonstrated an understanding of the importance of thoughts in producing feelings of anxiety, Josie reported difficulty identifying her own automatic thoughts. Specifically, she tended to identify questions that passed through her mind in anticipation of or during anxiety-provoking situations. For example, when recalling a recent anxiety-provoking situation in which she had to present her work in front of a class, Josie identified the thought, “What will other people think of me?” The therapist helped Josie to restate this question as a statement of what she feared, asking Josie to let her “anxious self” answer the question. She was able to come up with automatic thoughts, such as “Other people will think I’m a moron” and “Other people will think I am unprepared for this presentation.” She identified other thoughts, such as “I am wasting their time,” “They will get bored with me,” and “My professor will be disappointed that I didn’t do a better job.” Many of the automatic thoughts appeared to be related to a general sense of letting others down. The therapist encouraged Josie that, with continued practice, she would get better at recognizing automatic thoughts.  session 7  In this session, Josie again struggled to identify automatic thoughts, but with prompting, she was increasingly able to do so. She also had some difficulty identifying the thinking errors contained in her automatic thoughts, often insisting that all the thoughts qualified as unhelpful and unproductive thoughts—that is, true but unhelpful. The therapist asked Josie some disputing questions to illustrate that the thoughts were not true or totally accurate, and that other thinking errors could apply. By the end of session, Josie had a better handle on thinking errors and was able to start using some disputing questions successfully. Josie reported that the cognitive restructuring work was much more challenging than she expected, but that she was eager to put the work into action during exposures.  session 8  The therapist decided to take an additional session to continue work on cognitive restructuring before moving onto exposures, so that Josie was maximally prepared. Cognitive restructuring practice was focused on a recent situation in which Josie turned down tickets, offered by a professor at school, to a show by her favorite artist. Josie was much better able to identify her automatic thoughts related to this situation, which included the following:  1. “Other students will be mad at me if I take the tickets.” 2. “I will be too scared to go and would waste the tickets.” 3. “I will not be able to take public transportation to get there.” 4. “If I do take public transportation, I will get lost and miss the show.” 5. “Other students want the tickets more than I do.” Josie was able to identify thinking errors such as fortune-telling, mind reading, and catastrophizing, among others. However, there was evidence that Josie was critical of herself and her occasional difficulty grasping the concepts of cognitive restructuring. At first, Josie struggled with labeling the thinking errors in her automatic thoughts and searching for the right rational response. The therapist suggested to Josie that there was no right or wrong way to challenge automatic thoughts or to develop a rational response, but Josie continued to evaluate her suggestions as not good enough. Furthermore, Josie grew extremely frustrated and pessimistic when she used disputing questions to challenge her automatic thoughts. Specifically, she had trouble challenging the thought that getting lost on the subway would have to lead to missing the show entirely. She reported that she doubted her own ability to read the subway map or ask for help and predicted that she would get so lost that she would either turn around and go home or arrive at the show after it had already started. Josie’s anxiety about entering the performance late would then, she predicted, lead her to go home anyway. Josie reported that she would feel disappointed, embarrassed, and ashamed if she lost her way on public transportation because it would mean she had failed to attend the performance and in doing so would anger her classmates, who she predicted would feel as though she wasted the opportunity. Josie grew increasingly   Social Anxiety Disorder  frustrated with the strength of her anxious thoughts and reported that she felt stupid for not being able to challenge them successfully. This highlighted some patterns noted throughout treatment, including Josie’s tendency to rely on perfectionist standards and all-ornothing thinking (e.g., evaluating her thoughts and behavioral responses as all right or all wrong) and impatience with her own progress in treatment. Despite this, she reported being willing to keep practicing and move on to in-session exposures. The therapist worked with Josie for the remainder of session to challenge her automatic thoughts. It was particularly helpful for Josie to identify that she had no evidence that she would get lost and to recognize that even if she did get lost, it would be important enough for her to attend the performance that she would ask for additional help or directions.  Exposure Segment  session 9  During homework review, Josie reported that she was able to use her cognitive restructuring skills when she ran into an old roommate at a coffee shop. Josie reported that the exchange had gone much more smoothly than she anticipated and this encouraged her to feel more confident in her understanding of and abilities to use cognitive restructuring skills actively in social situations. With regard to the in-session exposure, the therapist wanted to choose a situation that would seem relevant to her treatment goals, elicit a moderate amount of anxiety, and in which Josie was likely to perform reasonably well. The in-session exposure was a follow-up to Josie’s recent interaction with her classmate Anne, who mentioned to Josie that some people from class would be getting together one weekend to hang out. However, Anne did not call Josie to make specific plans; neither did Josie follow through with making plans to attend the event, and she ended up missing it. Josie thought that Anne did not call because she might have interpreted Josie’s anxiety symptoms (e.g., shyness, quietness, lack of eye contact) as disinterest in socializing. Josie’s exposure involved her talking with Anne, whose role was played by the therapist, about this misunderstanding. The following excerpts are from the cognitive restructuring prior to the exposure.  tHeraPist: First, let’s go to the BYOCT worksheet and work through the situation before the exposure hap   pens. When you think about this situation happening now? What kind of automatic thoughts come up for you?  Josie: I’m not going to talk to her because I won’t know what to say. Also, I shouldn’t say anything about her not calling me because it would make everything awkward. I should be really friendly and smile the whole time.  tHeraPist: Are you making any predictions about how this interaction will go?  Josie: Oh, yeah. I’m going to choke up, and she is going to judge me. I think that’s it.  tHeraPist: OK, good job identifying those automatic thoughts. Now what kinds of emotions come up when you think those thoughts?  Josie: I feel sad. The anxiousness almost goes away, and I just don’t feel like talking to her. I also feel a little bit of anger and frustration at myself because I can’t confront her about this and I don’t want to make her feel uncomfortable.  tHeraPist: So it sounds like that kind of thinking might lead to you not saying anything at all then, avoiding the interaction?  Josie: Yeah, I’d definitely avoid it.  tHeraPist: Well this exposure will allow us to practice confronting those automatic thoughts, but first we need to do some cognitive restructuring practice. Why don’t we start by identifying some thinking errors?   Josie: Right away I see should statements and fortunetelling. And to think that she’s judging me, that’s mind reading.  tHeraPist: Good job. Now let’s try to dispute some of these thoughts. Let’s start with the automatic thought: “I’m not going to talk to her because I won’t have anything to say.” Do you know this for certain?  Josie: (smiling) No, actually I do want to talk with her, and I could always ask her little things. I have no evidence that I’ll have nothing to say.  tHeraPist: So you could come up with something to say?  Josie: Yeah, even if it’s just small talk, I could come up with something. I do want to ask her about what happened, but I don’t want to come across as too aggressive or confrontational. I feel bad when I confront people.   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  tHeraPist: So let’s figure out some ways you’d feel comfortable asking her to hang out, ways that allow you to get your message across without feeling aggressive or blunt. This can help us start to identify some behavioral goals for the exposure. Let’s take a look at what it is you want to ask her or tell her.  Josie: Well, I want to ask her if we can hang out some other time, since she didn’t call me last time. But I have the automatic thought that I shouldn’t say anything because it will make things awkward. I guess if I challenge that, I don’t really know that I will make things awkward.  tHeraPist: What might be another outcome if you say something?  Josie: She might apologize and ask me if I want to come, and I can tell her that I’d love to come the next time she invites me. She did invite me in the first place. She just never called because she thought I didn’t want to go.  tHeraPist: Good. So we identified some automatic thoughts, and you said they made you feel sad and frustrated. Then we challenged them and came up with some coping thoughts. How do those thoughts make you feel?  Josie: That’s better. I feel a lot better.  tHeraPist: How could we sum these up into a rational response? Does anything stand out to you?  Josie: “Saying something might have a positive outcome” really stands out to me. I’d feel better and things might turn out better if I remind myself of that. It will help me to challenge the thought that I’ll choke up or run out of things to say.  The therapist selected that automatic thought for cognitive restructuring, because it had been a recurrent one for Josie in homework and seemed relevant to the upcoming exposure. Also, the therapist made an effort to take Josie through the cognitive restructuring relatively quickly because the longer the exposure was delayed, the more anxious she would get and the more difficult it would be for her to focus on the cognitive restructuring because of her anxiety. The next step was to set goals for the exposure. Josie decided that her achievable behavioral goals for this exposure would include telling Anne that she was interested in the last social event, letting Anne know that she would be interested in hanging out some time soon, and giving Anne her phone number.  The exposure began with both Josie and the therapist standing up to simulate more closely the interaction that might occur as they passed each other in the hallway at school. Josie stood where she would be able to see her rational response and behavioral goals written on the easel.  tHeraPist: Josie, what is your initial SUDS rating?  Josie: About a 45.  tHeraPist: OK, and what is your rational response?  Josie: Saying something might have a positive outcome.   Josie and the therapist began to chat about class, and Josie soon brought up the recently past social event. The therapist let the exposure go on for approximately 5 minutes. Upon being prompted by the therapist, Josie gave SUDS ratings at 1-minute intervals throughout the interaction and read her rational response aloud. After the exposure had ended, post-processing began.  tHeraPist: Did you reach your behavioral goals?  Josie: I told her I wanted to hang out and asked her to call me again.  tHeraPist: So you met your goals. Great job. Did any new automatic thoughts come up?  Josie: I noticed that I fidgeted a lot. I had the thought “This is scary,” but also that she seemed pretty cool about the interaction. I thought I really shouldn’t be nervous.  tHeraPist: Did the thoughts we identified earlier come up?  Josie: Yeah. I thought I wouldn’t know what to say, and there was a pause in the conversation, but it was fine when I said something. I worried that I’d make this awkward for her, but I think it was more awkward for me because I was so nervous.  tHeraPist: How did your rational response work?  Josie: It worked pretty well; it got easier to remember and I believed it was true when I said it. It really seemed to help me think more about rational thoughts instead of anxious ones.  tHeraPist: Let’s take a look at your SUDS. You started at a 45 and went up to 55 when conversation started. When you said something to her about wishing she’d call you, the SUDS went up to a 60. By the time she told you what happened, the SUDS dropped to 40.   Social Anxiety Disorder  After some small talk, it went down to a 20. That’s a  pretty significant drop. Josie: It was a lot better after I got over that bump,  when I told her I wanted to hang out.  tHeraPist: What thoughts do you remember having  then? Josie: “I shouldn’t say anything,” “I should walk away,”  “I have to say something.”  tHeraPist: So what happened then?  Josie: I said my rational response when you asked, right after I asked her about what happened, and I felt a lot better. It felt like things were going to be OK. I feel really good about how it went.  After processing the exposure, the therapist helped Josie to plan an in vivo exposure to do on her own that week. She planned to meet her old roommate for coffee, using the BYOCT forms to guide her cognitive restructuring, the exposure, and her own postprocessing of the experience.  session 10  In the 10th session, Josie reported that she had a very challenging but rewarding week. She recalled an inclass critique of her work, and, though her anxiety was intense, she was able to manage it and remain in class by reminding herself of her rational response: “I can learn something from their feedback.” Josie also noted that she had completed two in vivo exposures, including having coffee with her old roommate and a conversation with her classmate Anne, just as she practiced in last week’s session. Josie seemed very encouraged by the outcomes of these situations and her ability to use cognitive restructuring techniques before and during anxiety-provoking events.  For exposure this session, Josie planned to interact with two women playing the roles of her boyfriend’s friends’ fiancées, to whom Josie felt she could not relate. The therapist anticipated that this exposure would be more difficult for Josie because it involved a fairly unstructured interaction and likely a conversation about topics with which Josie was relatively unfamiliar, such as wedding planning. Josie reported the following automatic thoughts in anticipation of the exposure:  1. “I’m not married yet, so what do I know about relationships and weddings?” 2. “I will offend them with my views.” 3. “They are going to think I am weird.” 4. “They are going to think I act too young.” 5. “I’m not going to give the right answers to their questions.” As with the automatic thoughts in her first exposure, Josie was able to identify thinking errors, including fortune-telling, mind reading, labeling, and all-ornothing thinking. By using the disputing questions, Josie was able to challenge the automatic thoughts she identified. In response to the first thought, Josie determined that although she was not married, she had been in a relationship for a number of years, so she would be able to relate to the other women on that level. In addition, she had helped her sister plan a wedding, so she was familiar with some aspects of wedding planning. Regarding her fear of being offensive, Josie noted that she was not sure she would offend them with her views and that her different perspective might lead to an interesting conversation. The automatic thought that the other women would think she was weird was more difficult for Josie to challenge, but she was satisfied when she determined that she would be able to live with herself if they thought she was a little unusual and that it was unlikely to affect her relationships with them. In reference to her fears that they would think she acts too young, Josie used the challenge that she was only 2 years younger than these women, but she had chosen a different path for herself that involved continued education and saving marriage until she felt more settled in life, a decision that she felt was very mature. In response to the automatic thought that she would not give the right answer to their questions, Josie argued that perhaps there was no right or wrong answer, and that even if she gave an answer that was inconsistent with the other women’s views, she could recover from those mistakes, and differences of opinion could lead to interesting conversation.  Josie decided that an appropriate rational response would be one that helped her feel that she could relate to these women despite their different circumstances. Her rational response for this exposure was “I’m not so different.” Josie’s goals were to talk about her own interests (e.g., music), ask a question, offer an opinion, and stay in the conversation until the exposure was over. Josie’s SUDS ratings started out at 45, decreased to about 20 by the fourth minute of the exposure, and went as low as 15 by the final minute of the 8-minute exposure. Josie met all of her behavioral goals, and though she was quiet compared to the role players   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  early in the conversation, she appeared to grow more at ease as time passed. Josie reported that the exposure went fairly well, and she was pleased that her sharing a story during the conversation led to a change of subject and additional conversation. Although Josie did not share their experiences and opinions, she was able to find a way to relate to them and to participate in the conversation. She reported having thoughts of leaving but convinced herself to stay by reminding herself that she would benefit from staying in the situation. Josie’s homework was to call an old music composition classmate, have a conversation over the phone with him, and ask him to listen to her practice a piece she was working on for an upcoming show.  session 11  Prior to this session, Josie was very busy with class work and preparation for an upcoming recital of her compositions as part of a final exam. Consequently, she had missed several sessions. Josie reported that over the course of the past month, she had interviewed for a job at a local bookstore, was offered the position, and accepted it. She said she experienced a significant amount of anxiety on the interview and in the first few days of work, but that she was feeling much more confident about things now. Although she had made dramatic improvements in her self-reported anxiety and continued to improve during the 1-month hiatus from regular treatment, the therapist discussed the importance of completing the remaining 5–6 weeks of the treatment program. Josie committed to following through with treatment and doing her homework more consistently. Though Josie had not formally been doing her homework and an in-session exposure was not conducted, the therapist reviewed her progress so far in relation to her fear and avoidance hierarchy. Socializing with a group of friends and riding public transportation alone were identified as areas for continued work. For homework, Josie was assigned the task of handing out fliers to friends and family for the upcoming recital, which was to involve repeated social interactions and a discussion of her work. She was also given the assignment of reading the chapter in the client workbook related to social interactions and making small talk.  session 12  In the Session 12 homework review, Josie said she interacted with many people on campus and around town while promoting an upcoming show, and that the con   versations had gone much more smoothly than anticipated. She said it was helpful to remind herself that she was an expert on her own musical compositions, so she could talk at least some about the performance she was advertising. The third in-session exposure, completed in this session, was designed to help Josie work on some of her automatic thoughts related to her upcoming recital that weekend. The therapist had planned an exposure during which Josie was to interact with audience members at a reception following her recital, and staff members from the clinic volunteered to play these roles. Josie agreed that this exposure was very relevant to her current concerns and would make her very anxious. Josie reported the following automatic thoughts in anticipation of the exposure:  1. “I’m going to sound pretentious if I talk confidently about my performance.” 2. “They are only talking to me because they feel bad for me.” 3. “I have to impress them.” 4. “They will think this is boring.” 5. “I won’t know what to say.” Josie was able to identify thinking errors, including allor- nothing thinking, labeling, fortune-telling, and mind reading. During the cognitive restructuring, Josie was encouraged to look at her successful experiences in the two previous exposures as evidence that she had things to say that were of interest to others. With the help of the therapist, Josie arrived at this rational response: “I can talk about my performance because I created it.”  Josie’s goals were to talk slowly, to provide information about herself, to answer questions posed to her, and to stay in a given interaction until the other person ended it. Josie’s initial SUDS rating started out at 80, but it had decreased to 30 within 3 minutes. At the end of the 10-minute exposure, Josie’s SUDS rating was below 20. Once again, Josie met her behavioral goals, and her performance was objectively skilled. Josie said that in addition to her rational response, it was helpful to tell herself that she did not have to take everything others said to heart. Josie thought the exposure went very well and even reported having fun interacting with the audience members and being the center of attention. She felt that this practice was going to be very helpful when she encountered the real situation at that weekend’s recital. Josie’s homework was to use the BYOCT worksheet before and after her actual recital to prepare herself to cope with anxious thoughts that might arise before, during, and after the performance.   Social Anxiety Disorder  session 13  Josie came to the session, reporting that her anxiety at the reception following last week’s recital was much more manageable than it had been in the past, and that she was actually able to enjoy conversations she had with family, music instructors, and fellow students. She reported feeling confident about her performance, which helped her to feel confident and comfortable while interacting with others at the reception. Though Josie did report experiencing significant anxiety as she began to socialize with family and friends after the recital, she said that her anxiety dropped substantially as she continued to interact with others about her performance, and at no point did she have thoughts of leaving the reception. Josie felt that the recital and reception were a success, and that her anxiety did not prevent her from enjoying these situations as it had in the past.  For an in-session exposure, Josie said it would be helpful to practice receiving feedback, both positive and negative, about her musical and academic performances. This situation was relevant because, as part of a final exam in Josie’s music composition course, she was to perform an original composition in front of students and her instructor, then receive their feedback. Though her ability to do this had improved on a smaller scale during her coursework, this particular class critique elicited a considerable amount of anxiety for Josie, and she wanted some direct help with the cognitive restructuring and behavioral practice. The therapist decided to conduct two smaller exposures—one in which Josie received neutral or positive feedback from class members and her instructor, and another in which she received negative feedback. Each exposure was designed to go on for approximately 5–10 minutes to allow Josie to discuss her composition and performance adequately and to receive and respond to feedback. A number of clinic staff members volunteered to assist with this exposure.  Prior to the exposure, Josie identified the following automatic thoughts for both exposures:  1. “I am going to mess this up.” 2. “I must appear professional.” 3. “I have to perform perfectly to impress them.” 4. “I won’t know what to say.” 5. “I won’t understand their questions.” Josie was able to identify thinking errors such as fortune-telling, all-or-nothing thinking, catastrophizing, and should statements. She also noted how her per   fectionistic standards and feelings of low self-efficacy were quickly elicited by this situation involving overt evaluation of her performance and interaction skills. After challenging her automatic thoughts, Josie decided that a helpful rational response in each of the exposures would be “I know my work because I did it,” which she felt would encourage her to continue talking confidently about her own composition and performance, regardless of the feedback she received. Josie’s behavioral goals were to answer questions posed to her and to ask follow-up questions, if she needed clarification.  The exposures were set up to take place immediately after a performance and began with Josie saying, “Thank you, I’d like to hear your thoughts about the piece.” In the first exposure, she received a mix of neutral and positive feedback about her composition, her performance, and her ability to conduct herself during the critique. Josie’s SUDS score started at 45 and dropped down to 15 within 3 minutes. She met all of her behavioral goals. The second exposure began the same way, but this time she received a mix of neutral and negative feedback; listeners pointed out mistakes she made in her performance, told her that she looked nervous, and indicated that they did not like the music she wrote. Josie’s SUDS score again started at a 45 and went up as high as 60 when she received her first negative comment. By the fifth minute of the exposure, her SUDS score was 30, and by the end of the exposure, 20. Josie again met her behavioral goals and reported that she handled both situations very well. Josie noted that although her anxiety peaked when she received negative feedback, she felt she responded to the comments politely and was even able to learn from them. She felt the exposure was very helpful in preparing for her upcoming feedback sessions in class. For homework, Josie was asked to read the client workbook chapter on core beliefs and to do an in vivo exposure that would involve her taking public transportation to and from school with a friend. She was also asked to complete a BYOCT worksheet before and after her in-class performance and evaluation.  Advanced Cognitive Restructuring Segment  session 14  Josie completed her homework exposure of riding the bus to and from school with a friend and reported that she was not very anxious. She said that next time she would take the bus on her own and work toward going places farther away and less familiar. Josie also report    CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  ed that things went well with her in-class evaluation, that her performance of the music she composed went well, but that she thought she messed up once or twice. However, she noted that no students gave her feedback indicating that they noticed the mistake. Josie reported feeling incredibly anxious after she finished playing and that right before the feedback session she even had thoughts of excusing herself for a few minutes. Reminding herself of her rational response, “I can learn something from their feedback,” encouraged Josie to stay in class and complete the evaluation. Though she received some challenging questions about how she composed the music and who had influenced her, Josie thought she had done a decent job, although she had stumbled over her words a few times. She noted that a few students commented about not particularly liking the style of music she chose, but Josie said she did not take these comments personally. Overall Josie felt that she had learned a lot from the students’ and instructor’s feedback and that, although anxious, felt it was an acceptable level of anxiety given the performance and evaluation aspects of the situation.  Josie did not read the chapter on core beliefs, so the therapist spent time in session introducing this concept. Josie worked hard in this session to identify her core beliefs, using the Peeling Your Onion worksheet. She realized that her most common automatic thoughts across situations were related to labeling herself, feeling as though she would not live up to others’ expectations, and fears that others would judge her negatively because of her social or performance skills. Josie felt that the theme of “not measuring up” was familiar and related potentially to her beliefs about never measuring up to her parents’ standards and not doing anything right, which led to more generalized perfectionism. Josie identified the thought, “I’m not measuring up,” as related to a fear that she would not be successful in life, and that to be successful, she felt she must be perfect. Identifying this chain of thinking left her feeling sad, frustrated, and disappointed. From here, Josie worked through the worksheet and identified the core belief, “If I’m not perfect, I’m worthless.” Time was spent brainstorming exposures Josie could do on her own to test and challenge this core belief. For homework, the therapist asked Josie to mess up intentionally while playing the piano for some family members, so as to challenge her core belief that anything short of perfectionism represents a failure. Josie also identified another situation in which she could intentionally mess up, while using the intercom system at her job. The therapist also  challenged Josie to identify ways that her imperfections might actually contribute to her value as a person. Josie was hesitant to do this but agreed when she reminded herself of the importance of facing feared situations.  session 15  Josie arrived at the 15th session and reported that she had been unable to make a mistake intentionally in her musical performance in front of family members, but she was able to make a mistake while using the intercom system at work. The therapist continued to use cognitive restructuring to explore Josie’s core belief, “If I’m not perfect, I’m worthless.”  tHeraPist: So, last week we started to talk about some core issues, and I felt like you left here feeling a little overwhelmed. How are you feeling about things now?  Josie: It was a difficult session because I was feeling really good about overcoming hard stuff in the beginning, like learning how to pick out automatic thoughts, see how they were wrong, then finding a really good, challenging response to them and actually believing it. I felt good because I can do that now, almost automatically, or at least without too much effort. I felt like I was done, and then we ended up having to face some really scary stuff again. I feel like I took a giant step up, to a harder level of work.  tHeraPist: The things we talked about last week were harder. That’s a good sign that we’ve really worked our way to your core beliefs because it feels so different. But remember all the work and practice that you put into identifying and challenging every other automatic thought or situation that we’ve worked on. It didn’t all happen right away. In terms of core beliefs, we’re going to do the same thing. All we’ve done is identify it. Now we will spend time challenging it and testing out the thought, “If I’m not perfect, I’m worthless.” We’ll start here in session today, but this is work you’ll continue on your own. What might be some thinking errors? What’s limiting in thinking that anything less than 100% is a failure?  Josie: That’s catastrophizing. Probably also a should statement because I feel like I must be perfect. And also maybe fortune-telling because I feel like I’m assuming things will go wrong eventually. That’s it.  tHeraPist: What about all-or-nothing thinking?   Social Anxiety Disorder  Josie: Oh yeah, definitely. In my mind, it’s like there’s 0% success or 100% success.  tHeraPist: So what are some ways we can challenge this? It won’t be easy, but let’s try.  Josie: Umm, I guess simple challenges, like “How do I know I’m going to be worthless if I’m not perfect?” I don’t know. I guess not being perfect doesn’t have to equal being worthless.  tHeraPist: Tell me more about that.  Josie: Some things are maybe valuable even when they’re not perfect. Like people. Or art.  tHeraPist: So sometimes people’s flaws, or quirks, make them more interesting?  Josie: Yeah, that’s what I like best about my boyfriend. Those things other people are bothered by I find endearing. I like things that are imperfect, that have their own personality to them that’s not quite right. I don’t really have a problem when the imperfection is with someone else. But with me, it’s different.  tHeraPist: Are you a harsher critic of yourself than others?  Josie: Definitely. Too bad I can’t see myself the way I see others.  tHeraPist: Maybe you can, maybe we can try that. It’s hard because you’ve been looking at yourself critically for a long time. It’s going to be a change, and it will take testing and practice. But what might be the reward for trying something besides being a harsher judge of yourself than others?  Josie: I guess the work will pay off, like it did with everything else. With practice, I even had fun at my show. I didn’t believe that I was going to be a failure. I believed I could do it. It was a huge success.  tHeraPist: Were there any minor flaws with the evening? Things that went wrong, but that you coped with?  Josie: Oh, yeah, tons. Like I forgot my friend’s name when I was introducing her to my parents. But it didn’t ruin the evening. Overall things were good, and I felt good about it. I could skip over those flaws and just enjoy it.  tHeraPist: So when thinking about that situation, how true does it feel that if you are not perfect, you are worthless?  Josie: When I came in, I felt overwhelmed by everything; now that we can see all the work I’ve done, I  feel better. I think I can challenge this. I don’t think it feels totally true anymore.  tHeraPist: OK, so what’s some evidence that this core belief may not be true?  Josie: Well, it’s OK for everyone else to not be perfect. Maybe a little less OK for me, but I guess it’s still somewhat OK. And some people are more valuable to me because of their imperfections. I guess being perfect is boring. Being perfect is impossible.  tHeraPist: So that seems like a high standard to hold yourself to.  Josie: (Laughs.) Yeah. I don’t know anyone who’s perfect. Everyone makes mistakes. Even me. Especially me. Everyone in the history of the world has been imperfect.  tHeraPist: Right. Now let’s get back to you, not just others. Do we have evidence that you may be valuable even if you’re imperfect? Are there upsides of imperfection?  Josie: I’ll be more unique, more of an individual. It makes for interesting challenges; it could make for a really interesting life. I could learn a lot about different ways to do things, try out all kinds of new things. Make lots of mistakes, and just learn to do things better the next time. Not perfect, but just better. And make room for failure.  tHeraPist: So how much do you believe that if you’re not perfect, you’re worthless?  Josie: Maybe like 20%. Right now, at least, only 20%.  tHeraPist: So how can we sum up some of these challenges that have gotten you to believing this only about 20%? What might be a rational response to this core belief, “If I’m not perfect, I’m worthless.”  Josie: I don’t know; this is hard. If I’m not perfect, I’m worthy? I don’t believe it, but it makes me laugh. I guess maybe it’s OK if I’m not perfect.  tHeraPist: Does that feel convincing?  Josie: Not really. I’m drawing a blank with coming up with the right rational response.  tHeraPist: What if we recognized that this rational response won’t be perfect? Maybe we need to find one that’s good enough for now. So let’s keep at this.  Josie: Oh I see, there’s the perfectionistic thinking again. I guess really, it is not humanly possible to be perfect. And I don’t think I would even want to be that person who finally was perfect.   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  tHeraPist: So it seems like a lot of work to be chasing perfection when it kind of doesn’t exist. It sounds like no matter how hard you try, there would always be the attempt to do better than perfect.  Josie: Yeah, like no matter what, I’d never be able to be perfect. It’s not humanly possible. I guess if I had to make this a rational response, I’d tell myself something like “There is no such thing as perfect.” I like that. I think that will work for now. I’m going to think about this more. This is a challenge, but I want to spend time on this.  tHeraPist: OK, so maybe we can try out this rational response this week by having you do some exposures that will allow you to challenge the core belief, “If I’m not perfect, I’m worthless.”  Josie: Yeah. I need to do that every day, challenge this, become more accepting of my imperfections. It might be fun to mess up on purpose. But a lot of the time I mess up just naturally, but I guess even then I’m not worthless. Mistakes are going to happen because there is no such thing as perfect.  For homework this session, Josie was assigned the task of intentionally making mistakes in conversation (e.g., “forgetting” people’s names, asking them to repeat something they have said), at work (e.g., pressing the wrong button when using the intercom, asking for help with a task), and in performances (e.g., playing the wrong notes while playing the piano for her family and friends).  Termination Segment  session 16  In the final session, Josie and the therapist discussed her progress and the challenges that lay ahead. Josie rerated her fear and avoidance hierarchy, and the decrease in her ratings was considered significant and meaningful (see Table 3.3). She reported that, over the course of treatment, she learned new skills such as recognizing and challenging automatic thoughts and seeing all aspects of herself—including imperfection—as acceptable. The most important change she noted was being able to get and to keep a job at a bookstore, where she must interact with customers and coworkers all day. Josie reported that as a result of her treatment, for the first time she was able to see herself as equal rather than inferior to others, and she was optimistic about her future goals, both personal and professional.  Session‑by‑Session Assessment  Figure 3.2 displays Josie’s session-by-session scores on the SASCI and the BFNE.  Recall that a score of 16 on the SASCI corresponds to no change, with lower scores indicative of increasingly greater improvement relative to baseline levels. Josie started to show modest improvement after Session 3. Her score spiked at Session 8, and then began a steady decline, reaching the minimum score of 4 by Session 12 and remaining there until the end of treatment. For the BFNE, Weeks and colleagues (2005) reported a mean score of 46.91 (SD = 9.27) in a large sample with social anxiety disorder and a mean of 26.81 (SD = 4.78) among normal controls. Early in treatment, Josie’s session scores exceeded the mean of the clinical sample by as much as 10 points. However, her scores declined consistently thereafter, and by the end of treatment were just below the mean of the control sample.  One‑Year Follow‑Up Assessment  After 1 year with no treatment, Josie showed considerable improvement on all self-report and clinicianadministered measures compared to her pretreatment assessment (see Table 3.2). In fact, she no longer met diagnostic criteria for social anxiety disorder. She was considering applications to graduate programs to continue her study of music and had plans to audition for the local orchestra. Josie reported that she had been making friends at her job and felt that she now had a core of social supports on which she could rely.  Five‑Year Follow‑Up Assessment  Approximately 5 years after the conclusion of her treatment, we had the opportunity to check in with Josie and discuss how things had gone for her since she completed CBT as described herein. She had received no additional therapy, other than a brief period of some premarital counseling with a member of the clergy. Josie had gotten married, moved to a large city, and had a child; she experienced an episode of postpartum depression that resolved without treatment. She had completed a prestigious music fellowship program where she gained additional experience and confidence as a composer and performer. At the time of our check-in, Josie was hoping to devote more time to her music, perhaps as a teacher. Josie was very proud to report that   Social Anxiety Disorder   figUre 3.2. Weekly scores on the (a) Social Anxiety Session Change Index (SASCI) and (b) Brief Fear of Negative Evaluation Scale (BFNE).  she has been successful in pushing herself to engage in social situations that were difficult at first and that she has learned that things often are not as difficult as she first feared. Josie reported a return of some anxiety symptoms, as reflected in ratings on her fear and avoidance hierarchy, which were higher than those reported at the 1-year follow-up but generally lower than those at the pretreatment assessment (Table 3.3). However, she  reported that this did not significantly interfere with her daily functioning, as reflected in her scores on the majority of self-report and clinician-administered measures (See Table 3.2). As at the 1-year follow-up, Josie did not meet criteria for social anxiety disorder. However, she experienced some distress in social situations that were not relevant to her life at the time of treatment. For instance, socializing with other children’s   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  parents at school and church was a new challenge that had led to some anxiety and avoidance in recent years. Josie thought she might benefit from some booster sessions, but she reported that she continues to review her client workbook and therapy notes from time to time to maintain her CBT skills.  cliNical PreDictors of success aND failure  Josie’s treatment turned out well, as it does for many clients. However, treatment response is a variable phenomenon, and researchers have investigated a number of predictors of CBT outcome (see more in the review of this topic by L. Magee, Erwin, & Heimberg, 2009).  Expectancy for improvement, subtype of social anxiety disorder, and comorbidity with other anxiety or mood disorders, as well as APD, have been discussed in other sections of this chapter. Here we briefly review three other variables—adherence to assigned CBT homework, anger, and cognitive change.  Adherence to prescribed homework assignments has been associated with positive treatment outcome, and evidence suggests that adherence to particular components of CBT homework assignments may be differentially predictive of outcome. For instance, adherence to between-session cognitive restructuring and exposure assignments predicts posttreatment outcome better than adherence to assignments related more to psychoeducation early in treatment (Leung & Heimberg, 1996). Other studies have not replicated these effects immediately after treatment (Edelmann & Chambless, 1995; Woody & Adessky, 2002). However, 6-month followup assessments revealed that homework-compliant individuals reported fewer avoidant behaviors, less fear of negative evaluation, and less anxiety when giving a speech compared to less compliant clients (Edelman & Chambless, 1995).  Anger is a significant predictor of CBT outcome as well. In a study by Erwin, Heimberg, Schneier, and Liebowitz (2003), individuals with high levels of trait anger were more likely to terminate treatment prematurely. Also, levels of state and trait anger and anger suppression before treatment were significantly correlated with posttreatment severity of social anxiety.  Finally, in a study comparing group CBT, exposure group therapy, and waiting-list control conditions, changes in estimated social cost, or negative cognitive appraisal, mediated pretreatment to posttreatment  changes in both active treatment groups (Hofmann, 2004). Furthermore, only the group receiving cognitive techniques, in addition to exposure, continued to show improvement from posttreatment to the 6-month follow-up assessment. Continued benefit was associated with an overall reduction in estimated social cost from pre- to posttreatment assessments, suggesting that the cognitive-behavioral intervention is associated with greater treatment gains that are mediated through changes in estimated social cost (Hofmann, 2004). More recently, Boden and colleagues (2012) demonstrated that changes in interpersonal core beliefs mediated the effect of CBT on social anxiety symptoms, and Goldin and colleagues (2012) showed that increased belief in one’s ability to engage in cognitive reappraisal did the same.  suMMary aND coNclusioNs  Our primary purpose in this chapter was to provide a step-by-step analysis of the conduct of individual CBT for social anxiety disorder from initial assessment to long-term follow-up. Procedural difficulties that may arise in the conduct of CBT for social anxiety disorder were not be discussed in detail here because of space limitations, but they are discussed thoroughly by Heimberg and Becker (2002). Individuals like Josie, who make dramatic improvements in their lives, provide the impetus for continued research on the treatment of social anxiety disorder—a potentially debilitating disorder with an increasingly encouraging prognosis.  referenCes  Acarturk, C., de Graaf, R., van Straten, A., ten Have, M., & Cuijpers, P. (2008). Social phobia and number of social fears, and their association with comorbidity, healthrelated quality of life and help seeking. Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology, 43, 273–279.  Aderka, I. M. (2009). Factors affecting treatment efficacy in social phobia: The use of video feedback and individual vs. group formats. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 23, 12–17.  Aderka, I. M., Hofmann, S. G., Nickerson, A., Hermesh, H., Gilboa-Schectman, E., & Marom, S. (2012). Functional impairment in social anxiety disorder. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 26, 393–400.  American Psychiatric Association. (1980). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (3rd ed.). Washington, DC: Author.   Social Anxiety Disorder  American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.). Arlington, VA: Author.  Antony, M. M., Coons, M. J., McCabe, R. E., Ashbaugh, A., & Swinson, R. P. (2006). Psychometric properties of the Social Phobia Inventory: Further evaluation. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 44, 1177–1185.  Barlow, D. H. (2002). Anxiety and its disorders: The nature and treatment of anxiety and panic (2nd ed.). New York: Guilford Press.  Beck, A. T., Steer, R. A., & Brown, G. K. (1996). Beck Depression Inventory manual (2nd ed.). San Antonio, TX: Psychological Corporation.  Beck, J. S. (1995). Cognitive therapy: Basics and beyond. New York: Guilford Press.  Beidel, D. C., Turner, S. M., Stanley, M. A., & Dancu, C. V. (1989). The Social Phobia and Anxiety Inventory: Concurrent and external validity. Behavior Therapy, 20, 417–427.  Blanco, C., Heimberg, R. G., Schneier, F. R., Fresco, D. M., Chen, H., Turk, C. L., et al. (2010). A placebo-controlled trial of phenelzine, cognitive behavioral group therapy and their combination for social anxiety disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry, 67, 286–295.  Blanco, C., Xu, Y., Schneier, F., Okuda, M., Liu, S.-M., & Heimberg, R. G. (2011). Predictors of persistence of social anxiety disorder: A national study. Journal of Psychiatric Research, 45, 1557–1563.  Boden, M. T., John, O. P., Goldin, P. R., Werner, K., Heimberg, R. G., & Gross, J. J. (2012). The role of maladaptive beliefs in cognitive behavioral therapy: Evidence from social anxiety disorder. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 50, 287–291.  Brown, E. J., Heimberg, R. G., & Juster, H. R. (1995). Social phobia subtype and avoidant personality disorder: Effect on severity of social phobia, impairment, and outcome of cognitive-behavioral treatment. Behavior Therapy, 26, 467–486.  Brown, E. J., Turovsky, J., Heimberg, R. G., Juster, H. R., Brown, T. A., & Barlow, D. H. (1997). Validation of the Social Interaction Anxiety Scale and the Social Phobia Scale across the anxiety disorders. Psychological Assessment, 9, 21–27.  Brown, T. A., Di Nardo, P. A., & Barlow, D. H. (1994). Anxiety Disorders Interview Schedule for DSM-IV. New York: Oxford University Press.  Brown, T. A., Di Nardo, P. A., & Barlow, D. H. (2013). Anxiety and Related Disorders Interview Schedule for DSM-5: Lifetime version (ADIS-5–L). Manuscript in preparation.  Brown, T. A., Di Nardo, P. A., Lehman, S. L., & Campbell,  L. A. (2001). Reliability of DSM-IV anxiety and mood disorders: Implications for the classification of emotional disorders. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 110, 49–58. Brozovich, F., & Heimberg, R. G. (2008). An analysis of post-event processing in social anxiety disorder. Clinical Psychology Review, 28, 891–903.  Bruce, S. E., Yonkers, K. A., Otto, M. W., Eisen, J. L., Weisberg, R. B., Pagano, M., et al. (2005). Influence of psychiatric comorbidity on recovery and recurrence in generalized anxiety disorder, social phobia, and panic disorder: A 12–year prospective study. American Journal of Psychiatry, 162, 1179–1187.  Bruch, M. A., Fallon, M., & Heimberg, R. G. (2003). Social phobia and difficulties in occupational adjustment. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 50, 109–117.  Bruch, M. A., Gorsky, J. M., Collins, T. M., & Berger, P. (1989). Shyness and sociability reexamined: A multicomponent analysis. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 57, 904–915.  Carleton, R. N., Collimore, K. C., Asmundson, G. J. G., Mc- Cabe, R. E., Rowa, K., & Antony, M. M. (2009). Refining and validating the Social Interaction Anxiety Scale and the Social Phobia Scale. Depression and Anxiety, 26, E71– E81.  Chambless, D. L., Fydrich, T., & Rodebaugh, T. L. (2008). Generalized social phobia and avoidant personality disorder: Meaningful distinction or useless duplication? Depression and Anxiety, 25, 8–19.  Chambless, D. L., & Ollendick, T. H. (2001). Empirically supported psychological interventions: Controversies and evidence. Annual Review of Psychology, 52, 685–716.  Chambless, D. L., Tran, G. Q., & Glass, C. R. (1997). Predictors of response to cognitive-behavioral group therapy for social phobia. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 11, 221–240.  Clark, D. M., Ehlers, A., Hackmann, A., McManus, F., Fennell, M., Grey, N., et al. (2006). Cognitive therapy versus exposure and applied relaxation in social phobia: A randomized controlled trial. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 74, 568–578.  Clark, D. M., Ehlers, A., McManus, F., Hackmann, A., Fennell, M., Campbell, H., et al. (2003). Cognitive therapy versus fluoxetine in generalized social phobia: A randomized placebo-controlled trial. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 71, 1058–1067.  Clark, D. M., & Wells, A. (1995). The cognitive model of social phobia. In R. G. Heimberg, M. R. Leibowitz, D. A. Hope, & F. R. Schneier (Eds.), Social phobia: Diagnosis, assessment, and treatment (pp. 69–93). New York: Guilford Press.  Collins, K. A., Westra, H. A., Dozois, D. J. A., & Stewart, S.  H. (2005). The validity of the brief version of the Fear of Negative Evaluation Scale. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 19, 345–359. Connor, K. M., Davidson, J. R. T., Churchill, E., Sherwood, A., Foa, E. B., & Weisler, R. H. (2000). Psychometric properties of the Social Phobia Inventory (SPIN): A new selfrating scale. British Journal of Psychiatry, 176, 379–386.  Connor, K. M., Kobak, K. A., Churchill, E., Katzelnick, D., & Davidson, J. R. T. (2001). Mini-SPIN: A brief screening assessment for generalized social anxiety disorder. Depression and Anxiety, 14, 137–140.   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  Cox, B. J., Pagura, J., Stein, M. B., & Sareen, J. (2009). The relationship between generalized social phobia and avoidant personality disorder in a national mental health survey. Depression and Anxiety, 26, 354–362.  Cox, B. J., Ross, L., Swinson, R. P., & Direnfeld, D. M. (1998). A comparison of social phobia outcome measures in cognitive-behavioral group therapy. Behavior Modification, 22, 285–297.  Davidson, J. R. T., Miner, C. M., De Veaugh-Geiss, J., Tupler,  L. A., Colket, J. T., & Potts, N. L. (1997). The Brief Social Phobia Scale: A psychometric evaluation. Psychological Medicine, 27, 161–166. Davidson, J. R. T., Potts, N. L., Richichi, E. A., Ford, S. M., Krishnan, R. R., Smith, R. D., et al. (1991). The Brief Social Phobia Scale. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 52(Suppl. 11), 48–51.  Di Nardo, P. A., Brown, T. A., & Barlow, D. H. (1994). Anxiety Disorders Interview Schedule for DSM-IV: Lifetime version (ADIS-IV-L). New York: Oxford University Press.  Edelmann, R. E., & Chambless, D. L. (1995). Adherence during session and homework in cognitive-behavioral group treatment of social phobia. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 33, 537–577.  Elting, D. T., Hope, D. A., & Heimberg, R. G. (1997). Interrelationships among measures commonly used in research on social phobia. Depression and Anxiety, 4, 246–248.  Erwin, B. A., Heimberg, R. G., Juster, H. R., & Mindlin, M. (2002). Comorbid anxiety and mood disorders among persons with social phobia. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 40, 19–35.  Erwin, B. A., Heimberg, R. G., Schneier, F. R., & Liebowitz,  M. R. (2003). Anger experience and expression in social anxiety disorder: Pretreatment profile and predictors of attrition and response to cognitive-behavioral treatment. Behavior Therapy, 34, 331–350. Fergus, T. A., Valentiner, D. P., McGrath, P. B., Gier-Lonsway,  S. L., & Kim, H.-S. (2012). Short forms of the Social Interaction Anxiety Scale and the Social Phobia Scale. Journal of Personality Assessment, 94, 310–320. Feske, U., Perry, K. J., Chambless, D. L., Renneberg, B., & Goldstein, A. J. (1996). Avoidant personality disorder as a predictor for severity and treatment outcome among generalized social phobics. Journal of Personality Disorders, 10, 174–184.  Fresco, D. M., Coles, M. E., Heimberg, R. G., Liebowitz, M. R., Hami, S., Stein, M. B., et al. (2001). The Liebowitz Social Anxiety Scale: A comparison of the psychometric properties of self-report and clinician-administered formats. Psychological Medicine, 31, 1025–1035.  Frisch, M. B. (1994). Manual and treatment guide for the Quality of Life Inventory. Minneapolis, MN: National Computer Systems.  Gaston, J. E., Abbott, M. J., Rapee, R. M., & Neary, S. A. (2006). Do empirically supported treatments generalize to private practice?: A benchmark study of a cognitive   behavioural group treatment programme for social phobia. British Journal of Clinical Psychology, 45, 33–48.  Gilbert, P. (2001). Evolution and social anxiety: The role of attraction, social competition, and social hierarchies. Psychiatric Clinics of North America, 24, 723–751.  Goldin, P. R., Ziv, M., Jazaieri, H., Werner, K., Kraemer, H., Heimberg, R. G., et al. (2012). Cognitive reappraisal self-efficacy mediates the effects of individual cognitivebehavioral therapy for social anxiety disorder in a randomized controlled trial. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 80, 1034–1040.  Hackmann, A., Clark, D. M., & McManus, F. (2000). Recurrent images and early memories in social phobia. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 38, 601–610.  Hackmann, A., Surawy, C., & Clark, D. M. (1998). Seeing yourself through others’ eyes: A study of spontaneously occurring images in social phobia. Behavioural and Cognitive Psychotherapy, 26, 3–12.  Hambrick, J. P., Turk, C. L., Heimberg, R. G., Schneier, F. R., & Liebowitz, M. R. (2003). The experience of disability and quality of life in social anxiety disorder. Depression and Anxiety, 18, 46–50.  Hayes, S. A., Hope, D. A., Van Dyke, M., & Heimberg, R.  G. (2007). Working alliance for clients with social anxiety disorder: Relationship with session helpfulness and within-session habituation. Cognitive Behaviour Therapy, 36, 34–42. Hayes, S. A., Miller, N. A., Hope, D. A., Heimberg, R. G., & Juster, H. R. (2008). Assessing client progress session-bysession: The Social Anxiety Session Change Index. Cognitive and Behavioral Practice, 15, 203–211.  Heimberg, R. G. (1994). Cognitive assessment strategies and the measurement of outcome of treatment for social phobia. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 32, 269–280.  Heimberg, R. G., & Becker, R. E. (2002). Cognitivebehavioral group therapy for social phobia: Basic mechanisms and clinical strategies. New York: Guilford Press.  Heimberg, R. G., Brozovich, F. A., & Rapee, R. M. (2010). A cognitive-behavioral model of social anxiety disorder: Update and extension. In S. G. Hofmann & P. M. DiBartolo (Eds.), Social anxiety: Clinical, developmental, and social perspectives (2nd ed., pp. 395–422). New York: Academic Press.  Heimberg, R. G., Dodge, C. S., Hope, D. A., Kennedy, C. R., Zollo, L. J., & Becker, R. E. (1990). Cognitive-behavioral group treatment for social phobia: Comparison with a credible placebo control. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 14, 1–23.  Heimberg, R. G., & Holaway, R. M. (2007). Examination of the known-groups validity of the Liebowitz Social Anxiety Scale. Depression and Anxiety, 24, 447–454.  Heimberg, R. G., Holt, C. S., Schneier, F. R., Spitzer, R. L., & Liebowitz, M. R. (1993). The issues of subtypes in the diagnosis of social phobia. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 7, 249–269.   Social Anxiety Disorder  Heimberg, R. G., Hope, D. A., Dodge, C. S., & Becker, R. E. (1990). DSM-III-R subtypes of social phobia: Comparison of generalized social phobics and public speaking phobics. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 178, 172–179.  Heimberg, R. G., Horner, K. J., Juster, H. R., Safren, S. A., Brown, E. J., Schneier, F. R., et al. (1999). Psychometric properties of the Liebowitz Social Anxiety Scale. Psychological Medicine, 29, 199–212.  Heimberg, R. G., Liebowitz, M. R., Hope, D. A., Schneier, F. R., Holt, C. S., Welkowitz, L. A., et al. (1998). Cognitive behavioral group therapy vs. phenelzine therapy for social phobia: 12–week outcome. Archives of General Psychiatry, 55, 1133–1141.  Heimberg, R. G., Mueller, G. P., Holt, C. S., Hope, D. A., & Liebowitz, M. R. (1992). Assessment of anxiety in social interaction and being observed by others: The Social Interaction Anxiety Scale and the Social Phobia Scale. Behavior Therapy, 23, 53–73.  Heimberg, R. G., Salzman, D. G., Holt, C. S., & Blendell,  K. A. (1993). Cognitive-behavioral group treatment for social phobia: Effectiveness at five-year followup. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 17, 325–339. Heimberg, R. G., & Turk, C. L. (2002). Assessment of social phobia. In R. G. Heimberg & R. E. Becker (Eds.), Cognitive-behavioral group therapy for social phobia: Basic mechanisms and clinical strategies (pp. 107–126). New York: Guilford Press.  Herbert, J. D., Bellack, A. S., & Hope, D. A. (1991). Concurrent validity of the Social Phobia and Anxiety Inventory. Journal of Psychopathology and Behavioral Assessment, 13, 357–368.  Herbert, J. D., Hope, D. A., & Bellack, A. S. (1992). Validity of the distinction between generalized social phobia and avoidant personality disorder. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 101, 332–339.  Hofmann, S. G. (2004). Cognitive mediation of treatment change in social phobia. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 72, 392–399.  Hofmann, S. G., Newman, M. G., Becker, E., Taylor, C. B., & Roth, W. T. (1995). Social phobia with and without avoidant personality disorder: Preliminary behavior therapy outcome findings. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 9, 427–438.  Hope, D. A., Heimberg, R. G., & Bruch, M. A. (1995). Dismantling cognitive-behavioral group therapy for social phobia. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 33, 637–650.  Hope, D. A., Heimberg, R. G., Juster, H., & Turk, C. L. (2000). Managing social anxiety: A cognitive-behavioral therapy approach (client workbook). New York: Oxford University Press.  Hope, D. A., Heimberg, R. G., & Turk, C. L. (2006). Managing social anxiety: A cognitive-behavioral therapy approach (therapist guide). New York: Oxford University Press.  Hope, D. A., Heimberg, R. G., & Turk, C. L. (2010a). Man   aging social anxiety: A cognitive-behavioral therapy approach (Client Workbook, 2nd ed.). New York: Oxford University Press.  Hope, D. A., Heimberg, R. G. , & Turk, C.L. (2010b). Managing social anxiety: A cognitive-behavioral therapy approach (Therapist Guide, 2nd ed.). New York: Oxford University Press.  Hope, D. A., Herbert, J. D., & White, C. (1995). Diagnostic subtype, avoidant personality disorder, and efficacy of cognitive behavioral group therapy for social phobia. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 19, 399–417.  Hope, D. A., Van Dyke, M., Heimberg, R. G., Turk, C. L., & Fresco, D. M. (2002). Cognitive-behavioral therapy for social anxiety disorder: Therapist adherence scale. Unpublished manuscript, available from Richard G. Heimberg, Adult Anxiety Clinic, Department of Psychology, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA 19122–6085.  Huppert, J. D., Strunk, D. R., Ledley, D. R., Davidson, J. R. T., & Foa, E. B. (2008). Generalized social anxiety disorder and avoidant personality disorder: Structural analysis and treatment outcome. Depression and Anxiety, 25, 441–448.  Kabat-Zinn, J. (1990). Full catastrophe living: Using the wisdom of your body and mind to face stress, pain, and illness. New York: Dell.  Katzelnick, D. J., Kobak, K. A., DeLeire, T., Henk, H. J., Greist, J. H., Davidson, J. R. T., et al. (2001). Impact of generalized social anxiety disorder in managed care. American Journal of Psychiatry, 158, 1999–2007.  Kendall, P. C., Chu, B., Gifford, A., Hayes, C., & Nauta, M. (1998). Breathing life into a manual: Flexibility and creativity with manual-based treatments. Cognitive and Behavioral Practice, 5, 177–198.  Kendall, P. C., Gosch, E., Furr, J. M., & Sood, E. (2008). Flexibility within fidelity. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 47, 987–993.  Kessler, R. C., Berglund, P. D., Demler, O., Olga, J. R., Merikangas, K. R., & Walters, E. E. (2005). Lifetime prevalence and age-of-onset distributions of DSM-IV disorders in the National Comorbidity Survey Replication. Archives of General Psychiatry, 62, 593–602.  Koszycki, D., Benger, M., Shlik, J., & Bradwejn, J. (2007). Randomized trial of a meditation-based stress reduction program and cognitive behavior therapy in generalized social anxiety disorder. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 45, 2518–2526.  Kupper, N., & Denollet, J. (2012). Social anxiety in the general population. Introducing abbreviated versions of the SIAS and SPS. Journal of Affective Disorders, 136, 90–98.  Leary, M. R. (1983). A brief version of the Fear of Negative Evaluation Scale. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 9, 371–375.  Leary, M. R., Kowalski, R. M., & Campbell, C. D. (1988). Self-presentational concerns and social anxiety: The role of generalized impression expectancies. Journal of Research in Personality, 22, 308–321.   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  Ledley, D. R., Heimberg, R. G., Hope, D. A., Hayes, S. A.., Zaider, T. I., Van Dyke, M., et al. (2009). Efficacy of a manualized and workbook-driven individual treatment for social anxiety disorder. Behavior Therapy, 40, 414–424.  Leung, A. W., & Heimberg, R. G. (1996). Homework compliance, perceptions of control, and outcome of cognitivebehavioral treatment for social phobia. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 34, 423–432.  Liebowitz, M. R. (1987). Social phobia. Modern Problems in Pharmacopsychiatry, 22, 141–173.  Liebowitz, M. R., Heimberg, R. G., Fresco, D. M., Travers, J., & Stein, M. B. (2000). Social phobia or social anxiety disorder: What’s in a name? Archives of General Psychiatry, 57, 191–192.  Liebowitz, M. R., Heimberg, R. G., Schneier, F. R., Hope,  D. A., Davies, S., Holt, C. S., et al. (1999). Cognitivebehavioral group therapy versus phenelzine in social phobia: Long-term outcome. Depression and Anxiety, 10, 89–98. Lincoln, T. M., Rief, W., Hahlweg, K., Frank, M., von Witzleben, I., Schroeder, B., et al. (2003). Effectiveness of an empirically supported treatment for social phobia in the field. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 41, 1251– 1269.  MacLeod, C., & Mathews, A. (1991). Biased cognitive operations in anxiety: Accessibility of information or assignment of processing priorities? Behaviour Research and Therapy, 29, 599–610.  Magee, L., Erwin, B. A., & Heimberg, R. G. (2009). Psychological treatment of social anxiety disorder and specific phobia. In M. M. Antony & M. B. Stein (Eds.), Handbook of anxiety and the anxiety disorders (pp. 334–349). New York: Oxford University Press.  Magee, W. J., Eaton, W. W., Wittchen, H.-U., McGonagle, K. A., & Kessler, R. C. (1996). Agoraphobia, simple phobia, and social phobia in the National Comorbidity Survey. Archives of General Psychiatry, 53, 159–168.  Mannuzza, S., Schneier, F. R., Chapman, T. F., Liebowitz, M. R., Klein, D. F., & Fyer, A. J. (1995). Generalized social phobia: Reliability and validity. Archives of General Psychiatry, 52, 230–237.  Marques, L., Porter, E., Keshaviah, A., Pollack, M. H., Van Ameringen, M., Stein, M. B., et al. (2012). Avoidant personality disorder in individuals with generalized social anxiety disorder: What does it add? Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 26, 665–672.  Mattick, R. P., & Clarke, J. C. (1998). Development and validation of measures of social phobia scrutiny fear and social interaction anxiety. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 36, 455–470.  Mattick, R. P., & Peters, L. (1988). Treatment of severe social phobia: Effects of guided exposure with and without cognitive restructuring. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 56, 251–260.  McEvoy, P. M. (2007). Effectiveness of cognitive behavioural group therapy for social phobia in a community clinic: A benchmarking study. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 45, 3030–3040.  McEvoy, P. M., Nathan, P., Rapee, R. M., & Campbell, B. N.  C. (2012). Cognitive behavioural group therapy for social phobia: Evidence of transportability to community clinics. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 50, 258–265. Mennin, D. S., Fresco, D. M., Heimberg, R. G., Schneier, F. R., Davies, S. O., & Liebowitz, M. R. (2002). Screening for social anxiety disorder in the clinical setting: Using the Liebowitz Social Anxiety Scale. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 16, 661–673.  Mörtberg, E., Clark, D. M., & Bejerot, S. (2011). Intensive group cognitive therapy and individual cognitive therapy for social phobia: Sustained improvement at 5–year follow-up. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 25, 994–1000.  Narrow, W. E., Rae, D. S., Robins, L. N., & Regier, D. A. (2002). Revised prevalence estimates of mental disorders in the United States: Using a clinical significance criterion to reconcile two surveys’ estimates. Archives of General Psychiatry, 59, 115–123.  Norton, P. J., & Hope, D. A. (2001). Kernels of truth or distorted perceptions: Self and observer ratings of social anxiety and performance. Behavior Therapy, 32, 765–786.  Ougrin, D. (2011). Efficacy of exposure versus cognitive therapy in anxiety disorders: Systematic review and meta analysis. BMC Psychiatry, 11, 200.  Peters, L., Sunderland, M., Andrews, G., Rapee, R. M., & Mattick, R. P. (2012). Development of a short form Social Interaction Anxiety (SIAS) and Social Phobia Scale (SPS) using nonparametric item response theory: The SIAS-6 and the SPS-6. Psychological Assessment, 24, 66–76.  Piet, J., Hougaard, E., Hecksher, M. S., & Rosenberg, N. K. (2010). A randomized pilot study of mindfulness-based cognitive therapy and group cognitive-behavioral therapy for young adults with social phobia. Scandinavian Journal of Psychology, 51, 403–410.  Pontoski, K., Heimberg, R. G., Turk, C. L., & Coles, M. E. (2010). Psychotherapy for social anxiety disorder. In D. Stein, E. Hollander, & B. Rothbaum (Eds.), American Psychiatric Publishing textbook of anxiety disorders (2nd ed., pp. 501–521). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press.  Powers, M. B., Sigmarsson, S. R., & Emmelkamp, P. M. G. (2008). A meta-analytic review of psychological treatments for social anxiety disorder. International Journal of Cognitive Therapy, 1, 94–113.  Rapee, R. M., & Heimberg, R. G. (1997). A cognitivebehavioral model of anxiety in social phobia. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 35, 741–756.  Rapee, R. M., & Lim, L. (1992). Discrepancy between self- and observer ratings of performance in social phobics. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 101, 728–731.   Social Anxiety Disorder  Ries, B. J., McNeil, D. W., Boone, M. L., Turk, C. L., Carter,  L. E., & Heimberg, R. G. (1998). Assessment of contemporary social phobia verbal report instruments. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 36, 983–994. Rodebaugh, T. L. (2009). Social phobia and perceived friendship quality. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 23, 872– 878.  Rodebaugh, T. L., Heimberg, R. G., Brown, P. J., Fernandez,  K. C., Blanco, C., Schneier, F. R., et al. (2011). More reasons to be straightforward: Findings and norms for two scales relevant to social anxiety. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 25, 623–630. Rodebaugh, T. L., Woods, C. M., & Heimberg, R. G. (2007). The reverse of social anxiety is not always the opposite: The reverse-scored items of the Social Interaction Anxiety Scale do not belong. Behavior Therapy, 38, 192–206.  Rodebaugh, T. L., Woods, C. M., Thissen, D. M., Heimberg,  R. G., Chambless, D. L., & Rapee, R. M. (2004). More information from fewer questions: The factor structure and item properties of the original and Brief Fear of Negative Evaluation Scale. Psychological Assessment, 16, 169–181. Roth, D. A., Coles, M. E., & Heimberg, R. G. (2002). The relationship between memories for childhood teasing and anxiety and depression in adulthood. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 16, 149–164.  Rytwinski, N. K., Fresco, D. M., Heimberg, R. G., Coles, M. E., Liebowitz, M. R., Cissell, S., et al. (2009). Screening for social anxiety disorder with the self-report version of the Liebowitz Social Anxiety Scale. Depression and Anxiety, 26, 34–38.  Safren, S. A., Heimberg, R. G., Brown, E. J., & Holle, C. (1997). Quality of life in social phobia. Depression and Anxiety, 4, 126–133.  Safren, S. A., Heimberg, R. G., & Juster, H. R. (1997). Client expectancies and their relationship to pretreatment symptomatology and outcome of cognitive-behavioral group treatment for social phobia. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 65, 694–698.  Sanderson, W. C., Di Nardo, P. A., Rapee, R. M., & Barlow,  D. H. (1990). Syndrome comorbidity in patients diagnosed with a DSM-III-R anxiety disorder. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 99, 308–312. Sank, L. I., & Shaffer, C. S. (1984). A therapist’s manual for cognitive behavior therapy in groups. New York: Plenum Press.  Schneier, F. R., Heckelman, L. R., Garfinkel, R., Campeas, R., Fallon, B. A., Gitow, A., et al. (1994). Functional impairment in social phobia. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 55, 322–331.  Schneier, F. R., Johnson, J., Hornig, C. D., Liebowitz, M. R., & Weissman, M. M. (1992). Social phobia: Comorbidity and morbidity in an epidemiologic sample. Archives of General Psychiatry, 49, 282–288.  Scholing, A., & Emmelkamp, P. M. G. (1993). Exposure with and without cognitive therapy for generalized social phobia: Effects of individual and group treatment. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 31, 667–681.  Segal, Z. V., Williams, J. M., & Teasdale, J. D. (2002). Mindfulness-based cognitive therapy for depression: A new approach to preventing relapse. New York: Guilford Press.  Stangier, U., Heidenreich, T., Peitz, M., Lauterbach, W., & Clark, D. M. (2003). Cognitive therapy for social phobia: Individual versus group treatment. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 41, 991–1007.  Stangier, U., Schramm, E., Heidenreich, T., Berger, M., & Clark, D. M. (2011). Cognitive therapy vs. interpersonal therapy in social anxiety disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry, 68, 692–700.  Stopa, L., & Clark, D. M. (1993). Cognitive processes in social phobia. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 31, 255– 267.  Taylor, S., Woody, S., McLean, P. D., & Koch, W. J. (1997). Sensitivity of outcome measures for treatments of generalized social phobia. Assessment, 4, 181–191.  Turner, S. M., Beidel, D. C., Dancu, C. V., & Stanley, M. A. (1989). An empirically derived inventory to measure social fears and anxiety: The Social Phobia and Anxiety Inventory. Psychological Assessment, 1, 35–40.  Turner, S. M., Beidel, D. C., & Townsley, R. M. (1992). Social phobia: A comparison of specific and generalized subtype and avoidant personality disorder. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 101, 326–331.  Turner, S. M., Beidel, D. C., Wolff, P. L., Spaulding, S., & Jacob, R. G. (1996). Clinical features affecting treatment outcome in social phobia. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 34, 795–804.  Vriends, N., Becker, E. S., Meyer, A., Michael, T., & Margraf,  J. (2007). Subtypes of social phobia: Are they of any use? Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 21, 59–75. Vriends, N., Becker, E. S., Meyer, A., Williams, S. L., Lutz, R., & Margraf, J. (2007). Recovery from social phobia in the community and its predictors: Data from a longitudinal epidemiological study. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 21, 320–337.  Wallace, S. T., & Alden, L. E. (1991). A comparison of social standards and perceived ability in anxious and nonanxious men. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 15, 237–254.  Watson, D., & Friend, R. (1969). Measurement of socialevaluative anxiety. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 33, 448–457.  Weeks, J. W., Heimberg, R. G., Fresco, D. M., Hart, T. A., Turk, C. L., Schneier, F. R., et al. (2005). Empirical validation and psychometric evaluation of the Brief Fear of Negative Evaluation Scale in patients with social anxiety disorder. Psychological Assessment, 17, 179–190.  Weeks, J. W., Heimberg, R. G., & Rodebaugh, T. L., & Nor    CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  ton, P. J. (2008). Exploring the relationship between fear of positive evaluation and social anxiety. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 22, 386–400.  Weeks, J. W., Spokas, M. E., & Heimberg, R. G. (2007). Psychometric evaluation of the Mini–Social Phobia Inventory (Mini-SPIN) in a treatment-seeking sample. Depression and Anxiety, 24, 382–391.  Wenzel, A. (2002). Characteristics of close relationships in individuals with social phobia: A preliminary comparison with nonanxious individuals. In J. H. Harvey & A. Wenzel (Eds.), A clinician’s guide to maintaining and enhancing close relationships (pp. 199–214). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.  Wlazlo, Z., Schroeder-Hartwig, K., Hand, I., Kaiser, G., & Münchau, N. (1990). Exposure in vivo vs. social skills  training for social phobia: Long-term outcome and differential effects. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 28, 181–193.  Wolpe, J., & Lazarus, A. A. (1966). Behavior therapy techniques. New York: Pergamon.  Wong, J., Gordon, E. A., & Heimberg, R. G. (2012). Social anxiey disorder. In P. Sturmey & M. Hersen (Eds.), Handbook of evidence-based practice in clinical psychology: Volume II, Adult disorders (pp. 621–649). New York: Wiley.  Woody, S. R., & Adessky, R. S. (2002). Therapeutic alliance, group cohesion, and homework compliance during cognitive-behavioral group treatment of social phobia. Behavior Therapy, 35, 5–27.   C H a P t e r 4 C H a P t e r 4 obsessive–Compulsive Disorder  MartiN e. fraNkliN eDNa B. foa  it will not take the reader long to see that successful therapy for obsessive–compulsive disorder (oCD) is markedly different in both structure and content from the usual therapeutic approaches. for this reason, regrettably, few therapists feel self‑efficacious enough to undertake this therapy, yet this approach is clearly the treatment of choice for the most beneficial short‑ and long‑term effects in oCD according to clinical trials. The information provided in this detailed chapter should be sufficient for any reasonably well‑trained mental health professional to undertake this treatment, particularly if few other options are available. The suffering involved with oCD can be extraordinary, and even imperfect attempts at therapy can relieve much of this suffering. This chapter describes the detailed conduct of intensive daily sessions involving both imaginal and direct in vivo practice. Also noticeable is the ingenuity required of therapists (e.g., Where do you find dead animals?). The importance of involving significant others continues a theme first described by Craske and Barlow in Chapter 1 of this volume, in which spouses/partners or other people close to the individual with the problem become an important and integral part of treatment. finally, this chapter contains an up‑to‑date review of the current status of psychological and pharmacological approaches to oCD.—D. H. B.  Advances in cognitive-behavioral and pharmacological treatments in the last four decades have greatly improved the prognosis for patients with obsessive– compulsive disorder (OCD). In this chapter we first discuss diagnostic and theoretical issues of OCD and review the available treatments, then describe assessment procedures and illustrate in detail how to implement intensive cognitive-behavioral treatment (CBT) involving exposure and ritual prevention (EX/RP) for OCD. Throughout the chapter, we use case material to illustrate interactions that occur between therapist and patient to demonstrate the process that occurs during treatment.  DefiNitioN  In the fifth edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5; American Psychiatric Association, 2013), OCD is characterized by recurrent obsessions and/or compulsions that interfere substantially with daily functioning. Obsessions are “persistent thoughts, urges, or images that are experienced, at some time during the disturbance, as intrusive and unwanted, and that in most individuals cause marked anxiety or distress” (p. 237). Common obsessions are repeated thoughts about causing harm to others, contamination, and doubting whether one locked  155   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  the front door. Compulsions are “repetitive behaviors or mental acts that the individual feels driven to perform in response to an obsession or according to rules that must be applied rigidly” (p. 237). Common compulsions include handwashing, checking, and counting. In DSM-5, OCD is categorized among obsessive– compulsive and related disorders (e.g., Stein et al., 2010), which highlights the formal and functional similarity between OCD and several other disorders that involve intense anxiety and associated compulsions (e.g., body dysmorphic disorder), as well as those involving repetitive behaviors that appear to be driven by appetitive urges (e.g., trichotillomania [hair pulling], excoriation [skin picking] disorder; American Psychiatric Association, 2013).  In DSM, the functional link between obsessions and compulsions is emphasized: “Obsessions” are defined as thoughts, images, or impulses that cause marked anxiety or distress, and “compulsions” are defined as overt (behavioral) or covert (mental) actions that are performed in an attempt to reduce the distress brought on by obsessions or according to rigid rules. This modification is supported by findings from the DSM-IV field trial on OCD, in which over 90% of participants reported that the aim of their compulsions was either to prevent harm associated with their obsessions or to reduce obsessional distress (Foa et al., 1995).  Data from the DSM-IV field study also indicated that the vast majority (over 90%) of individuals with OCD manifest both obsessions and behavioral rituals. When mental rituals are also included, only 2% of the sample report “pure” obsessions (Foa et al., 1995). Behavioral rituals (e.g., handwashing) are equivalent to mental rituals (e.g., silently repeating special prayers) in their functional relationship to obsessions: Both serve to reduce obsessional distress, to prevent feared harm, or to restore safety. Thus, whereas all obsessions are indeed mental events, compulsions can be either mental or behavioral. Identification of mental rituals is an especially important aspect of treatment planning because obsessions and compulsions are addressed via different techniques. For example, we once treated a patient who described himself as a “pure obsessional,” who would experience intrusive and unwanted images of harm coming to his girlfriend by an animal attack. The patient would quickly and intentionally insert his own image into the scene to become the victim of the animal mauling, thereby reducing his distress and, in his estimation, reducing the likelihood that some future harm would come to his girlfriend. The substitution  of his own image into the scene constituted a mental ritual, and the success of imaginal exposure exercises required that the patient refrain from this form of compulsion.   A growing consensus about a continuum of insight in individuals with OCD (e.g., Foa et al., 1995; Insel & Akiskal, 1986) led to the inclusion in DSM-IV (American Psychiatric Association, 1994) of a subtype of OCD “with poor insight” to include individuals who indeed have obsessions and compulsions but fail to recognize their senselessness. In DSM-5, individuals are classified as having good or fair insight, poor insight, or absent insight/delusional beliefs, reflecting an even greater recognition of a continuum of insight in OCD (Leckman et al., 2010). Clinically it is important to evaluate the degree of insight prior to initiating CBT because fixed belief about the consequences of refraining from compulsions and avoidance behaviors has been found to be associated with attenuated treatment outcome (e.g., Foa, Abramowitz, Franklin, & Kozak, 1999; Neziroglu, Stevens, Yaryura-Tobias, & McKay, 2000).  To be diagnosed with OCD, obsessions and/or compulsions must be found to be of sufficient severity to cause marked distress, be time-consuming, and interfere with daily functioning. If another Axis I disorder is present, the obsessions and compulsions cannot be restricted to the content of that disorder (e.g., preoccupation with food in the presence of eating disorders).  PrevaleNce aND course of ocD  Once thought to be an extremely rare disorder, the 12month prevalence of OCD was estimated at 1.0% in the recent National Comorbidity Survey Replication involving over 9,000 adult participants in the United States (Kessler et al., 2005). Epidemiological studies with children and adolescents suggest similar lifetime prevalence rates in these samples (e.g., Flament et al., 1988; Valleni-Basille et al., 1994). Slightly more than half of adults suffering from OCD are female (Rasmussen & Tsuang, 1986), whereas a 2:1 male to female ratio has been observed in several pediatric clinical samples (e.g., Hanna, 1995; Swedo, Rapoport, Leonard, Lenane, & Cheslow, 1989). Age of onset of the disorder typically ranges from early adolescence to young adulthood, with earlier onset in males; modal onset is ages 13–15 in males, and ages 20–24 in females (Rasmussen & Eisen, 1990). However, cases of OCD have   Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder  been documented in children as young as age 2 (Rapoport, Swedo, & Leonard, 1992).  Development of the disorder is usually gradual, but acute onset has been reported in some cases. Although chronic waxing and waning of symptoms are typical, episodic and deteriorating courses have been observed in about 10% of patients (Rasmussen & Eisen, 1989). In some cases of pediatric OCD and tic disorders, onset is very sudden and associated with streptococcal infection; treatment of the infection is associated with substantial reduction of symptoms, but recurrence of infection is again associated with symptom exacerbation (Swedo et al., 1998). Presentation of OCD in these cases, which is much more typical in males than in females, came to be known as pediatric autoimmune neuropsychiatric disorders associated with streptococcal infection (PANDAS) and has more recently been revised and broadened under the umbrella term “pediatric autoimmune neuropsychiatric syndrome” (PANS; Swedo, Leckman, & Rose, 2012); the prevalence of PANDAS or PANS has yet to be determined. OCD is frequently associated with impairments in general functioning, such as disruption of gainful employment (Koran, 2000; Leon, Portera, & Weissman, 1995) and interpersonal relationship difficulties (Emmelkamp, de Haan, & Hoogduin, 1990; Riggs, Hiss, & Foa, 1992). Adolescents identified as having OCD (Flament et al., 1988) reported in a subsequent follow-up study that they had withdrawn socially to prevent contamination and to conserve energy for obsessive–compulsive behaviors (Flament et al., 1990). Many individuals with OCD suffer for years before seeking treatment. In one study, individuals first presented for psychiatric treatment over 7 years after the onset of significant symptoms (Rasmussen & Tsuang, 1986). The disorder may cause severe impairment in functioning that results in job loss and disruption of marital and other interpersonal relationships. Marital distress is reported by approximately 50% of married individuals seeking treatment for OCD (Emmelkamp et al., 1990; Riggs et al., 1992).  coMorBiDity  Convergent epidemiological and clinical data indicate that OCD rarely occurs in isolation: Although the rates of comorbidity differ across studies due to selection of population and methodology, comorbidity is generally high. For example, Weissman and colleagues (1994)  found that 49% of individuals diagnosed with OCD suffered from a comorbid anxiety disorder and 27% from comorbid major depressive disorder (MDD). Among studies conducted specifically within anxiety clinics, there is great variability, but comorbid conditions are generally common (for a review, see Ledley, Pai, & Franklin, 2007). In the largest of the studies conducted in the context of an anxiety clinic, Brown, Campbell, Lehman, Grisham, and Mancill (2001) found that 57% of 77 adults with a principal diagnosis of OCD had a current comorbid Axis I condition; the rate rose to 86% for lifetime comorbid Axis I conditions. Notably, when OCD co-occurs with other anxiety disorders, it is typically the principal diagnosis (e.g., the diagnosis of greatest severity; see Antony, Downie, & Swinson, 1998). It also appears to be the case that MDD onset tends to follow that of OCD, suggesting that depression might be a response to OCD symptoms (Bellodi, Sciuto, Diaferia, Ronchi, & Smeraldi, 1992; Diniz et al., 2004).  The data are equivocal with respect to the influence of comorbidity on OCD presentation. In one study, Denys, Tenney, van Megen, de Geus, and Westenberg (2004) found that comorbidity did not influence OCD symptom severity, whereas others (Angst, 1993; Tukel, Polat, Ozdemir, Aksut, & Turksov, 2002) found a relationship between comorbidity and OCD symptom severity. A more consistent finding is that comorbidity is associated with poorer quality of life, particularly in the case of comorbid depression (Lochner & Stein, 2003; Masellis, Rector, & Richter, 2003).  With respect to the effect of comorbid anxiety and depression on treatment outcome, the influence of depression has received more empirical attention to date. Some studies have found that higher levels of depression at pretreatment are related to poorer outcome (e.g., Keijsers, Hoogduin, & Schaap, 1994; Steketee, Chambless, & Tran, 2001), whereas others have found little or no effect (Mataix-Cols, Marks, Greist, Kobak, & Baer, 2002; O’Sullivan, Noshirvani, Marks, Monteiro, & Lelliott, 1991; Steketee, Eisen, Dyck, Warshaw, & Rasmussen, 1999). Some have suggested that, more specifically, the severity of the comorbid depression might influence its effects on OCD treatment outcome: Abramowitz, Franklin, Street, Kozak, and Foa (2000) found that only severely depressed patients were less likely to respond to EX/RP therapy for OCD. Similarly, highly depressed patients with OCD seem to be at greater risk for relapse following treatment discontinuation (Abramowitz & Foa, 2000; Basoglu, Lax, Kasvi    CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  kis, & Marks, 1988). The influence of comorbid anxiety disorders on outcome has received less attention thus far: One study reported that patients with OCD and comorbid generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) terminate OCD treatment at higher rates than other patients (Steketee et al., 2001), and another found that the presence of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) in patients with OCD attenuated response to EX/RP (Gershuny, Baer, Jenike, Minichiello, & Wilhelm, 2002). Within pediatric OCD specifically, comorbidity other than a second anxiety disorder (e.g., externalizing disorder, mood disorder) was associated with poorer acute response to CBT (Storch et al., 2008), and another recent report indicated that comorbid attention-deficit/ hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) specifically attenuated CBT outcomes at follow-up among children and adolescents (Farrell, Waters, Milliner, & Ollendick, 2012). Notably, the mechanisms by which these comorbid conditions influence outcome have yet to be explored.  Tourette syndrome and other tic disorders also appear to be related to OCD, although not sufficiently to be grouped within obsessive–compulsive and related disorders in DSM-5. Estimates of the comorbidity of Tourette syndrome and OCD range from 28 to 63% (Comings, 1990; Kurlan et al., 2002; Leckman & Chittenden, 1990; Pauls, Towbin, Leckman, Zahner, & Cohen, 1986). Conversely, up to 17% of patients with OCD are thought to have Tourette syndrome (Comings, 1990; Kurlan et al., 2002; Rasmussen & Eisen, 1989). In a recent report, tic comorbidity was associated with poorer treatment outcome in general (Matsunaga et al., 2005), yet in a recent pediatric study was found to influence pharmacotherapy treatment outcome but not CBT response (March et al., 2007).  DiffereNtial DiaGNosis  The high comorbidity of OCD with other disorders noted earlier, as well as the similarity between the criteria for OCD and other DSM disorders, can pose diagnostic quandaries. Below we review some of the more common diagnostic difficulties likely to confront clinicians and provide recommendations for making these difficult diagnostic judgments.  Obsessions versus Depressive Rumination  It is sometimes difficult to differentiate between depressive ruminations and obsessions. The distinction rests primarily on thought content and the patient’s re   ported resistance to such thoughts. Unlike obsessions, ruminations are typically pessimistic ideas about the self or the world, and ruminative content frequently shifts. Additionally, depressive ruminators tend to not make repeated attempts to suppress their ruminations the way individuals with OCD try to suppress obsessions. When depression and OCD co-occur, both phenomena may be present, but only obsessions should be targeted with exposure exercises. We have also found clinically that the generally pessimistic presentation of depressed patients can undermine hopefulness about improvement during EX/RP; thus, these beliefs may require therapeutic intervention even though they are not obsessional.  Anxiety Disorders  OCD was previously classified as an anxiety disorder in DSM-IV, and it often co-occurs with anxiety disorders. Diagnostic criteria are sometimes similar among these related (anxiety) disorders, but the symptoms associated with each diagnosis can usually be distinguished. For example, the excessive worries characteristic of GAD may appear similar to those in OCD but, unlike obsessions, worries are excessive concerns about real-life circumstances and are experienced by the individual as appropriate (ego-syntonic). In contrast, obsessive thinking is more likely to be unrealistic or magical, and obsessions are usually experienced by the individual as inappropriate (ego-dystonic). There are, however, exceptions to this general rule: Individuals with either GAD or OCD may worry about everyday matters, such as their children getting sick. However, when worried about their children catching cold, parents with GAD might focus their concern on the long-term consequences (e.g., falling behind in school, development of a lifelong pattern of debilitation), whereas parents with OCD might focus more on the contamination aspect of illness (e.g., their child being infested with “cold germs”). The problem of distinguishing between obsessions and worries in a particular patient is most relevant when the patient exhibits no compulsions, but, as we mentioned earlier, pure obsessionals comprise only about 2% of individuals with OCD (Foa et al., 1995).  In the absence of rituals, the avoidance associated with specific phobias may also appear similar to OCD. For example, excessive fear of germs and specific phobia both may result in persistent fear of dogs. However, unlike an individual with OCD, a person with a specific phobia can successfully avoid dogs for the most part, or   Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder  reduce distress quickly by escaping dogs when avoidance is impractical. In contrast, the individual with OCD who is obsessed with “dog germs” continues to feel contaminated even after the dog is gone, and sometimes knowing that a dog was in the vicinity several hours earlier can also produce obsessional distress even if there is no possibility that the dog will return. This distress often prompts subsequent avoidance behaviors (e.g., taking off clothing that might have been near the contaminating dog) not typically observed in specific phobias.  Body Dysmorphic Disorder  The preoccupation with imagined physical defects of body dysmorphic disorder (BDD) is formally similar to the obsessions of OCD, and BDD is grouped with obsessive–compulsive and related disorders in DSM-5. The best way to differentiate between this disorder and OCD is to examine for content specificity of the fearprovoking thoughts. Most individuals with BDD are singly obsessed, whereas most individuals with OCD have multiple obsessions.  Tourette Syndrome and Tic Disorders  To differentiate the stereotyped motor behaviors that characterize Tourette syndrome and tic disorders from compulsions, the functional relationship between these behaviors and any obsessive thoughts must be examined. Motor tics are generally experienced as involuntary and are not aimed at neutralizing distress brought about by obsessions. There is no conventional way to differentiate them from “pure” compulsions, but OCD with “pure” compulsions is extremely rare (Foa et al., 1995). As noted earlier, there appears to be a high rate of comorbidity between OCD and tic disorders (e.g., Pauls et al., 1986); thus, both disorders may be present simultaneously in a given patient. Interestingly, tics were similarly responsive to an EX/RP protocol when compared in a randomized study to habit-reversal training in which a competing response is substituted for the tic; this finding suggests that the conceptual model underlying the treatment of tics might require modification (Verdellen, Keijsers, Cath, & Hoogduin, 2004).  Delusional Disorder and Schizophrenia  Individuals with OCD may present with obsessions of delusional intensity (for a review, see Kozak & Foa, 1994). Approximately 5% of patients with OCD report  complete conviction that their obsessions and compulsions are realistic, with an additional 20% reporting strong but not fixed conviction. Therefore, it is important to consider the diagnosis of OCD “with poor insight” even if these beliefs are very strongly held. The differentiation between delusional disorder and OCD can depend on the presence of compulsions in OCD (Eisen et al., 1998). In OCD, obsessions of delusional intensity are usually accompanied by compulsions.  It is also important to recognize that the content of obsessions in OCD may be quite bizarre, as in the delusions of schizophrenia, but bizarreness in and of itself does not preclude a diagnosis of OCD. For example, one patient seen at our center was fearful that small bits of her “essence” would be forever lost if she passed too close to public trash cans. This patient did not report any other symptoms of formal thought disorder, such as loose associations, hallucinations, flat or grossly inappropriate affect, and thought insertion or projection. Following a course of EX/RP that focused on exercises designed to expose the patient to the loss of her “essence” (e.g., driving by the city dump), her OCD symptoms were substantially reduced. On occasion patients do meet diagnostic criteria for both OCD and schizophrenia, and a dual diagnosis is appropriate under these circumstances. Importantly, EX/RP with such patients should proceed only if the associated treatment exercises do not exacerbate the comorbid thought disorder symptoms.  coGNitive aND Behavioral MoDels  Mowrer’s (1939) two-stage theory for the acquisition and maintenance of fear and avoidance behavior has been commonly adopted to explain phobias and OCD. As elaborated by Mowrer (1960), this theory proposes that in the first stage, a neutral event becomes associated with fear by being paired with a stimulus that by its nature provokes discomfort or anxiety. Through conditioning processes, objects, as well as thoughts and images, acquire the ability to produce discomfort. In the second stage of this process, escape or avoidance responses are developed to reduce the anxiety or discomfort evoked by the various conditioned stimuli and are maintained by their success in doing so. Dollard and Miller (1950) adopted Mowrer’s two-stage theory to explain the development of phobias and obsessive– compulsive neurosis. As noted earlier, because of the intrusive nature of obsessions, many situations that provoke obsessions cannot readily be avoided. Passive   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  avoidance behaviors, such as those utilized by phobics, are also less effective in controlling obsessional distress. Active avoidance patterns in the form of ritualistic behaviors are then developed and maintained by their success in alleviating this distress.  In light of equivocal empirical support for the twostage theory and its limitations in explaining the etiology of obsessions, several cognitive explanations were proposed to account for the development and maintenance of OCD symptoms (e.g., Beck, 1976; Carr, 1974). Salkovskis (1985) offered a more comprehensive cognitive analysis of OCD. He posited that intrusive obsessional thoughts are stimuli that may provoke certain types of negative automatic thoughts. Accordingly, an intrusive thought leads to mood disturbances only if it triggers negative automatic thoughts through interaction between the unacceptable intrusion and the individual’s belief system (e.g., only bad people have sexual thoughts). According to Salkovskis, exaggerated senses of responsibility and self-blame are the central themes in the belief system of a person with OCD. Neutralization, in the form of behavioral or cognitive compulsions, may be understood as an attempt to reduce this sense of responsibility and to prevent blame. In addition, frequently occurring thoughts regarding unacceptable actions may be perceived by the individual with OCD as equivalent to the actions themselves, so, for example, even if the person has not sinned, the thought of sinning is as bad as sinning itself.  Salkovskis (1985) further proposed that five dysfunctional assumptions characterize individuals with OCD and differentiate them from persons without OCD:  (1) Having a thought about an action is like performing the action; (2) failing to prevent (or failing to try to prevent) harm to self or others is the same as having caused the harm in the first place; (3) responsibility is not attenuated by other factors (e.g., low probability of occurrence); (4) not neutralizing when an intrusion has occurred is similar or equivalent to seeking or wanting the harm involved in that intrusion to actually happen; (5) one should (and can) exercise control over one’s thoughts. (p. 579) Thus, while the obsession may be ego-dystonic, the automatic thought it elicits will be ego-syntonic. By extension, this model suggests that treatment of OCD should largely focus on identifying the erroneous assumptions and modifying the automatic thoughts. This theory paved the way for various elaborations on the cognitive models, experimental studies of the model,  and the development of cognitive therapies that derive from the central role of these key cognitive factors.  Salkovskis’s (1985) theory sparked examination of the role of responsibility in the psychopathology of OCD (Ladoucer et al., 1995; Rachman, Thordarson, Shafran, & Woody, 1995; Rhéaume, Freeston, Dugas, Letarte, & Ladoucer, 1995). Further attention has been paid to what Rachman (1998) referred to as thought– action fusion (TAF), wherein individuals believe that simply having an unacceptable thought increases the likelihood of the occurrence of a feared outcome, and that thoughts of engaging in repugnant activities are equivalent to actually having done so. Contemporary cognitive theorists would then suggest that obsessive– compulsive beliefs such as TAF, exaggerated responsibility, and intolerance of uncertainty likely result in increased and ultimately futile efforts at thought suppression and other ill-advised mental control strategies, which would then yield increased frequency of such thoughts and associated distress (Purdon & Clark, 2002). Hence, a vicious cycle of avoidance maintains and strengthens the OCD, and the cognitive therapies that derive from these contemporary models would directly target these obsessive–compulsive beliefs in an effort to break the cycle.  In an integrated cognitive-behavioral account, Foa and Kozak (1985) conceptualized anxiety disorders in general as specific impairments in emotional memory networks. Following Lang (1979), they view fear as an information network existing in memory that includes representation about fear stimuli, fear responses, and their meaning. With regard to the fear content, Foa and Kozak suggested that fear networks of individuals with anxiety disorders are characterized by the presence of erroneous estimates of threat, unusually high negative valence for the feared event, and excessive response elements (e.g., physiological reactivity), and are resistant to modification. This persistence may reflect failure to access the fear network because of either active avoidance or because the content of the fear network precludes spontaneous encounters with situations that evoke anxiety in everyday life. Additionally, anxiety may persist because of some impairment in the mechanism of extinction. Cognitive defenses, excessive arousal with failure to habituate, faulty premises, and erroneous rules of inference are all impairments that would hinder the processing of information necessary for modifying the fear structure to reduce fear behavior.  Foa and Kozak (1985) suggested that several forms of fear occur in individuals with OCD. The patient   Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder  who fears contracting venereal disease from public bathrooms and washes to prevent such harm has a fear structure that includes excessive associations between the stimuli (e.g., bathroom) and the anxiety/distress responses, as well as mistaken beliefs about the harm related to the stimulus. For other individuals with OCD, fear responses are associated with mistaken meaning rather than with a particular stimulus. For example, some patients who are disturbed by perceived asymmetry, and who reduce their distress by rearranging objects, do not fear the objects themselves, nor do they anticipate disaster from the asymmetry. Rather, they are upset by their view that certain arrangements of stimuli are “improper.”  Like Reed (1985), Foa and Kozak (1985) proposed that in addition to the pathological content of the obsessions, OCD is distinguished from other disorders by pathology in the mechanisms underlying information processing. Specifically, they suggested that patients with OCD experience impairments in considering the rules for making inferences about harm, often concluding that a situation is dangerous based on the absence of evidence for safety, and that they often fail to make inductive leaps about safety from information about the absence of danger. Consequently, rituals performed to reduce the likelihood of harm can never provide safety and must be repeated. In an elaboration on emotional processing theory and the mechanism by which exposure works, Foa, Huppert, and Cahill (2006) suggested that in vivo exposure to the feared stimulus in the absence of the anticipated harm corrects the exaggerated probability estimates; imaginal exposure not only corrects the exaggerated cost but also strengthens the discrimination between “thoughts about harm” and “real harm,” thus altering the associations between threat meaning of stimulus and/or response elements in the fear structure.  In contrast to the more general theories of OCD described earlier, some theorists have posed more specific hypotheses to account for the pathology observed in certain OCD subtypes. For example, clinical observations led some investigators to hypothesize that memory deficits for actions underlie compulsive checking (e.g., Sher, Frost, & Otto, 1983). However, the results of experimental investigations of this hypothesis are equivocal. Some support for an action–memory deficit was found in nonclinical individuals with checking rituals (e.g., Rubenstein, Peynircioglu, Chambless, & Pigott, 1993; Sher et al., 1983). In contrast, a study using a clinical sample found that compared to nonpa   tients, patients with OCD with checking rituals better recalled their fear-relevant actions (e.g., plugging in an iron, unsheathing a knife), but not fear-irrelevant actions (e.g., putting paper clips in a box; Constans, Foa, Franklin, & Mathews, 1995). From these data, it appears that checking is not motivated primarily by memory problems; hence, teaching mnemonic strategies to patients with OCD with checking rituals is probably not the optimal clinical strategy; rather, having patients repeatedly confront the low-risk situations that provoke obsessional distress, while simultaneously refraining from checking behavior or mental reviewing of actions, is preferred.  treatMeNts  Exposure and Ritual Prevention  The prognostic picture for OCD has improved dramatically since Victor Meyer (1966) first reported on two patients who responded well to a treatment that included prolonged exposure to obsessional cues and strict prevention of rituals. This procedure, known at the time as exposure and ritual prevention (EX/RP), was later found to be extremely successful in 10 of 15 cases and partly effective in the remainder. Patients treated with this regimen also appeared to maintain their treatment gains: At a 5-year follow-up, only two of these patients had relapsed (Meyer & Levy, 1973; Meyer, Levy, & Schnurer, 1974).  As was the case with Meyer’s program, current EX/ RP treatments typically include both prolonged exposure to obsessional cues and procedures aimed at blocking rituals. Exposure exercises are often done in real-life settings (in vivo), for example, by asking the patient who fears accidentally causing a house fire by leaving the stove on, to leave the house without checking the burners. When patients report specific feared consequences of refraining from rituals, these fears may also be addressed via imaginal exposure. In fact, in vivo and imaginal exposure exercises are designed specifically to prompt obsessional distress. It is believed that repeated, prolonged exposure to feared thoughts and situations provides information that disconfirms mistaken associations and evaluations held by the patients and thereby promotes habituation (Foa & Kozak, 1986). Exposure is usually done gradually by confronting situations that provoke moderate distress before confronting more upsetting ones. Exposure homework   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  is routinely assigned between sessions, and patients are also asked to refrain from rituals.  Since Meyer’s (1966) initial positive report of the efficacy of EX/RP, many subsequent studies of EX/RP have indicated that most EX/RP treatment completers make and maintain clinically significant gains. Randomized controlled trials (RCTs) have indicated that EX/RP is superior to a variety of control treatments, including placebo medication (Marks, Stern, Mawson, Cobb, & McDonald, 1980), relaxation (Fals-Stewart, Marks, & Schafer, 1993), and anxiety management training (Lindsay, Crino, & Andrews, 1997). Foa and Kozak’s (1996) review of 12 outcome studies (N = 330) reporting treatment responder rates indicated that 83% of EX/RP treatment completers were classified as responders at posttreatment. In 16 studies reporting longterm outcome (N = 376; mean follow-up interval of 29 months), 76% were responders. Moreover, several studies have now indicated that these encouraging findings for EX/RP are not limited to highly selected RCT samples (Franklin, Abramowitz, Kozak, Levitt, & Foa, 2000; Rothbaum & Shahar, 2000; Valderhaug, Larsson, Gotestam, & Piacentini, 2007; Warren & Thomas, 2001).  In general, EX/RP has been found quite effective in ameliorating OCD symptoms and has produced great durability of gains following treatment discontinuation. In our review of the literature, it also was apparent that among the many variants of EX/RP treatment, some are relevant for outcome and others are not. We review the literature on the relative efficacy of the ingredients that comprise EX/RP to help clinicians decide which EX/RP components are most essential.  EX/RP Treatment Variables  exPosUre VersUs riTUAl PreVenTion VersUs ex/rP  To separate the effects of exposure and ritual prevention on OCD symptoms, Foa, Steketee, Grayson, Turner, and Latimer (1984) randomly assigned patients with washing rituals to treatment by exposure only (EX), ritual prevention only (RP), or their combination (EX/ RP). Each treatment was conducted intensively (15 daily 2-hour sessions conducted over 3 weeks) and followed by a home visit. Patients in each condition were found to be improved at both posttreatment and followup, but EX/RP was superior to the single-component treatments on almost every symptom measure at both  assessment points. In comparing EX and RP, patients who received EX reported lower anxiety when confronting feared contaminants than did patients who had received RP, whereas the RP group reported greater decreases in urge to ritualize than did the EX patients. Thus, it appears that EX and RP affected different OCD symptoms. The findings from this study clearly suggest that EX and RP should be implemented concurrently; treatments that do not include both components yield inferior outcome. It is important to convey this information to patients, especially when they are experiencing difficulty either refraining from rituals or engaging effectively in exposure exercises during and between sessions.  iMPleMenTATion of riTUAl PreVenTion  Promoting abstinence from rituals during treatment is thought to be essential for successful treatment outcome, but the preferred method of RP has changed over the years. In Meyer’s (1966) EX/RP treatment program, hospital staff members physically prevented patients from performing rituals (e.g., turning off the water supply in a patient’s room). However, physical intervention by staff or family members to prevent patients from ritualizing is no longer typical nor recommended. It is believed that such prevention techniques are too coercive to be an accepted practice today. Moreover, physical prevention by others may actually limit generalizability to nontherapy situations in which others are not present to intercede. Instead, instructions and encouragement to refrain from ritualizing and avoidance are now recommended. As noted earlier, although exposure in itself can reduce obsessional distress, it is not so effective in reducing compulsions. To maximize treatment effects, the patient needs to refrain voluntarily from ritualizing while engaging in systematic exposure exercises. The therapist should strongly emphasize the importance of refraining from rituals and help the patient with this difficult task by providing support, encouragement, and suggestions about alternatives to ritualizing.  Use of iMAginAl exPosUre  Treatment involving imaginal plus in vivo EX/RP at follow-up was superior to an in vivo EX/RP program that did not include imaginal exposure (Foa, Steketee, Turner, & Fischer, 1980; Steketee, Foa, & Grayson,   Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder  1982). However, a second study did not find that the addition of imaginal exposure enhanced long-term efficacy compared to in vivo exposure only (De Araujo, Ito, Marks, & Deale, 1995). The treatment program in the former study differed from that of De Araujo and colleagues on several parameters (e.g., 90-minute vs. 30-minute imaginal exposures, respectively); thus, the source of these studies’ inconsistencies cannot be identified.   In our clinical work, we have found imaginal exposure to be helpful for patients who report that disastrous consequences will result if they refrain from rituals. Because many of these consequences cannot be readily translated into in vivo exposure exercises (e.g., burning in hell), imaginal exposure allows the patient an opportunity to confront these feared thoughts. Also, the addition of imagery to in vivo exposure may circumvent the cognitive avoidance strategies used by patients who intentionally try not to consider the consequences of exposure while confronting feared situations in vivo. In summary, although imaginal exposure does not appear essential for immediate outcome, it may enhance long-term maintenance and be used as an adjunct to in vivo exercises for patients who fear disastrous consequences. For patients who only report extreme distress as a consequence of refraining from rituals and avoidance behaviors, imaginal exposure may not be needed.  grADUAl VersUs ABrUPT exPosUres  No differences in OCD symptom reduction were detected in a study comparing patients who confronted the most distressing situations from the start of therapy to those who confronted less distressing situations first, yet patients preferred the more gradual approach (Hodgson, Rachman, & Marks, 1972). However, because patient motivation and agreement with treatment goals are core elements of successful EX/RP, situations of moderate difficulty are usually confronted first, followed by several intermediate steps, before the most distressing exposures are attempted. Thus, we emphasize that exposure will proceed at a pace that is acceptable to the patient, and that no exposure will ever be attempted without the patient’s approval. At the same time, it is preferable to confront the highest item on the treatment hierarchy relatively early in treatment (e.g., within the first week of intensive treatment) to allow sufficient time to repeat these difficult exposures over the later sessions.  DUrATion of exPosUre  Duration of exposure was once believed to be important for outcome in that prolonged, continuous exposure was found to be more effective than short, interrupted exposure (Rabavilas, Boulougouris, & Perissaki, 1979). Indeed, reduction in anxiety (habitation) across sessions has been associated with improvement following exposure-based treatments for OCD and for PTSD (e.g., Jaycox, Foa, & Morral, 1998; Kozak, Foa, & Steketee, 1988; van Minnen & Hagenaars, 2002). However, several studies have not found a strong relationship between within-session habituation and fear and symptom reduction (Jaycox et al., 1998; Kozak et al., 1988; Mathews, Johnston, Shaw, & Gelder, 1974; Rowe & Craske, 1998). In an elaboration on emotional processing theory, Foa and colleagues (2006) found that the recent deemphasis on the relationship between within-session habituation and outcome is not critical to emotional processing theory because the proposed mechanism underlying symptom reduction is the modification of the relevant erroneous associations through disconfirming information, not through habituation per se. In practical terms, this means patients should be instructed that although, optimally, they should persist with exposure until the anxiety is substantially reduced, the more important factor is repeating the same exposures, to promote reduction of associated anxiety over time. Patients with OCD might be particularly vulnerable to fears of ending exposures “too soon,” hence, doing the treatment incorrectly, so this new instruction might help encourage patients to go about their business without ritualizing or avoiding, regardless of whether anxiety still lingers on from an exposure task. The deemphasis on the critical importance of habituation in the moment is more pronounced procedurally when using acceptance and commitment therapy (e.g., Twohig et al., 2010), but generally speaking this viewpoint appears to be gaining acceptance among cognitive-behavioral therapists as well. For example, clinically we often remind patients that whether or not they are anxious is less relevant than what they do (or do not do) when they are anxious, since ritualizing and avoidance will maintain fear down the line.  freqUenCy of exPosUre sessions  Optimal frequency of exposure sessions has yet to be established. Intensive exposure therapy programs that have achieved excellent results (e.g., Foa, Kozak,   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  Steketee, & McCarthy, 1992) typically involve daily sessions over the course of approximately 1 month, but quite favorable outcomes have also been achieved with more widely spaced sessions (e.g., Abramowitz, Foa, & Franklin, 2003; De Araujo et al., 1995; Franklin et al., 1998). A recent RCT in pediatric OCD found no difference between intensive and weekly treatment (Storch et al., 2007). Clinically, we have found that less frequent sessions may be sufficient for highly motivated patients with mild to moderate OCD symptoms, who readily understand the importance of daily exposure homework. Patients with very severe symptoms or those who for various reasons cannot readily comply with EX/RP tasks between sessions, are typically offered intensive treatment.  THerAPisT‑AssisTeD VersUs self‑exPosUre  Evaluations of the presence of a therapist during exposure have yielded inconsistent results. In one study, patients with OCD receiving therapist-assisted exposure were more improved immediately posttreatment than those receiving clomipramine and self-exposure, but this difference was not evident at follow-up (Marks et al., 1988). However, these results are difficult to interpret in light of the study’s complex design. A second study using patients with OCD also indicated that therapist-assisted treatment was not superior to selfexposure at posttreatment or at follow-up (Emmelkamp & van Kraanen, 1977), but the number of patients in each condition was too small to render these findings conclusive. In contrast to the negative findings of Marks and colleagues (1988) and Emmelkamp and van Kraanen (1977), therapist presence yielded superior outcome of a single, 3-hour exposure session compared to self-exposure for persons with specific phobia (Öst, 1989). Because specific phobias are, on the whole, less disabling and easier to treat than OCD, one may surmise that therapist presence should also influence treatment outcome with OCD. Moreover, using meta-analytic procedures, Abramowitz (1996) found that therapist-controlled exposure was associated with greater improvement in OCD and GAD symptoms compared to self-controlled procedures. A recent study found comparable outcome for patients receiving EX/ RP with therapist assistance and those who received teletherapy (Lovell et al., 2006), which further raises the question of whether therapist assistance is required for good outcome. In light of these inconsistent findings, no clear answer is available on the role of thera   pist assistance with exposure tasks in OCD treatment. However, we have found clinically that the presence of a therapist can be useful in helping patients to remain engaged in exposures while anxiety is high, to avoid subtle rituals or avoidance behaviors during exposure (e.g., distraction, mental rituals), and to remain sufficiently motivated despite distress. Researchers have begun to examine the question of whether telephone therapy or Skype would also be effective, including adapted CBT protocols for Tourette syndrome (Himle, Olufs, Himle, Tucker, & Woods, 2010 ) and OCD specifically (e.g., Bachofen et al., 1999); such research may provide greater confidence that these methods can be used efficaciously, which will help to address the ongoing problem of the paucity of OCD treatment expertise that plagues most communities.  EX/RP versus Other Treatment Approaches  In this section we review the literature on the efficacy of standard individual EX/RP treatment versus other therapeutic approaches, including group treatment, family-based EX/RP treatment, cognitive therapy, and pharmacotherapy.  inDiViDUAl VersUs groUP ex/rP  Intensive individual EX/RP, although effective, can pose practical obstacles such as high cost for treatment, and scheduling problems for patient and therapist alike. Additionally, because experts in EX/RP treatment are few and far between, patients may need to wait for long periods or travel substantial distances to be treated. Thus, some researchers have begun to examine the efficacy of more affordable and efficient treatment modalities. One such alternative is group treatment. Fals-Stewart and colleagues (1993) conducted a controlled study in which patients with OCD were randomly assigned to individual EX/RP, group EX/RP, or a psychosocial control condition (relaxation). Each of the active treatments was 12 weeks long, with sessions held twice weekly, and included daily exposure homework. Significant improvement in OCD symptoms was evident in both active treatments, with no differences detected between individual and group EX/RP immediately posttreatment or at 6-month follow-up. Profile analysis of OCD symptom ratings collected throughout treatment did indicate a faster reduction in symptoms for patients receiving individual treatment. These results offer evidence for the efficacy of group treat    Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder  ment. However, because patients were excluded from this study if they were diagnosed with any personality disorder or with comorbid depression, it may be that the sample was somewhat atypical. In addition, none of the participants had received previous OCD treatment, which is also unusual for this population and suggestive of a less symptomatic sample. Thus, inferences about the broader OCD population merit caution until these results are replicated.  More recently, Barrett, Healy-Farrell, and March (2004) found that individual and group CBT were highly and similarly efficacious for children and adolescents with OCD relative to a wait-list control; this raises the possibility that group interventions might hold particular promise in the treatment of youth with OCD. Also in youth, Asbahr and colleagues (2005) found group CBT and sertraline comparable at posttreatment, but there was less relapse in the former condition. More recently, another Australian research group found comparable outcomes for group treatment compared to individual treatment, both of which were superior to a wait-list control (Anderson & Rees, 2007); not surprisingly, though, individual treatment was associated with more rapid response.  fAMily inVolVeMenT VersUs sTAnDArD ex/rP TreATMenT  Emmelkamp and colleagues (1990) examined whether family involvement in treatment would enhance the efficacy of EX/RP for OCD. Patients who were married or living with a romantic partner were randomly assigned to receive EX/RP either with or without partner involvement in treatment. Results indicated that OCD symptoms were significantly lowered following treatment for both groups. No differences between the treatments emerged, and initial marital distress did not predict outcome. However, the reduction in anxiety/ distress reported for the sample as a whole was modest (33%), which may have resulted from the relatively short treatment sessions and absence of in vivo exposure exercises in treatment sessions.  Mehta (1990) also examined the effect of family involvement on EX/RP treatment outcome. To adapt the treatment to serve the large numbers of young unmarried people seeking OCD treatment and the “joint family system” prevalent in India, Mehta used a familybased rather than spouse-based treatment approach. Patients who did not respond to previous pharmacotherapy were randomly assigned to receive treatment  by systematic desensitization and EX/RP, either with or without family assistance. Sessions in both conditions were held twice per week for 12 weeks; response prevention was described as “gradual.” In the family condition, a designated family member (parent, spouse, or adult child) assisted with homework assignments, supervised relaxation therapy, participated in response prevention, and was instructed to be supportive. On self-reported OCD symptoms, a greater improvement was found for the family-based intervention at posttreatment and 6-month follow-up. Although this study had methodological problems that complicate interpretation of findings (e.g., use of self-report OCD measures only, unclear description of treatment procedures), it offers some preliminary evidence that family involvement may be helpful in OCD treatment. Clinically, we routinely enlist the support of family members in EX/ RP, providing psychoeducation about the illness and its consequences during the early stages of treatment planning, and advice and encouragement in managing the patient’s request for assurances, his or her avoidant behaviors, and violation of EX/RP rules between sessions. We also try to reduce family members’ criticism of the patient and unconstructive arguing about OCD and related matters when these issues arise in the therapy.  Published randomized studies of CBT for OCD with youth have each included parents at least to some extent in treatment (Barrett et al., 2004; de Haan, Hoogduin, Buitelaar, & Keijsers, 1998; Pediatric OCD Treatment Study Team, 2004), and a direct comparison of CBT, with and without a family component, using an otherwise identical protocol has yet to be conducted in pediatric OCD. Research on whether family involvement enhances individual CBT outcomes in other anxiety disorders has generally yielded mixed findings, however, and a large, recently completed RCT indicated that both forms of treatment are efficacious and essentially equivalent to one another (Bogels & Bodden, 2005). Higher family dysfunction in general was associated with poorer long-term outcome in a recent study (Barrett, Farrell, Dadds, & Boulter, 2005), as was family accommodation of OCD rituals specifically (Peris et al., 2012), and at this point it might be clinically prudent to include a more comprehensive family component when family members are very directly involved in the patient’s rituals (e.g., reassurance seeking) or when family psychopathology threatens generalizability of treatment gains to a chaotic home environment. It also may be that greater family involvement in treatment is   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  needed when the patient is very young (Freeman et al., 2003, 2007).  ex/rP VersUs CogniTiVe THerAPies  Increased interest in cognitive therapy (e.g., Beck, 1976; Ellis, 1962), coupled with dissatisfaction with formulations of treatment mediated by processes such as extinction (Stampfl & Levis, 1967) or habituation (Watts, 1973), prompted examination of the efficacy of cognitive procedures for anxiety disorders in general and for OCD in particular. A number of early studies found few differences between standard behavioral treatments and behavioral treatments enhanced with various cognitive approaches (e.g., Emmelkamp & Beens, 1991; Emmelkamp, Visser, & Hoekstra, 1988). Recent advances in cognitive conceptualizations of OCD have apparently yielded more efficacious and durable cognitive treatments. Freeston and colleagues (1997) found a cognitive-behavioral intervention efficacious compared to a wait-list control group for patients with “pure” obsessions. Several other studies (Cottraux et al., 2001; McLean et al., 2001; Vogel, Stiles, & Götestam, 2004; Whittal, Thordarson, & McLean, 2005) have suggested equivalent results for CBT and EX/RP, respectively, although some procedural overlap between the two conditions in these studies makes their findings difficult to interpret. In concert with studies attesting to the utility of cognitively oriented approaches for conditions that are quite similar to OCD, such as hypochondriasis (Barsky & Ahern, 2004; Warwick, Clark, Cobb, & Salkovskis, 1996), it does appear that cognitive therapies hold promise for the treatment of OCD and might be an efficacious potential alternative to EX/RP. More recently, however, Whittal, Woody, McLean, Rachman, and Robichaud (2010) failed to find a difference between cognitive therapy and stress management training (SMT) for a sample with primary obsessions and mental rituals, although this appeared to be due to the fact that SMT yielded substantial and lasting benefit compared to pretreatment rather than because cognitive therapy did not.  The question of whether cognitive therapy improves the efficacy of EX/RP is generally difficult to discern because both exposure therapy and cognitive therapy are intended to modify mistaken cognitions. An RCT that compared “pure” forms of CT or EX/RP, with or without medication, found similar, yet somewhat attentuated, outcomes relative to what might typically be expected from either treatment (van Balkom et al.,  1998). Foa and Kozak (1986) argued that the disconfirmation of erroneous associations and beliefs is a crucial mechanism underlying the efficacy of exposure treatments, hence disputing discussions that mistaken cognitions from EX/RP might be expected to hamper outcome. For example, a patient and therapist sitting on the bathroom floor in a public restroom conducting an exposure to contaminated surfaces routinely discuss risk assessment, probability overestimation, and so forth, as the therapist helps the patient achieve the cognitive modification necessary for improvement. The practical issue of interest is how to maximize efficacy: Is informal discussion of cognitive distortions during the exposure exercises sufficient, or should the therapist engage in formal Socratic questioning of hypothesized distortions, such as inflated responsibility? Notably, in a meta-analytic review, cognitive therapies for OCD that included some form of exposure to feared stimuli were superior to those that did not, suggesting that exposure may be necessary to maximize outcomes (Abramowitz, Franklin, & Foa, 2002).  To expand upon this point further, Hiss, Foa, and Kozak (1994) investigated whether formal relapse prevention techniques following intensive EX/RP enhanced maintenance of gains. Notably, all discussions about cognitive factors typically included during the core treatment (e.g., discussion of lapse vs. relapse, posttreatment exposure instructions, themes of guilt and personal responsibility, and feared consequences) were removed. Patients received this modified EX/RP, followed by either a relapse prevention treatment or a psychosocial control treatment (associative therapy). All patients in both conditions were classified as responders at posttreatment (defined as 50% or greater reduction in OCD symptoms), with treatment gains better maintained in the relapse prevention group than in the associative therapy condition at 6-month followup. The percentages of responders at follow-up were 75% in the relapse prevention condition and 33% in associative therapy. The higher than usual observed relapse rate in the associative therapy condition may have resulted from the removal of cognitive techniques typically utilized during the core treatment, such as discussion of feared consequences. These findings, and those discussed earlier, further underscore our belief that blended treatment designed to provide patients the opportunity to disconfirm their erroneous cognitions makes the most sense clinically. Accordingly, our approach clearly incorporates informal cognitive procedures, and discussions of the outcome of exposures are   Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder  geared toward challenging mistaken beliefs; this is accomplished in the context of a treatment approach that still emphasizes the importance of EX/RP in bringing about such changes.  Serotonergic Medications  Effectiveness of Medications  The use of serotonergic medications in the treatment of OCD has received a great deal of attention in the past 25 years. Of the tricyclic antidepressants, clomipramine (CMI) has been studied most extensively. In controlled trials, CMI has consistently been found to be superior to placebo (e.g., DeVeaugh-Geiss, Landau, & Katz, 1989). Similar results have been obtained with the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) fluoxetine, fluvoxamine, and sertraline (see Greist, Jefferson, Kobak, Katzelnick, & Serlin, 1995). Accordingly, each of these medications has been approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) as treatments for adult OCD. On the whole, these studies suggest that up to 60% of patients show some response to treatment with SSRIs. However, even the average treatment gain achieved by treatment responders is moderate at best (Greist, 1990). In addition, amelioration of obsessive–compulsive symptoms is maintained only as long as the drug is continued: For example, in an early controlled, double-blind discontinuation study, 90% of patients relapsed within a few weeks after being withdrawn from CMI (Pato, Zohar-Kadouch, Zohar, & Murphy, 1988). More recent discontinuation studies with slower taper periods have not yielded such dramatic results, but they nevertheless converge to suggest that maintenance treatment is necessary to sustain achievements attained with pharmacotherapy alone for OCD (Dougherty, Rauch, & Jenike, 2002).  EX/RP versus Pharmacotherapy  Many controlled studies have indicated that serotonergic antidepressants are superior to placebo in ameliorating OCD symptoms (for a review, see Greist et al., 1995). However, only a few controlled studies have directly compared the relative or combined efficacy of antidepressant medications and EX/RP, and several studies that have made such a comparison included complex designs that make it difficult to draw confident conclusions about relative and combined efficacy (e.g., Marks et al., 1980, 1988). Cottraux and colleagues  (1990) compared fluvoxamine (FLV) with antiexposure instructions, FLV plus weekly EX/RP, and pill placebo (PBO) plus EX/RP, and found FLV + EX/RP and FLV  + antiexposure instructions superior to PBO + EX/RP; there was a trend toward an advantage for combined treatment, but it failed to reach significance. Hohagen and colleagues (1998) compared EX/RP + FLV to EX/ RP + PBO and found that both groups improved significantly and comparably on compulsions, but the patients who received EX/RP + FLV were significantly better at posttreatment on obsessions than those who received EX/RP + PBO. Subanalyses indicated that patients with secondary depression also fared better if they were receiving EX/RP + FLV. The relative and combined efficacy of CMI and intensive EX/RP was examined in a multicenter, RCT conducted at our center (Penn) and at Columbia University. Findings with both treatment completer and intention-to-treat (ITT) data indicated at posttreatment that the active treatments were superior to placebo, EX/ RP was superior to CMI, and the combination of the two treatments was not superior to EX/RP alone (Foa et al., 2005); relapse was more evident following treatment discontinuation in the CMI group than in either treatment that included intensive EX/RP (EX/RP, EX/ RP + CMI; Simpson et al., 2004). However, the design used in the Penn–Columbia study may not have optimally promoted an additive effect for CMI because the intensive portion of the EX/RP program was largely completed before patients reached their maximum dose of CMI. In addition, combined treatment effects may be more evident when intensive EX/RP is not used (Foa, Franklin, & Moser, 2002). Notably, an additive effect for combined treatment was found in a recent study in pediatric OCD at Penn, Duke, and Brown (Pediatric OCD Treatment Study Team, 2004), although examination of effect sizes by site indicated that the CBT monotherapy effect at Penn was very large, and no additive effect for combined treatment was found at this site.  In summary, although there is clear evidence that both pharmaceutical treatment with serotonergic medications and EX/RP treatments are effective for OCD, information about their relative and combined efficacy remains scarce because most of the studies that examined these issues have been methodologically limited. Nevertheless, no study has found clear, long-term superiority for combined pharmacotherapy plus EX/RP over EX/RP alone. The absence of conclusive findings notwithstanding, many experts continue to advocate com    CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  bined procedures as the treatment of choice for OCD (e.g., Greist, 1992). In clinical practice, it is common to see patients in EX/RP treatment who are taking SSRIs concurrently. In uncontrolled examinations of EX/RP treatment outcome for adults (Franklin, Abramowitz, Bux, Zoellner, & Feeny, 2002) and youth (Franklin et al., 1998; Piacentini, Bergman, Jacobs, McCracken, & Kretchman, 2002) treated in OCD outpatient clinics, no posttreatment differences in OCD symptom severity were detected between patients who received EX/RP alone and those who received SSRI medication when receiving EX/RP. From these data we can surmise that concomitant pharmacotherapy is not required for every patient to benefit substantially from EX/RP, and that concomitant pharmacotherapy does not appear to inhibit EX/RP treatment response. With respect to EX/ RP augmentation in SSRI partial responders, there is now evidence from randomized trials that EX/RP augmented treatment outcome compared to medication alone in youth (Franklin et al., 2011) and compared to stress management training in adults (Simpson et al., 2010). More definitive conclusions about the effects of augmenting pharmacotherapy with EX/RP await a more carefully controlled examination, however.  assessMeNt  Following a diagnostic interview to ascertain the presence of OCD, it is advisable to quantify the severity of the OCD symptoms with one or more of the instruments described below. Quantification of symptom severity assists the therapist in evaluating how successful treatment was for a given patient. In our clinic, we use several assessment instruments. As in most OCD clinical research studies, however, the primary measure of OCD symptom severity used in our center is the Yale– Brown Obsessive–Compulsive Scale (Goodman et al., 1989a, 1989b).  Yale–Brown Obsessive–Compulsive Scale  The Yale–Brown Obsessive–Compulsive Scale (Y- BOCS; Goodman et al., 1989a, 1989b), a standardized, semistructured interview, takes approximately 30 minutes to complete. The Y-BOCS severity scale includes 10 items (five assess obsessions and five, compulsions), each of which is rated on a 5-point scale ranging from 0 (No symptoms) to 4 (Severe symptoms). Assessors rate the time occupied by the obsessions and compulsions,  the degree of interference with functioning, the level of distress, attempts to resist the symptoms, and level of control over the symptoms. The Y-BOCS has shown adequate interrater agreement, internal consistency, and validity (Goodman et al., 1989a, 1989b). The Y- BOCS served as the primary measure of outcome in most of the published OCD pharmacotherapy and CBT treatment studies conducted during the 1990s.  Self‑Report Measures  Obsessive–Compulsive Inventory—Revised  The Obsessive–Compulsive Inventory—Revised (OCI- R; Foa, Huppert, et al., 2002) is an 18-item, self-report measure that assesses the distress associated with obsessions and compulsions. In addition to the total score, six separate subscale scores are calculated by adding the three items that comprise each subscale: Washing, Checking, Ordering, Obsessing, Hoarding, and Neutralizing. Foa, Huppert, and colleagues (2002) reported good internal consistency, test–retest reliability, and discriminant validity in clinical patients with OCD, PTSD, generalized social phobia, and nonanxious controls. The total score ranges from 0 to 72, and each subscale ranges from 0 to 12.  Other Self-Report Measures  A few self-report instruments for assessing OCD symptoms, such as the Leyton Obsessional Inventory (Kazarian, Evans, & Lefave, 1977) and the Lynfield Obsessional/ Compulsive Questionnaire (Allen & Tune, 1975), are also available. These instruments are limited in that they assess only certain forms of obsessive– compulsive behavior and/or they include items that are unrelated to OCD symptoms. More recently, Storch and colleagues (2009) have developed the Children’s Florida Obsessive–Compulsive Inventory, which is intended primarily for screening purposes.  iNitial iNterview  After a diagnosis of OCD has been established, and before actually beginning treatment, the therapist should schedule 4–6 hours of appointments with the patient. In these sessions, the therapist needs to accomplish three important tasks. First, the sessions are used to collect the information necessary to develop a treatment plan.   Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder  Specifically, the therapist must first identify specific cues that cause the patient distress (threat cues), avoidance, rituals, and feared consequences. Second, the therapist should develop a good rapport with the patient, who will engage in exposure exercises designed to elicit anxiety and distress during intensive EX/RP, and the lack of a good relationship between therapist and the patient may compromise outcome. Third, the therapist needs to explore the patient’s beliefs about OCD and the perceived consequences of refraining from rituals and avoidance because this information guides the informal discussions of cognitive processes that take place throughout EX/RP.  Threat cues may be either (1) tangible objects in the environment or (2) thoughts, images, or impulses that the person experiences (for lack of better terms, we have labeled them “external cues” and “internal cues,” respectively). Passive avoidance and ritualistic behavior (sometimes called “active avoidance”) both serve to reduce the distress associated with the threat cues. Rituals may be further divided into overt or covert (mental) forms. It is essential that patients understand the difference between obsessions and mental compulsions because obsessions are treated with systematic exposure and mental compulsions, with ritual preventions. During treatment, patients should be instructed to report any mental compulsions to the therapist because performing such compulsions during exposure exercises attenuates the effects of these exercises in the same way that behavioral compulsions do.  External Fear Cues  Most individuals with OCD experience fear in reaction to specific environmental cues (objects, persons, or situations), but each patient has his/her own idiosyncratic threat cues. For example, individuals who fear contamination from toilets may differ as to whether they fear all toilets or only those open to the public. One patient may fear only the toilet itself, whereas another may also fear bathroom floors, doorknobs, and faucets. Similarly, two individuals may experience distress at the prospect of a fire burning down their home, but whereas one experiences the distress only when she is the last person to leave the house, the other experiences distress before going to bed at night when his children are present.  The therapist needs to gather specific information about cues that elicit the patient’s distress to identify the basic sources of the fear. Identification of the basic  source is important for planning the treatment program. Confronting the source of the fear is essential for successful behavioral treatment of OCD. Often, when such exposure does not take place during treatment, relapse occurs. For example, a patient who feared contamination by her hometown was treated with EX/RP 3,000 miles away from the town. Because of the distances involved, direct exposure to the town was impossible, so treatment comprised exposure to objects contaminated directly or indirectly by contact with the town. Although the patient habituated to the objects used in the exposure sessions, she continued to fear her hometown. Within 1 year after treatment, she had developed fears to new objects related to her hometown. Not until she engaged in repeated exposures to the town itself did she experience lasting improvement.  It is important that the therapist conduct a thorough investigation of objects, situations, and places that evoke obsessional distress for the patient at the time of presentation and at onset. Such information helps to identify the source of the distress. To facilitate communication with the patient about situations that evoke distress, a Subjective Units of Discomfort Scale (SUDS) ranging from 0 to 100 points is introduced. Patients are asked to rate each situation with respect to the level of distress they expect to experience upon exposure. The source of the distress is expected to be 100. The following dialogue between therapist and patient illustrates the process of gathering information about distressing situations.  tHeraPist: When do you get the urge to wash your  hands? Patient: In a lot of places. There are so many places.  tHeraPist: Are there any places where the urges are particularly strong?  Patient: Well when I am sitting in my living room, particularly near the fireplace. Also in the laundry room, which I never go to. Also, when I walk in the park.  tHeraPist: Let’s talk about your living room. How  upset are you when you are sitting next to your fire   place?  Patient: That’s bad. I guess about a 90.  tHeraPist: Can you tell me what makes you so upset  in your living room? Patient: Well that is a long story . . . and I know it  doesn’t make sense.   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  tHeraPist: Go on. It’s important that we understand what makes you uncomfortable and fearful in your living room.  Patient: About 2 years ago, I got up in the morning and went into the living room, and I saw a dead squirrel in the fireplace. I guess he got in through the chimney. So, I figured that if the squirrel was dead, he must have been sick. I know that a lot of squirrels have rabies, so I thought that if the squirrel died of rabies, then there are germs all over the chimney.  tHeraPist: Have you tried to have the chimney and the fireplace cleaned?  Patient: Yes, we did have a company come in and clean the whole area, but I’m not sure that they can clean away the germs.  tHeraPist: I understand. How about the laundry room, how upsetting is it to be in the laundry room? Patient: That would be a 100; that’s why I don’t go in there.  tHeraPist: How did the laundry room become dangerous?   Patient: Oh, that’s another story. Until a year ago, my children used to keep their guinea pigs in the laundry room. One day we found the female guinea pig dead. So I thought that it probably died of rabies, too.  tHeraPist: Oh, I understand. So you are generally afraid you will contract rabies if you come in contact with things that you think are contaminated with rabies germs. Is this true?  Patient: Exactly. That’s why I don’t like to walk in the woods or the park. You know, those places have all kind of animals, and you can never tell where the germs might be.  It is clear from this conversation that it was not living rooms, laundry rooms, or parks per se that the patient feared. Rather, any situation or object that, in her mind, had some probability of being infested with rabies germs became a source of contamination. Some contamination-fearful patients, however, cannot specify feared consequences of coming into contact with stimuli they perceive to be contaminated. For these patients, the primary fear is that they will not be able to tolerate the extreme emotional distress generated by being contaminated. With such patients, it is also important to probe further to discern whether they have  fears about the long-term health consequences of experiencing high and unremitting anxiety in response to stimuli that prompt obsessions.  Internal Fear Cues  Anxiety and distress may also be generated by images, impulses, or abstract thoughts that the individual finds disturbing, shameful, or disgusting. Examples of such cues include impulses to stab one’s child, thoughts of one’s spouse injured in an accident, or images of religious figures engaged in sexual activity. Clearly, internal threat cues may be produced by external situations, such as the sight of a knife triggering the impulse to stab one’s child. Some patients may become distressed when they experience certain bodily sensations, such as minor pains triggering the fear of having cancer.  In many cases, patients may be reluctant to express their obsessive thoughts because they are either ashamed of them or fear that expressing them will make the consequence more likely to occur. In these cases, the therapist needs to encourage the expression of these thoughts through direct questioning and a matter-of-fact attitude. Sometimes it helps to tell the patient that many people with and without OCD have unwanted thoughts (as many as 85% of normal individuals; Rachman & DeSilva, 1978). It may also be helpful to remind the patient that talking about the obsessions will be a part of therapy; the evaluation session provides an opportunity to begin this process.  tHeraPist: So tell me, when is it that you feel the urge  to count? Patient: It seems like I’m always counting something,  but it’s mostly when I think about certain things.  tHeraPist: What kind of things?  Patient: I don’t know. Bad things.  tHeraPist: Can you give me some examples of bad  thoughts that will make you want to count? Patient: (brief silence) I really prefer not to talk about  them. It makes things worse.  tHeraPist: You mean it makes the counting worse?  Patient: Yes.  tHeraPist: All right, I know now that when you think  or talk about certain bad things, you have an urge to  count, but I still don’t know what those bad things   Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder  are. How about you tell me so that I can help you with them? Patient: I’d really rather not. Can’t we talk about something else?  tHeraPist: It is important that I know what the thoughts are to plan your treatment. I’ll try to help you. Do the thoughts involve someone being hurt?  Patient: Yes. tHeraPist: Do the thoughts involve only certain peo   ple getting hurt or could it be anyone? Patient: Mostly my family. tHeraPist: OK, what else can you tell me about the  thoughts? Patient: I really don’t want to say any more. tHeraPist: I know this is scary, but remember that fac   ing your fears is what this treatment is all about. Patient: OK. It’s not always thoughts. Sometimes I see pictures in my mind, where my brother or my mom and dad are killed. I’m afraid when I talk about these thoughts and pictures that they really will die. tHeraPist: A lot of people have thoughts that they don’t like to have. Even people without OCD. Just because you have these thoughts, or talk about them, doesn’t mean that bad things will actually happen or that you want them to come true.  It is important to reassure the patient that unpleasant thoughts occur often and to emphasize the distinction between thoughts and reality. Many patients with OCD have magical ideas in which the distinction between “thinking about” and “making things happen” is blurred, a process labeled by Salkovskis (1985) as “thought–action fusion” (TAF). It is important to point out to the patient that thoughts are different from actions. Also, many patients think that if negative thoughts enter their mind, then it means they wish the bad thing will happen. The therapist should assure the patient that thinking about bad things does not mean that one wants them to happen. These sorts of informal discussions of mistaken beliefs are an integral part of correct implementation of EX/RP. Such discussions should accompany the treatment planning process, and be reiterated as needed during exposure exercises. It is, however, important that such discussions accompany EX/RP exercises rather than replace them.  Feared Consequences  Many individuals with OCD are afraid that something terrible will happen if they fail to perform their rituals. Such patients with washing rituals, for example, typically fear that they and/or someone else will become ill or disabled, or die, as a result of being contaminated. Many patients with checking rituals fear that because of their negligence, certain catastrophes will occur, such as their homes burning down, or that they might kill someone while driving. Some patients have only a vague notion of what these negative consequence might be (e.g., “I don’t know exactly what will happen, but I feel that if I don’t count to seven, something bad will happen to my family”). Others do not fear catastrophes at all, but they cannot tolerate the emotional distress they experience if they do not perform rituals. Some fear that unless they ritualize, anxiety will increase continually, until they have a nervous breakdown. Data from the DSM-IV field trial indicated that approximately two-thirds of patients with OCD could clearly identify consequences other than emotional distress that would result when they refrained from performing rituals, whereas the remainder could report no such consequences (Foa et al., 1995).  It is important to identify the specific details of the patient’s feared consequences to plan an effective exposure program. For example, the content of the imaginal exposure of a patient who checks while driving for fear of having hit a pedestrian and being sent to jail differs from that of a patient who fears that hitting a pedestrian will result in punishment by God. Similarly, patients who ritualistically place objects in a specific order may differ with respect to their feared catastrophes. Some perform the ritual to prevent catastrophic consequences (e.g., death of parents), whereas others do so only to reduce distress elicited by disordered objects. The former would benefit from treatment that includes both imaginal and in vivo exposure, whereas the latter is likely to profit from in vivo exposure alone.  Strength of Belief  Clinical observations have led to suggestions that individuals with OCD who have poor insight do not respond well to exposure and response prevention, although two later studies failed to find a linear relationship between strength of belief in feared catastrophes and improvement following exposure and response prevention (Foa   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  et al., 1999; Lelliott, Noshirvani, Basoglu, Marks, & Monteiro, 1988). Two issues need to be considered in evaluating these collective findings. First, the reliability and validity of the strength of belief measures used in previous studies are unknown. Second, the relationship between overvalued ideation and treatment outcome may not be linear. Clinical observation suggests that only patients who express extreme belief in their obsessional ideation show poor outcome. Indeed, Foa and colleagues (1999) found that only extremely strong belief (fixed belief) was associated with attenuated outcome. Such patients may appear delusional when discussing their feared catastrophes. We hypothesize that the effect of fixed belief on outcome may be mediated by treatment compliance: Patients who are convinced that feared disasters will ensue if they engaged in prescribed exercises probably will not complete the tasks as assigned.  When assessing the strength of belief, it is important to remember that a patient’s insight into the senselessness of his/her belief often fluctuates. Some patients readily acknowledge that their obsessional beliefs are irrational, but the beliefs still cause marked distress. A few individuals firmly believe that their obsessions and compulsions are rational. In most patients, though, the strength of belief fluctuates across situations, making it difficult to ascertain the degree to which they believe the obsessions are irrational. The following example is an inquiry into the strength of a patient’s belief in her obsessional fear of contracting acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS).  tHeraPist: How likely is it that you will contract  AIDS from using a public restroom? Patient: I’m really terrified that I will get AIDS if I  use a bathroom in a restaurant.  tHeraPist: I know that you are afraid of getting AIDS,  but if you think logically, how likely do you think  you are to get AIDS by sitting on a public toilet?  Patient: I think I will get AIDS if I use a public toilet.  tHeraPist: So do you mean to say that there is a 100%  chance of you getting AIDS if you sit on a public  toilet once?  Patient: Well, I don’t know about once, but if I did it again and again I would.  tHeraPist: What about other people? Will they get AIDS if they use a public toilet?  Patient: I guess so. I’m not sure.  tHeraPist: Since most people use public bathrooms, almost everyone should have AIDS by now. How do you explain the fact that a relatively small number of people have AIDS?  Patient: Maybe not everybody is as susceptible to AIDS as I am.  tHeraPist: Do you think that you are more susceptible  than other people? Patient: I don’t know for sure. Maybe the likelihood of  my getting AIDS is only 50%.  Based on the interaction just described, the therapist concluded that the patient was not an “overvalued ideator”; thus, the prognosis for this patient is brighter than it would be if she continued strongly to hold her original belief. Accordingly, the implementation of EX/RP for this patient would follow the standard guidelines.  