Alcohol Use Disorders  diction Severity Index. Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment, 9, 199–213.  McLellan, A. T., Lewis, D. C., O’Brien, C. P., & Kleber, H. D. (2000). Drug dependence, a chronic medical illness: Implications for treatment, insurance, and outcomes evaluation. Journal of the American Medical Association, 284, 1689–1695.  Menges, D., McCrady, B. S., Epstein, E. E., & Beem, C. (2008). Psychometric evaluation of the Drinking Patterns Questionnaire: A measure of high-risk drinking situations. Addictive Behaviors, 33, 1061–1066.  Meyers, R. J., & Smith, J. E. (1995). Clinical guide to alcohol treatment: The community reinforcement approach. New York: Guilford Press.  Miller, W. R., Benefield, R., G., & Tonigan, J. S. (1993). Enhancing motivation for change in problem drinking: A controlled comparison of two therapist styles. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 61, 455–461.  Miller, W. R., Leckman, A. L., Delaney, H. D., & Tinkcom,  M. (1992). Long-term follow-up of behavioral self-control training. Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 53, 249–261. Miller, W. R., Meyers, R. J., & Tonigan, J. S. (1999). Engaging the unmotivated in treatment for alcohol problems: A comparison of three strategies for intervention through family members. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 67, 688–697.  Miller, W. R., & Rollnick, S. (1991). Motivational interviewing: Preparing people to change addictive behavior. New York: Guilford Press.  Miller, W. R., & Rollnick, S. (2002). Motivational interviewing: Preparing people for change (2nd ed.). New York: Guilford Press.  Miller, W. R., & Tonigan, J. S. (1996). Assessing drinkers’ motivations for change: The Stages of Change Readiness and Treatment Eagerness Scale (SOCRATES). Psychology of Addictive Behaviors, 10, 81–89.  Miller, W. R., Tonigan, J. S., & Longabaugh, R. (1995). The Drinker Inventory of Consequences (DrInC): An instrument for assessing adverse consequences of alcohol abuse. Rockville, MD: National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism.  Miller, W. R., Walters, S. T., & Bennett, M. E. (2001). How effective is alcoholism treatment in the United States? Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 62, 211–220.  Moderation Management. (2006). The MM limits. Retrieved September 21, 2006, from www.moderation.org/readings. shtml#mmlimits.  Monti, P. M., Abrams, D. B., Binkoff, J. A., Zwick, W. R., Liepman, M. R., Nirenberg, T. D., et al. (1990). Communication skills training, communication skills training with family and cognitive behavioral mood management training for alcoholics. Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 51, 263–270.  Monti, P. M., Kadden, R. M., Rohsenow, D. J., Cooney, N. L., & Abrams, D. B. (2002). Treating alcohol dependence: A  coping skills training guide (2nd ed.). New York: Guilford Press.  Moos, R. H., & Billings, A. (1982). Children of alcoholics during the recovery process: Alcoholic and matched control families. Addictive Behaviors, 7, 155–163.  Moos, R. H., Finney, J. W., & Cronkite, R. (1990). Alcoholism treatment: Context, process, and outcome. New York: Oxford University Press.  Moos, R. H., Finney, J. W., & Gamble, W. (1982). The process of recovery from alcoholism: II. Comparing spouses of alcoholic patients and matched community controls. Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 43, 888–909.  Morgenstern, J., Blanchard, K. A., McCrady, B. S., McVeigh,  K. H., Morgan, T. J., & Pandina, R. J. (2006). A randomized field trial examining the effectiveness of intensive case management for substance dependent women receiving temporary assistance for needy families (TANF). American Journal of Public Health, 96, 2016–2023. Moyers, T. B., Martin, T., Houck, J. M., Christopher, P. J., & Tonigan, J. S. (2009). From in-session behaviors to drinking outcomes: A causal chain for motivational interviewing. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 77, 1113–1124.  Nathan, P. E., & McCrady, B. S. (1987). Bases for the use of abstinence as a goal in the behavioral treatment of alcohol abusers. Drugs and Society, 1, 109–132.  O’Farrell, T. J., Choquette, K. A., & Cutter, H. S. G. (1998). Couples relapse prevention sessions after behavioral marital therapy for male alcoholics: Outcomes during the three years after starting treatment. Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 59, 357–370.  Ojehegan, A., & Berglund, M. (1989). Changes in drinking goals in a two-year outpatient alcoholic treatment program. Addictive Behaviors, 14, 1–10.  Orford, J., & Keddie, A. (1986). Abstinence or controlled drinking in clinical practice: A test of the dependence and persuasion hypotheses. British Journal of Addiction, 81, 495–504.  Orford, J., Templeton, L., Velleman, R., & Copello, A. (2005). Family members of relatives with alcohol, drug and gambling problems: A set of standardized questionnaires for assessing stress, coping and strain. Addiction, 100, 1611–1624.  Oscar-Berman, M., & Marinkovi, K. (2007). Alcohol: Effects on neurobehavioral functions and the brain. Neuropsychology Review, 17, 239–257.  O’Toole, T. P., Freyder, P. J., Gibbon, J. L., Hanusa, B. J., Seltzer, D., & Fine, M. J. (2004). ASAM Patient Placement Criteria treatment levels: Do they correspond to care actually received by homeless substance abusing adults? Journal of Addictive Diseases, 23, 1–15.  Pabst, A., Baumeister, S. E., & Krause, L. (2010). Alcoholexpectancy dimensions and alcohol consumption at different ages in the general population. Journal of Studies on Alcohol and Drugs, 71, 46–53.   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  Paolino, T. J., Jr., McCrady, B. S., & Diamond, S. (1978). Some alcoholic marriage statistics: An overview. International Journal of the Addictions, 13, 1252–1257.  Prochaska, J. O., & DiClemente, C. C. (2005). The transtheoretical approach. In J. C. Norcross & M. R. Goldfried (Eds.), Handbook of psychotherapy integration (2nd ed., pp. 147–171). New York: Oxford University Press.  Project MATCH Research Group. (1997a). Matching alcoholism treatments to client heterogeneity: Project MATCH posttreatment drinking outcomes. Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 58, 7–29.  Project MATCH Research Group. (1997b). Project MATCH secondary a priori hypotheses. Addiction, 92, 1671–1698.  Project MATCH Research Group. (1998). Matching alcoholism treatments to client heterogeneity: Project MATCH three-year drinking outcomes. Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental Research, 22, 1300–1311.  Raytek, H. S., McCrady, B. S., Epstein, E. E., & Hirsch, L. S. (1999). Therapeutic alliance and the retention of couples in conjoint alcoholism treatment. Addictive Behaviors, 24, 317–330.  Robins, L. N., Wing, J., Wittchen, H. U., Helzer, J. E., Babor,  T. F., Burke, J., et al. (1988). The prevalence of psychiatric disorders in patients with alcohol and other drug problems. Archives of General Psychiatry, 45, 1023–1031. Rollnick, S., Heather, N., Gold, R., & Hall, W. (1992). Development of a short “Readiness to Change” Questionnaire for use in brief opportunistic interventions. British Journal of Addictions, 87, 743–754.  Roman, P. (2013). Treatment for substance use disorders in the United States: An organizational technology perspective. In B. S. McCrady & E. E. Epstein (Eds.), Addictions: A comprehensive guidebook (2nd ed., pp. 597–621). New York: Oxford University Press.  Rose, S. J., Zweben, A., Ockert, D., & Baier, A. (2013). Interfaces of substance abuse treatment with other health and social systems. In B. S. McCrady & E. E. Epstein (Eds.), Addictions: A comprehensive guidebook (2nd ed., pp. 641–655). New York: Oxford University Press.  Rosenberg, H. (1993). Prediction of controlled drinking by alcoholics and problem drinkers. Psychological Bulletin, 113, 129–139.  Rosenthal, R. N. (2013). Treatment of persons with dual diagnoses of substance use disorder and other psychological problems. In B. S. McCrady & E. E. Epstein (Eds.), Addictions: A comprehensive guidebook (2nd ed., pp. 659–707). New York: Oxford University Press.  Rychtarik, R. G., Connors, G. J., Whitney, R. B., McGillicuddy, N. B., Fitterling, J. M., & Wirtz, P. W. (2000). Treatment settings for persons with alcoholism: Evidence for matching clients to inpatient versus outpatient care. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 68, 277– 289.  Rynes, K. N., McCrady, B. S., Morgan, T., Violette, N., &  Pandina, R. (2012). Need-service matching predicts drug use outcomes in comprehensive treatment for mothers in the child welfare system. Unpublished manuscript.  Saunders, J. B., Aasland, O. G., Babor, T. F., de la Fuente, J. R., & Grant, M. (1993). Development of the Alcohol Use Disorders Screening Test (AUDIT): WHO collaborative project on early detection of persons with harmful alcohol consumption—II. Addiction, 88, 791–804.  Sisson, R. W., & Azrin, N. (1986). Family-member involvement to initiate and promote treatment of problem drinkers. Journal of Behavior Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry, 17, 15–21.  Skinner, H., & Allen, B. A. (1982). Alcohol dependence syndrome: Measurement and validation. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 91, 199–209.  Slaymaker, V., & Sheehan, T. (2013). The disease model. In  B. S. McCrady & E. E. Epstein (Eds.), Addictions: A comprehensive guidebook (2nd ed., pp. 451–481). New York: Oxford University Press. Smith, J. E., & Meyers, R. J. (2004). Motivating substance abusers to enter treatment: Working with family members. New York: Guilford Press.  Smith, P. H., Homish, G. G., Leonard, K. E., & Cornelius, J.  R. (2012). Intimate partner violence and specific substance use disorders: Findings from the National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Related Conditions. Psychology of Addictive Behaviors, 26, 236–245. Sobell, L. C., & Sobell, M. B. (2003). Alcohol consumption measures. In J. P. Allen & V. B. Wilson (Eds.), Assessing alcohol problems: A guide for clinicians and researchers, second edition (pp. 75–99), Bethesda, MD: National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism.  Sobell, L. C., & Sobell, M. B. (1995). Alcohol Timeline Followback users’ manual. Toronto: Addiction Research Foundation.  Sobell, L. C., & Sobell, M. B. (2011). Group therapy for substance use disorders: A motivational cognitive-behavioral approach. New York: Guilford Press.  Sobell, M. B., & Sobell, L. C. (2000). Stepped care as a heuristic approach to the treatment of alcohol problems. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 68, 573–579.  Spanier, G. (1976). Measuring dyadic adjustment: New scales for assessing the quality of marriage and similar dyads. Journal of Marriage and the Family, 38, 15–28.  Spear, S. F., & Mason, M. (1991). Impact of chemical dependency on family health status. International Journal of the Addictions, 26, 179–187.  Spitzer, R. L., Williams, J. B. W., Gibbon, M., & First, M. B. (1996). Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV: Patient Edition (with Psychotic Screen—Version 1.0). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press.  Stinchfield, R., & Owen, P. (1998). Hazelden’s model of treatment and its outcome. Addictive Behaviors, 23, 669–683. Straus, M., Hamby, S. L., Boney-McCoy, S., & Sugarman,   Alcohol Use Disorders  D. B. (1996). The Revised Conflict Tactics Scales (CTS2): Development and preliminary psychometric data. Journal of Family Issues, 17, 283–316. Sullivan, J. T., Sykora, K., Schneiderman, J., Naranjo, C. A., & Sellers, E. M. (1989). Assessment of alcohol withdrawal: The revised Clinical Institute Withdrawal Assessment for Alcohol scale (CIWA-Ar). British Journal of Addiction, 84, 1353–1357.  Thomas, E. J., Santa, C., Bronson, D., & Oyserman, D. (1987). Unilateral family therapy with the spouses of alcoholics. Journal of Social Service Research, 10, 145–162.  Thomas, E. J., Yoshioka, M., & Ager, R. D. (1996). Spouse enabling of alcohol abuse: Conception, assessment, and modification. Journal of Substance Abuse, 8, 61–80.  Tonigan, J. S., Miller, W. R., & Brown, J. M. (1997). The reliability of FORM 90: An instrument for assessing alcohol treatment outcome. Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 58, 358–364.  Vaillant, G. (1983). The natural history of alcoholism. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. Vaillant, G., & Milofsky, E. S. (1982). Natural history of male  alcoholism: 4. Paths to recovery. Archives of General Psychiatry, 39, 127–133.  Walitzer, K. S., & Connors, G. J. (2007). Thirty-month follow-up of drinking moderation training for women: A randomized clinical trial. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 75, 501–507.  Witkiewitz, K., Donovan, D. M., & Hartzler, B. (2012). Drink refusal training as part of a combined behavioral intervention: Effectiveness and mechanisms of change. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 80, 440–449.  Witkiewitz, K., & Marlatt, G. A. (2004). Relapse prevention for alcohol and drug problems: That was zen, this is tao. American Psychologist, 59, 224–235.  Woodward, J. J. (2013). Alcohol. In B. S. McCrady & E. E. Epstein (Eds.), Addictions: A comprehensive guidebook (2nd ed., pp. 135–154). New York: Oxford University Press.  Zimmerman, A., Lubman, D. I., & Cox, M. (2012). Tobacco, caffeine, alcohol and illicit substance use among consumers of a national community managed mental health service. Mental Health and Substance Use, 5, 287–302.   CHaPter 14  Drug Use Disorders  stePheN t. hiGGiNs stacey c. siGMoN sarah h. heil  in this chapter we follow the case of “Bill,” a 24‑year‑old individual with cocaine use disorder, who would ordinarily be considered to be among the most difficult types of patients for someone administering psychological interventions. As is typical with this population, Bill presented with not only cocaine but also alcohol use disorder; problems with anger management; heavy use of cigarettes and marijuana; suicidal ideation; and major interpersonal, social, and occupational problems (including a prohibition from visiting his 5‑year‑old daughter). The fact that stephen T. Higgins and his team of close associates have been able to create a treatment protocol for individuals such as Bill—a protocol with strong empirical support—is in itself a remarkable achievement. But only those most familiar with this approach have a good idea of the multifaceted nature of this brief semistructured strategy, which includes attention to the full range of addictive behaviors, as well as mood disturbances, interpersonal relationships, and problems in living. Without this comprehensive approach, there seems to be no question that these treatment strategies would not enjoy the success that they do. even clinicians or students not working directly with addictive behaviors will benefit from being familiar with this new generation of successful psychological approaches to drug use.—D. H. B.  Drug use disorders represent a highly prevalent and costly public health problem in the United States and virtually all other industrialized countries. To get a sense of the scope of the U.S. problem, an estimated  131.2 million persons 12 years and older (51.4%) report current alcohol use (past 30 days), 69.6 million (27.2%) report current tobacco use, and 22.7 million (8.9%) report current use of illicit drugs (United States Department of Health and Human Services [USDHHS], 2012). Of course, not all current users experience adverse effects, but a sizable proportion incur substantial problems. An estimated 22.2 million (8.7%) Americans 12 years and older meet formal Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, fourth edition, text revision (DSM-IV-TR; American Psychiatric Association, 2000) diagnostic criteria for drug abuse or dependence within the past year, and 1.5 million (0.6%) report being treated for a drug use problem within the past year (USDHHS, 2012). The annual costs to the  U.S. economy associated with these problems are estimated to exceed $600 billion (Bouchery, Harwood, Sacks, Simon, & Brewer, 2011; Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2008; U.S. Department of Justice, 2011). Clearly there is a tremendous need for effective treatments for drug use disorders. This chapter focuses on psychosocial treatments for illicit drug use disorders. Treatments for alcohol problems are covered by Mc   588   Drug Use Disorders  Crady (Chapter 13, this volume) and there are several excellent reviews available on treatments for tobacco use disorders (e.g., Kenford & Fiore, 2004; Schnoll & Lerman, 2006). Because the focus is on empirically based interventions, we largely cover behavioral and cognitive-behavioral therapies. That said, effective contemporary treatments for drug use disorders often entail combining psychological treatments with medications, and this is reflected in this chapter as well. We use a multielement intervention to illustrate details of treatment implementation, namely, the community reinforcement approach (CRA) plus vouchers intervention that our group developed for outpatient treatment of cocaine dependence. Last, the National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA, 2009) has published 13 principles of effective treatment for illicit drug abuse based on more than 35 years of research and, when applicable, we underscore those principles throughout the chapter (Table 14.1).  DefiNiNG the cliNical DisorDer  Before proceeding to discussions about treatment, we briefly discuss criteria for diagnosing drug use disorders. In the research discussed in this chapter we have used DSM-IV-TR (American Psychiatric Association, 2000), and we plan to use DSM-5 (American Psychiatric Association, 2013) in future efforts. DSM-5, published in May 2013, contains one major change from DSM-IV-TR that merits mention (O’Brien, 2011). The abuse and dependence diagnostic categories featured in DSM-IV-TR were replaced in DSM-5 by a single “substance use disorder” spectrum that comprises 11 symptoms. These symptoms, largely paralleling those found in DSM-IV-TR, are as follows: (1) use of substance in larger amounts or over a longer period than was intended; (2) a persistent desire or unsuccessful efforts to cut down or control substance use; (3) a great deal of time spent in activities necessary to obtain the substance; (4) craving; (5) a failure to fulfill major role obligations; (6) continued substance use despite having persistent or recurrent social or interpersonal problems; (7) cessation or reduction in important social, occupational, or recreational activities because of substance use; (8) substance use in situations in which it is physically hazardous, (9) continuation of substance use despite knowledge of having a persistent or recurrent physical or psychological problem that is likely to have been caused or exacerbated by the substance, (10)  table 14.1. Principles of effective treatment  1. No single treatment is appropriate for all individuals. 2. Treatment needs to be readily available. 3. Effective treatment attends to multiple needs of the individual, not just his/her drug use. 4. An individual’s treatment and services plan must be assessed continually and modified as necessary to ensure that the plan meets his/her changing needs. 5. Remaining in treatment for an adequate period of time is critical for treatment effectiveness (i.e., 3 months or longer). 6. Counseling (individual and/or group) and other behavioral therapies are critical components of effective treatment for addiction. 7. Medications are an important element of treatment for many patients, especially when combined with counseling and other behavioral therapies. 8. Addicted or drug-abusing individuals with coexisting mental disorders should have both disorders treated in an integrated way. 9. Medical detoxification is only the first stage of addiction treatment and by itself does little to change long-term drug use. 10. Treatment does not need to be voluntary to be effective. 11. Possible drug use during treatment must be monitored continuously. 12. Treatment programs should provide assessment for HIV/AIDS, hepatitis B and C, tuberculosis and other infectious diseases, and counseling to help patients modify or change behaviors that place themselves or others at risk of infection. 13. Recovery from drug addiction can be a long-term process and frequently requires multiple episodes of treatment. tolerance; and (11) withdrawal. The milder end of the disorder spectrum (two to three symptoms) is comparable to the less severe abuse category in DSM-IV-TR, and the higher end of the spectrum (six or more symptoms) to the more severe dependence category. All of our research discussed below has involved individuals who fell along the more severe or “dependence” end of this spectrum.  Evidence does support a position that, on average, more severe drug use disorders are associated with poorer treatment outcome. Severity is influenced by frequency of use, amount of drug used and route of administration, and sociodemographics (e.g., educational   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  attainment), among other factors. There seems to be little doubt that these factors will be positively correlated with the number of untoward signs and symptoms exhibited following a period of repeated drug use, and to that extent merit careful attention in a diagnostic assessment. For these and other reasons, we have found DSM-IV-TR helpful in assessing the severity of cocaine and other drug use disorders, and anticipate the spectrum approach of DSM-5 to be even more helpful in that regard.  assessMeNt  A comprehensive assessment is an essential first step in effective clinical management of drug use disorders. This section outlines the assessment practices we used in our specialty clinic for individuals who met DSM-IV-TR criteria for cocaine dependence and what in DSM-5 would represent the more severe end of the cocaine use disorder spectrum. The assessment framework is relatively generic and can be readily applied to other types of drug use disorders by substituting the cocaine-specific information with pertinent information on whatever other type of drug use disorder is the presenting problem.  All initial clinic contacts are handled by a receptionist, who establishes that the caller reports problems related to drug use, is age 18 years or more, and resides within the county in which the clinic is located. The CRA plus vouchers treatment that we use is intensive, requiring several clinic visits per week. Persons living outside the county are often unable to follow such a demanding schedule. A broader geographical range may be possible with other, less intensive interventions. The important matter is to have established the geographical range that is practical for the treatment being offered. Those who do not satisfy our basic inclusion criteria are referred to an appropriate alternative clinic. Those who meet the criteria receive an appointment for an intake assessment.  Every effort is made to schedule the intake assessment interview as soon as possible (Principle 2, Table 14.1). Scheduling the interview within 24 hours of clinic contact significantly reduces attrition between the initial clinic contact and assessment interview, which is a substantial problem among those with drug use disorders (Festinger, Lamb, Kirby, & Marlowe, 1996). Some patients cannot come in within 24 hours, so our secondary goal is to get them in within 72 hours.  Clients are informed that the intake interview will take about 3 hours. This initial session is one of the most important. Clinic staff should be aware of the client’s potential uneasiness and try to make the person feel at ease. Being courteous, complimenting clients on taking this important first step toward change, respecting the fact that some clients might be physically ill or uncomfortable related to recent drug use and therefore being flexible with regard to tardiness, and so forth, can help. Accommodating the need for brief breaks, food or drink, or a brief phone call can help as well. Throughout all interactions we seek to be empathic and to convey a very upbeat, “You can do it” message.  During the intake assessment, we collect detailed information on drug use; evaluate treatment readiness; and assess psychiatric functioning, employment/vocational status, recreational interests, current social supports, family and social problems, and legal issues (see Principle 3, Table 14.1). The following instruments that we use to obtain such information are listed in the order in which they are typically administered. Modifications can be readily made to our list depending on the population being treated. We offer it only to provide an example of what we have found to be an effective assessment package, along with associated clinical rationales.  Self‑Administered Questionnaires  We use several questionnaires that can be completed by the client upon arrival at the clinic for an initial intake assessment. The intake worker greets the client, introduces him/herself, brings the client into a private office, and briefly but carefully informs him/her about what to expect during the intake process. It is essential to ask about clients’ reading ability prior to having them complete self-administered questionnaires. If there is doubt about reading capability, we discreetly ask clients to read several questions aloud to get an indication of whether they can complete the forms without staff assistance. With poor readers, the questionnaires can be read aloud by a staff member in a private setting. This must be done with care and positive regard for the discomfort that poor readers may feel under such circumstances. Competent readers are given approximately 45 minutes to complete the forms.  We have clients complete a routine, brief demographics questionnaire. Obtaining a client’s current address and phone number is important, as is obtaining the number of someone who always knows the client’s whereabouts. This information is important for   Drug Use Disorders  purposes of outreach efforts during treatment should the client stop coming to scheduled therapy sessions or need to be contacted for other clinical purposes, and contacting clients for routine posttreatment follow-up evaluations.  The Stages of Change Readiness and Treatment Eagerness Scale (SOCRATES; Miller & Tonigan, 1996) provides information about clients’ perceptions of the severity of their drug use problems and their readiness to engage in behavior to reduce their drug use. This questionnaire provides a quantitative index of motivation to change, which may be an important indicator of clients’ willingness to comply with certain treatment goals. We use three versions of the SOCRATES that refer to specific substances (i.e., cocaine, alcohol, and other drug use) because clients’ motivations to reduce substance use are often drug-specific. For example, almost all who seek treatment in our clinic are ready to act toward changing their cocaine use, but many are more ambivalent about changing their alcohol or marijuana use, which are the two other forms of drug use we deal with most frequently. Our approach is to reinforce action the patient is ready to take with regard to cocaine and to share empathically our empirical knowledge about the influence of other forms of drug use on the probability of successfully discontinuing cocaine use. Our recommendation is that at least short-term abstinence from all intoxicating substance use is the path with the greatest chance of success. Use of alcohol can directly increase the probability of cocaine use and predicts poor outcome. Use of marijuana, which does not predict poor outcome with regard to cocaine use per se, is associated with problems of its own.  We use an adaptation of the Cocaine Dependency Self-Test (Washton, Stone, & Hendrickson, 1988) as an efficient means to collect specific information regarding the type of adverse effects of cocaine that clients have experienced. Systematically collected information on the adverse effects of drug use is important. Such information is useful in helping clients to problem-solve regarding the pros and cons of cocaine use as part of efforts to promote and sustain motivation for change during the course of treatment.  A sizable proportion of clients with illicit drug use disorders are also problem drinkers, which makes assessment of that problem essential. As part of our alcohol assessment we use the Michigan Alcoholism Screening Test (MAST), a widely used, brief alcoholism screening instrument (Selzer, 1971). Considering that almost all clients entering treatment for cocaine  abuse and dependence use alcohol and approximately 60% meet DSM-IV-TR diagnostic criteria for alcohol dependence, the MAST is useful for flagging clients with alcohol problems.  Depressed mood is another common problem among those presenting for treatment for drug use disorders. We use the Beck Depression Inventory–II (BDI-II; Beck, Steer, Ball, & Ranieri, 1996) to screen for depressive symptomatology and readminister it on a regular basis to monitor progress with those clients who score in the clinical range at intake. The average BDI-II scores of cocaine abusers entering treatment fall in the clinical range. For most clients, those scores decrease precipitously after 1 or 2 weeks in treatment. However, this is not true for all clients. Therefore, it is important to assess carefully and monitor depressive symptomatology, and to refer the client or intervene when symptoms do not remit. Assessing and monitoring for suicide risk are important as well. We do so using a protocol we developed in collaboration with our local mental health crisis service.  The Symptom Checklist 90—Revised (SCL-90-R; Derogatis, 1983) is also used to screen for psychiatric symptomatology more broadly and is helpful in determining whether a more in-depth psychiatric evaluation is warranted. The SCL-90-R also can be easily readministered to monitor progress or change in psychiatric status.  After clients complete these self-administered questionnaires, they are reviewed by clinic staff to be sure that all questions have been completed and that the information appears consistent. Any obvious inconsistencies are resolved with the client.  Program Description  We find it useful to break up the data-gathering aspects of the initial assessment between completion of the self-administered questionnaires and initiation of the structured interviews. We provide a brief description of the treatment program and its philosophy at this time. Clients are given the opportunity to ask questions or to express any concerns they may have. The goal here is to orient clients to what will happen in treatment, to create an atmosphere of optimism, and to help clients feel hopeful that they can succeed in treatment. This description and interaction is typically brief (10–15 minutes). A therapist provides more detailed rationales and descriptions during this same intake session, but after the structured interviews are completed. When   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  asked questions about the treatment process, the intake worker provides brief answers and reassures the client that a therapist will soon be meeting with him/her to provide much more information about the program and how it works.  In providing the brief description, the intake worker explains that our program is confidential and specifically designed for persons who have problems with cocaine. For obvious reasons, users of illicit drugs are often quite concerned about confidentiality. Clients are informed about the overall duration of treatment, the recommended frequency and duration of clinic visits, and the general foci and orientation of our treatment approach (i.e., lifestyle changes). We explain that the primary goals of such changes are that clients discontinue cocaine use and make positive changes that result in greater life satisfaction. Examples of what might occur during treatment are provided:  “If you are interested in finding a job, the therapists will help you with the search, with a résumé, and with transportation and phone support, if necessary. If you would like to go back to school, we can help you obtain the applications, access funding and assistance, and even take you to an interview if you don’t have transportation. If you are having relationship problems, relationship counseling is available. If you don’t regularly participate in any fun activities, we have lots of suggestions and may even take you to some of these, like basketball, tennis, fishing, boating, arts and crafts classes, and so forth.  “Also, we provide coping skills training. So if you have problems controlling anger, we can help with anger management. If you have money problems, we can assist you with financial management. If you have difficulty with behavior problems with your children, we can assist you in get some help with that problem. If you have trouble relaxing, we can work on relaxation skills and stress management, and so forth.”  In addition, the intake worker provides a very brief description of our clinic’s incentive program:  “You also will participate in our incentive program. How this works is that if you provide urine samples that are cocaine-free, you earn points that can be used to support your goals. What that means is, if you stay clean, you accumulate points that can be used to pay for activities such as going to the mov   ies, joining a gym, taking a class, buying a fishing rod, and so forth. Your therapist will tell you more about these things when you meet him/her after our interview.”  Semistructured Interviews  A semistructured drug history interview (developed in our clinic) is used to facilitate collection of information on current and past drug use. Such detailed information is essential for proper treatment planning.  The goal in completing a drug use history is to obtain detailed information regarding the duration, severity, and pattern of the client’s drug use. The accuracy of the client’s report of drug use (amount and frequency) is facilitated by an effective technique for reviewing recent use (i.e., the Timeline Follow-Back Interview; Sobell & Sobell, 1992; for a review see Hjorthoj, Hjorthoj, & Nordendoft, 2012). Using a calendar as a prompt, clients are asked to recall on a day-by-day basis the number of days they used in the past week and the amount used per occasion. Grams are typically the best metric for determining amount of cocaine used. The same assessment is conducted for the past 3 weeks and as far back in time as needed for diagnostic reasons. This technique results in a good overview of the client’s pattern of drug use during the past 30 days. The intake worker asks for as much clarification as possible to obtain an accurate assessment of drug use history. Diagnoses of abuse and dependence are made later by master’s- or doctorate-level psychologists.  The Addiction Severity Index (ASI; McLellan, Cacciola, Alterman, Rikoon, & Carise, 2006) is designed to provide reliable, valid assessments of multiple problems commonly associated with drug use, and a quantitative, time-based assessment of problem severity in the following areas: alcohol and drug use; employment; and medical, legal, family, social, and psychological functioning. The information obtained in the ASI is quite useful for developing treatment plans that include lifestyle change goals. It is also a useful instrument for assessing progress at follow-up, in that it is timebased and yields quantitative composite scores for multiple problem areas. Training on ASI administration is necessary to ensure that the intake worker conducts a reliable ASI interview (for information on training in the use of the ASI, see www.tresearch.org/training/ asi_train.htm).  A Practical Needs Assessment Questionnaire (developed in our clinic) determines whether the client has   Drug Use Disorders  any pressing needs or crises that may interfere with initial treatment engagement (e.g., housing, legal, transportation, or child care). The intake worker asks specific questions regarding current housing, child care, legal circumstances, medical issues, and other matters that might be of current and serious concern to the client. Detailed information is collected on any identified crisis. The rationale here is to identify matters that may need immediate clinical attention. The lives of many individuals entering treatment for drug dependence are in chaos. The probability of engaging and keeping such clients in treatment may be compromised if swift assistance relative to certain acute needs is not provided, typically in the form of referrals to community agencies for assistance.  After completing these interviews, the intake worker informs clients that they will be meeting with their therapist in a few minutes. During a brief break (5–10 minutes), the intake worker completes an intake summary sheet for the therapist taking on this new case, along with all of the supporting intake information. The intake worker meets briefly with the therapist to review the case. Patients are then introduced to their therapists. We try never to allow a patient to leave the intake interview without a brief meeting with a therapist, so that he/she can depart with the feeling that treatment has begun, and with concrete plans for abstaining from cocaine use until the next clinic visit.  In many ways this initial meeting is an orientation session to establish rapport with the client and provide further rationales for our treatment approach. Doing so permits clients to develop clear expectations about treatment. We continue with the “can do” approach, acknowledging how hard the client and clinic staff will have to work to succeed, but conveying a very confident message that success can be achieved by working together. The therapist and patient collaboratively begin formulating an initial treatment plan during this session. Clients are oriented to the rigorous urinalysis testing regimen that is a central component of this treatment. If it appears that a medication is indicated, initial steps are taken toward implementing the relevant medical protocols for making that happen. With the cocaine-dependent population, we routinely use a regimen of clinic-monitored disulfiram therapy to address problem drinking, which also reduces cocaine use (Carroll, Nich, Ball, McCance, & Rounsaville, 1998). Recently we have begun using a regimen of clinicmonitored naltrexone therapy because the prevalence of prescription opioid abuse has increased.  Behavioral aND coGNitive‑Behavioral theraPies for illicit DruG use DisorDers  Conceptual Framework  Behavioral and cognitive-behavioral therapies are based largely on the concepts and principles of operant and respondent conditioning, and social learning theory. Within this conceptual framework, drug use is considered learned behavior that is maintained, at least in part, by the reinforcing effects of the pharmacological actions of drugs in conjunction with social and other nonpharmacological reinforcement derived from the drug-abusing lifestyle (Higgins, Heil, & Lussier, 2004). The reliable empirical observation that abused drugs function as reinforcers in humans and laboratory animals provides sound scientific support for that position (Griffiths, Bigelow, & Henningfield, 1980; Higgins et al., 2004). Cocaine, other psychomotor stimulants, ethanol, opioids, nicotine, and sedatives serve as reinforcers and are voluntarily self-administered by a variety of species. Moreover, through respondent and operant conditioning, environmental events that previously have been paired with drug use reliably lead to drug-seeking behavior. Physical dependence is not necessary for these drugs to support ongoing and stable patterns of voluntary drug seeking and use in otherwise healthy laboratory animals or humans. Commonalities do not end there. Effects of alterations in drug availability, drug dose, schedule of reinforcement, and other environmental manipulations of drug use are consistent and generalize across different species and types of drug abuse (Griffiths et al., 1980; Higgins et al., 2004). These commonalities support a theoretical position that reinforcement and other principles of learning are fundamental determinants of drug use, abuse, and dependence.  Within this conceptual model, then, drug use is considered a normal, learned behavior that falls along a frequency continuum ranging from patterns of little use and few problems to excessive use and many untoward effects, including death. The same processes and principles of learning are assumed to operate across the continuum. All physically intact humans are assumed to possess the necessary neurobiological systems to experience drug-produced reinforcement; hence, they develop patterns of drug use, abuse, and dependence. Said differently, individuals need not have any exceptional or pathological characteristics to develop drug abuse   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  or dependence. Clearly, genetic or acquired characteristics (e.g., family history of substance dependence, other psychiatric disorders) can affect the probability of developing drug abuse or dependence (i.e., they are risk factors), but this model assumes that such special characteristics are not necessary for these disorders to emerge.  Treatment is designed to assist in reorganizing the physical and social environments of the user. The goal is to weaken systematically the influence of reinforcement derived from drug use and the related drug-using lifestyle, and to increase the frequency of reinforcement derived from healthier alternative activities, especially those that are incompatible with continued drug use. Below we describe the basic categories of empirically tested and efficacious behavioral and cognitivebehavioral therapies for achieving these overarching goals (Carroll & Onken, 2005).  Prototypical Behavioral and Cognitive‑Behavioral Interventions and Empirical Support for Efficacy  At least four empirically based prototypical behavioral and cognitive-behavioral interventions are used in the treatment of illicit drug use disorders (Carroll & Onken, 2005). First is cognitive-behavioral/relapse prevention therapy, which has been shown to be effective with cocaine, methamphetamine, and other types of drug use disorders (e.g., Carroll et al., 1994; Rawson et al., 2004; Reback & Shoptaw, in press). Typically this approach entails functional analysis training through which clients learn to identify environmental antecedents and consequences that influence their drug use. Functional analysis is typically accompanied by skills training on how to rearrange one’s environment to alter the probability of drug use by either avoiding high-risk settings or managing them effectively when contact cannot be avoided. Cognitive strategies are often used to identify and modify unrealistic expectations about drug use, to cope with craving for drug use, and to change thinking patterns that increase the likelihood of drug use. Social skills training is often incorporated when clients have used drugs to cope with social anxiety or when particular skills deficits limit clients’ access to alternative, healthier sources of reinforcement (e.g., Monti, Rohsenow, Michalec, & Abrams, 1997). Systematic training is included to prevent relapse, with sufficient emphasis that the terms “cognitive-behavioral therapy” and “relapse prevention therapy” are often used inter   changeably. There is good evidence that this approach is efficacious in treating illicit drug use disorders (for a meta-analysis, see Irvin, Bowers, Dunn, & Wong, 1999).  Second, contingency management is an efficacious behavioral treatment strategy commonly used to treat cocaine, opiate, and other types of illicit drug use disorders (Higgins, Silverman, & Heil, 2008), as well as other behavioral health problems (see Supplemental Issue of Preventive Medicine on “Incentives and Health”; Higgins, Silverman, Sigmon, & Naito, 2012). With contingency management, reinforcing and punishing consequences are systematically used to increase abstinence from drug use or to improve other therapeutic goals, such as treatment attendance or medication compliance (Higgins et al., 2008). A particular form of contingency management, wherein clients receive vouchers that are exchangeable for retail items contingent on objective evidence of recent abstinence from drug use, has become a common intervention for clients with illicit drug use disorders. We know of at least two meta-analyses supporting the efficacy of contingency management with methadone maintenance patients (Griffith, Rowan-Szal, Roark, & Simpson, 2000) and in the treatment of drug use disorders more generally (Lussier, Heil, Mongeon, Badger, & Higgins, 2006).  Third, motivational interviewing, an efficacious intervention with problem drinkers (Vasilaki, Hosier, & Cox, 2006), is being used more frequently to treat illicit drug use disorders as well. Motivational interviewing is a brief intervention designed to facilitate behavior change by helping clients to identify personal values and goals, to examine whether drug use may conflict with those values and goals, and to explore how to resolve any ambivalence or conflict between personal goals and values, and ongoing drug use (Miller & Rollnick, 2002). Results on the use of motivational interviewing with illicit drug use disorders are still mixed (e.g., Martino, Carroll, & Rounsaville, 2006; Smedslund et al., 2011).  Fourth, behavioral couple therapy has been effective in the treatment of illicit drug use disorders, although it has not been as extensively investigated as alcohol use disorders (Carroll & Onken, 2005; O’Farrell & Clements, 2012). Therapy typically emphasizes improved communication skills. Couples are taught how to negotiate for change in each other’s behavior to make the relationship more reinforcing. A contract wherein the designated client agrees to abstain from drug use and/   Drug Use Disorders  or to comply with a recommended medication regimen is typically involved. There is also evidence that behavioral family counseling has efficacy with adolescents who have illicit drug use disorders (e.g., Azrin, Donohue, Besalel, Kogan, & Acierno, 1994) as do other family therapy interventions (e.g., Henggeler, Pickrel, Brondino, & Crouch, 1996; Liddle et al., 2001).  It is a common practice to provide multielement treatments for illicit drug use disorders that incorporate many of the specific interventions we have outlined (e.g., Bellack, Bennett, Gearson, Brown, & Yang, 2006). Indeed CRA plus vouchers, which we use to treat cocaine dependence, incorporates all of the interventions outlined earlier except for family therapies with adolescents. Below we describe the CRA plus vouchers intervention and its implementation in the treatment of cocaine dependence. With regard to efficacy, the metaanalysis supporting the efficacy of vouchers was noted earlier (Lussier et al., 2006). A meta-analysis supports the efficacy of CRA, with and without vouchers, in the treatment of drug use disorders (Roozen et al., 2004), and a randomized trial has demonstrated that the CRA component is an active element of the CRA plus vouchers treatment (Higgins et al., 2003).  CRA plus Vouchers  The recommended duration of CRA plus vouchers therapy is 24 weeks of treatment and 24 weeks of aftercare (Budney & Higgins, 1998). The influence of treatment duration has not yet been examined experimentally with this or other efficacious psychosocial treatments for drug use disorders, but a duration of 3 or more months of care is generally recommended (Principle 5, Table 14.1).  CRA therapy in this model is delivered in individual sessions, although CRA has been delivered effectively in a group therapy format with alcohol-dependent clients (Azrin, 1976). As we noted earlier, the treatment involves two main components: CRA and vouchers.  The Community Reinforcement Approach  Before we get into the specific elements of CRA, more general characteristics of the therapy style are worth mentioning. Therapists try to be flexible in appointment scheduling and goal setting, which we believe facilitates treatment retention and progress toward target goals. Particularly in the early stages of treatment, therapists try to work around client’s schedules and  generally make participation in treatment convenient. We try to tolerate tardiness to sessions and early departure from sessions, to be flexible in the time of day that sessions are scheduled, and we even meet with clients outside the office, if necessary. With especially difficult clients, improvements in these areas become part of the treatment plan.  Therapists must exhibit empathy and good listening skills. They need to convey a sincere understanding of the client’s situation and its inherent difficulties. Throughout treatment, therapists avoid making value judgments, and instead exhibit genuine empathy and consideration for the difficult challenges that clients face.  Last, CRA requires both therapists and patients to develop an active, make-it-happen attitude throughout treatment. Active problem solving is a routine part of the therapeutic relationship. Within ethical boundaries, therapists are committed to doing what it takes to facilitate lifestyle changes on the part of clients. Therapists take clients to appointments or job interviews. They initiate recreational activities with clients and schedule sessions at different times of day to accomplish specific goals. They have clients make phone calls from their office, and they search newspapers for job possibilities or ideas for healthy recreational activities in which clients might be able to participate. In summary, the motto of CRA therapists is “We can make it happen,” and they try their best to model that approach for patients.  CRA is delivered in twice-weekly 1- to 1.5-hour therapy sessions during the initial 12 weeks and onceweekly sessions of the same duration during the final 12 weeks of treatment. Sessions focus on the following seven general topics, depending on the needs of the individual client.  First, clients are instructed in how to recognize antecedents and consequences of their cocaine use, that is, how to functionally analyze their cocaine use. They are also instructed in how to use that information to reduce the probability of using cocaine. A twofold message is conveyed to the client: (1) His/her cocaine use is orderly behavior that is more likely to occur under certain circumstances than others, and (2) by learning to identify the circumstances that affect his/her cocaine use, the client can develop and implement plans to reduce the likelihood of future cocaine use. Our methods for teaching functional analysis are based on the work of Miller and Muñoz (e.g., 2005) and McCrady (Chapter 13, this volume), whose methods are used widely in substance abuse treatment.   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  Using the form shown in Figure 14.1, we help clients  analyze instances of their own cocaine use. We explain  the following:  “A functional analysis allows you to identify the immediate causes of your cocaine use. You have probably noticed that in certain situations you use cocaine, whereas in others you do not. The situations around us can powerfully control cocaine use, particularly if we are unaware of their influence.  “Some of the situations that can influence cocaine use are people you are with, places you go, time of day, the amount of money you have with you, how much alcohol you have consumed, and how you are feeling. The first step in understanding your cocaine use is to identify the situations in which you are likely to use. We call that identifying your ‘triggers.’ You will also want to identify consequences of your use; that is, identify the immediate, usually positive consequences (getting high, having fun), and the delayed, often negative consequences (blowing your money, unwanted sexual encounters, fights with your spouse). As you identify triggers and consequences, you will discover certain patterns to your cocaine use that are important targets for intervention.”  Clients are assigned the task of analyzing at least  three recent episodes of cocaine use. Learning to ana   lyze one’s cocaine use is emphasized during initial  treatment sessions, but the exercise is used throughout the treatment process to help clients understand and modify any lapses to cocaine use, as well as to address problems with cocaine craving.  In conjunction with functional analysis, clients are taught self-management plans for using the information revealed in the functional analyses to decrease the chances of future cocaine use. Using the selfmanagement planning sheet shown in Figure 14.2, clients are counseled to restructure their daily activities to minimize contact with known antecedents of cocaine use, to find alternatives to the positive consequences of cocaine use, and to make explicit the negative consequences of cocaine use.  A key part of self-management planning that is implemented with most clients is drug-refusal training. Most cocaine abusers who are trying to quit cocaine use continue to have contact, either planned or inadvertent, with individuals who are still using. Turning down cocaine or opportunities to go places where cocaine is available is more difficult than most clients anticipate. We approach this as a special case of assertiveness training (e.g., McCrady, Chapter 13, this volume; Meyers & Smith, 1995). The key components of effective refusal are shown in Table 14.2. Therapists should explain the rationale for drug-refusal skills training, engage the client in a detailed discussion of the key elements of effective refusal, assist the client in formulating his/her own refusal style (incorporating the key ele-  Consequences  Thoughts Trigger and feelings Behavior Positive Negative   figUre 14.1. Form for functional analysis of substance use.   Drug Use Disorders  Trigger Plans ± Consequences Difficulty (1–10) 1. a b c d e.  figUre 14.2. Self-management planning sheet. From Budney and Higgins (1998).  ments), and role-play some scenes in which the client is offered cocaine. The role-played situations should be very specific and realistic for the client in terms of people, times of day, location, and so forth. Client and therapist should alternate roles, so that the former has the opportunity to practice while receiving constructive feedback, and the latter has the opportunity to model effective refusal skills.  Second, all clients receive instruction in developing a new social network that supports a healthier lifestyle and getting involved with enjoyable recreational activities that do not involve cocaine or other drug use. Systematically developing and maintaining contacts  table 14.2. Components of effective refusal  1. No should be the first thing you say. 2. Tell the person offering you drugs or asking you to go out not to ask you now or in the future if you want to do cocaine. Saying things like “maybe later,” “I have to get home,” or “I’m on medication,” and so forth, just make it likely that he or she will ask again. 3. Body language is important: a. Making good eye contact is important; look directly at the person when you answer. b. Your expression and tone should clearly indicate that you are serious. 4. Offer an alternative, if you want to do something else with that person. Make sure that it is something that is incompatible with cocaine use (taking your children for a walk or to the park, going to work out, etc.). 5. Change the subject to a new topic of conversation. with “safe” social networks and participation in ”safe” recreational activities remain a high priority throughout treatment for the vast majority of clients. Specific treatment goals are set, and weekly progress on specific goals is monitored (Principle 4, Table 14.1).  Clearly, plans for developing healthy social networks and recreational activities must be individualized depending on the circumstances, skills, and interests of clients. For clients who are willing to participate, self-help groups (Alcoholics Anonymous or Narcotics Anonymous) can be an effective way to develop a new network of associates that supports a sober lifestyle. A clinic staff member often accompanies a client to his/her first self-help meeting or two. By no means do we focus exclusively on or mandate self-help involvement. We assist clients with getting involved in a wide variety of social groups that reinforce a healthy lifestyle (e.g., church groups). Clinic staff members accompany clients who are trying new, healthy activities. Some clients wish to reinitiate activities in which they engaged prior to becoming involved with cocaine use, or have clear ideas about activities they would like to pursue. We assist those clients in renewing or initiating participation in those activities. Many others either never engaged in recreation as adults without drug involvement or are simply unable to identify any activities they would currently like to pursue. We often have these clients complete a leisure interest inventory to prompt ideas about activities they might have liked previously or otherwise want to explore. We encourage clients to sample new activities even if they are unsure whether they will find them enjoyable. As we describe   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  below, vouchers may be used to support costs of initiating recreational and other activities that support a healthy lifestyle.  Third, various other forms of individualized skills training are provided, usually to address some specific skills deficit that may influence directly or indirectly a client’s risk for cocaine use (e.g., time management, problem solving, assertiveness training, social skills training, and mood management). For example, essential to success with the self-management skills and social/recreational goals discussed earlier is some level of time management skills. All clients are given daily planners to facilitate planning. Because clients may lose or forget their planners, providing photocopies to cover the next week of treatment is a good strategy. Therapists provide the following rationale:  “This part of your treatment involves learning to plan, schedule, and prioritize the events and activities in your life. Solving your cocaine problem requires making substantial lifestyle changes; it is important to develop efficient ways to do this. Some patients say they don’t like to plan—they like to be spontaneous. But if they don’t find a way to schedule and organize their lives, they often get overwhelmed and don’t achieve their goals.”  With most clients, time management in some form is worked on throughout treatment. The importance of writing down a schedule of activities that help to promote cocaine abstinence between therapy sessions is emphasized in each session. Planning for “high-risk” times is particularly important. Use of “to do” lists, daily planning, and prioritizing activities is addressed.  As other examples of skills training, we implement protocols on controlling depression (Lewinsohn, Muñoz, Youngren, & Zeiss, 1986; Muñoz & Miranda, 2000) with those clients whose depression continues after they discontinue cocaine use (see Principle 8, Table 14.1). We sometimes implement social skills and relaxation training with individuals who report social anxiety about meeting new people, dating, and so forth (Rodebaugh, Holaway, & Heimberg, 2004). Many clients report persistent problems with insomnia following discontinuation of drug use. With them we often implement a protocol based on those developed by Morin (2004). We often work with clients regarding money management. With many clients this might simply involve helping them arrange direct deposit for their paycheck, so that they are not tempted to use be   cause they have a large sum of cash on hand. For others, this might involve a plan to get out of debt, which can help to reduce stress. Because clients often have so many problems that could benefit from our assistance, we follow a rule of only treating those problems that we feel directly or indirectly affect the probability of initial and longer-term cocaine abstinence for individual clients. Here we rely heavily on functional analysis and other available information regarding the client’s cocaine use. For problems that do not appear to be related to cocaine use but warrant professional attention, we generally make a referral. We work very hard to keep treatment focused on resolving the problem of cocaine use, and not being sidetracked by other pressing problems that may have no direct or indirect effect on the presenting problem of cocaine dependence.  Fourth, unemployed clients are offered Job Club, which is an efficacious method to help chronically unemployed individuals obtain employment (see the Job Club manual; Azrin & Besalel, 1980). The majority of people who seek treatment for cocaine dependence are unemployed, so we offer this service to many of our clients. We assist others in pursuing educational goals or new career paths. A meaningful vocation is fundamental to a healthy lifestyle, and we recommend goals directed toward vocational enhancement for all clients. Rules that we follow for several common types of vocational problems are outlined in Table 14.3.  Fifth, clients with romantic partners who are not drug abusers are offered behavioral couple therapy, an intervention designed to teach couples positive communication skills and how to negotiate reciprocal contracts for desired changes in each other’s behavior. We attempt to deliver relationship counseling across eight sessions, with the first four sessions delivered across consecutive weeks and the next four delivered on alternating weeks. We introduce this aspect of therapy with the following rationale:  “As you well know, an important area of your life that is negatively affected by cocaine problems is your relationship with your partner. Those close to the person with the problem are typically most adversely affected by the problem. Many partners of cocainedependent individuals have tried many times to help their mate to stop using. Strategies for trying to help vary. Anger and frustration usually build up, and feelings of hopelessness and helplessness arise. Sometimes attempts to help are met with resentment and anger from the partner with the problem.   Drug Use Disorders  table 14.3. examples of goals set in Vocational Counseling  For the unemployed client:  •• Eight job contacts per week. •• Develop a resume. •• Send out two resumes with a cover letter per day. •• Go to the job service twice per week. •• Enroll in a job training program. •• Enroll in a vocational exploration program. •• Take a job-skills-related class. •• Consider and collect information on educational  possibilities.  For the client who works “too many” hours or has irregular schedule:  •• Keep work hours between 35 and 50 hours per week. •• Establish a more regular schedule. •• Explore alternative work schedules.  For the person working in a “high risk” for drug use environment or the dissatisfied employee:  •• Consider a job change. •• Submit applications for alternative employment while continuing to work. •• Modify the work environment to reduce risk of drug  use or improve working conditions. •• Enroll in a career exploration class. •• Enroll in job-skills or alternative, career-related  educational classes.  “In this part of treatment, we focus on how cocaine use has affected your relationship and how we can work to increase the positive aspects of your relationship. We also discuss ways that your partner can assist you in achieving and maintaining abstinence. We hope to be able to help you both deal more effectively with this cocaine problem.  “We have found that where there are drug abuse problems, there are usually communication problems. Usually, we see communication that is filled with anger, silence, apathy, or resentment, and many times partners try to get their needs met outside the relationship. By the time patients come to see us, there is little, if any, enjoyment left in the relationship.”   The intervention involves a related series of exercises. Partners independently rate their current level of happiness across household responsibilities, child rearing, social activities, money, communication, sex and affection, academic progress, personal independence,  partner’s independence, general happiness. These ratings are shared and discussed, then rerated weekly to monitor progress. Next, a system of “daily reminders to be nice” (i.e., express appreciation and affection toward one’s spouse) is implemented. The obvious goal is to get the partners to take the time to be positive with each other. Each partner is expected to engage in a daily practice of “nice” gestures toward his/her spouse and to keep a daily compliance record of his/ her own behavior—not the spouse’s compliance. That information is reviewed and shared during sessions. After some level of positive interaction is established, partners independently identify what a “perfect relationship” would entail in terms of the key elements of their relationship mentioned earlier—what that perfect relationship would look like. Finally, the partners begin to work on using positive communication skills to negotiate for reciprocal changes in each other’s behavior to move toward that “perfect relationship.” The terms “positive” and “reciprocal” are fundamentally important here. Requests are stated exclusively in positive terms, and both members have to be willing to make changes.  Sixth, HIV/AIDS education is provided to all clients in the early stages of treatment, along with counseling that addresses any specific needs or risk behavior of the individual patient (Herrmann et al., 2013). We address with all clients the potential for acquiring HIV/AIDS from sharing injection equipment and through sexual activity. This involves at least two sessions. First, clients complete an HIV/AIDS knowledge test. They next watch and discuss with their therapist a video on HIV/ AIDS. Points emphasized by therapists during the discussion are shown in Table 14.4. Clients are also provided HIV/AIDS prevention pamphlets and free condoms (if desired). The HIV/AIDS knowledge test is repeated, and any remaining errors are discussed and resolved. Finally, clients are given information about being tested for HIV antibodies and hepatitis B and C, and are encouraged to get tested (Principle 12, Table 14.1). Those interested in testing are assisted by clinic staff in scheduling an appointment.  Seventh, all who meet DSM-IV-TR diagnostic criteria for alcohol dependence or report that alcohol use is involved in their use of cocaine are offered disulfiram therapy (see Principle 7, Table 14.1), which is an integral part of the CRA treatment for alcoholism (Meyers & Smith, 1995), and decreases alcohol and cocaine use in clients who are dependent on both substances (Carroll et al., 1998). Clients generally ingest a 250-mg   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  table 14.4. Points emphasized in discussions of HiV/aids  1. The fastest-growing risk group for HIV/AIDS is made up of people who use intravenous (IV) drugs and their sexual partners. At the start of the epidemic, this group made up just a small proportion of those getting infected, but these numbers are increasing rapidly at the present time. Not just gay men get infected! 2. Review the three ways that HIV is transmitted: (a) through sexual contact with an infected person, (b) through blood (as in needle sharing), and (c) from infected mothers to their babies during pregnancy or at the time of birth. Explain that the most efficient way for HIV to be transmitted is through blood (blood contains the highest concentration of the virus) and that sharing needles (“works”) is an “easy” way for the virus to get from the system of one person to that of another. 3. Emphasize the point that people who are infected with HIV do not necessarily look sick and might not even know they are infected. You cannot tell by looking at someone whether that person has the virus. 4. If clients are currently using IV drugs, point out that the only safe thing to do if they tend to share needles is to use new needles or to clean them, if they are still using. Review the steps necessary for appropriate syringe cleaning. 5. Unprotected sexual intercourse with the exchange of body fluids (blood, vaginal fluids, semen, preejaculatory fluid) is also an efficient means of giving or receiving the virus. Sex can be made safer by using latex condoms for each and every sexual encounter (this includes oral, vaginal, and anal sex). 6. Point out that alcohol and other drug use contribute to risk because of (a) possible suppression of the immune system, and (b) impaired judgment, which can lead to increased risk taking (e.g., drug use, unsafe sex). daily dose, observed by clinic staff on urinalysis test days, and, when possible, by a significant other on the other days. We encourage clients to sign a disulfiram contract, shown in Figure 14.3. Disulfiram therapy is only effective when implemented with procedures to monitor compliance with the recommended dosage of medication. We find that having staff monitor compliance on days that clients report to the clinic works very well. Having a significant other monitor compliance on the other days works well if the appropriate person is available to do so at the frequency needed. When that is not possible, we sometimes adopt a practice of having the client ingest a larger dose (500 mg) on days when  he/she reports to the clinic and skip dosing on the intervening days.  Use of substances other than tobacco and caffeine is discouraged as well in CRA therapy. Anyone who meets DSM-IV-TR criteria for physical dependence on opiates is referred to an adjoining service located within our clinic for methadone or other opioid replacement therapy (see Bickel, Amass, Higgins, Badger, & Esch, 1997). We recommend marijuana abstinence because of the problems associated with its abuse, but we have found no evidence that marijuana use or dependence adversely affects treatment for cocaine dependence (Budney, Higgins, & Wong, 1996). Importantly, we never dismiss or refuse to treat a client due to other drug use. We recommend cessation of tobacco use but usually not during the course of treatment for cocaine dependence. That practice may change as new research begins to demonstrate that smoking cessation can be successfully integrated into simultaneous treatment for other substance abuse or dependence disorders.  Upon completion of the 24 weeks of treatment, clients are encouraged to participate in 6 months of aftercare in our clinic, which involves at least a oncemonthly brief therapy session and a urine toxicology screen. More frequent clinic contact is recommended if therapist or client deem it necessary. These clinic visits might be considered booster sessions that monitor progress and address problems with cocaine use or other aspects of the lifestyle changes initiated during treatment. They also allow for a gradual rather than abrupt ending of the client’s involvement with the clinic.  Voucher Program  As we noted earlier, the voucher program is a contingency management intervention designed to increase retention and abstinence. Many cocaine- and other drug-dependent individuals arrive in treatment with their lives in disarray. A reasonable assumption is that some time will be needed to assist these individuals in stabilizing and restructuring their lives, so that naturalistic sources of reinforcement for abstinence can exert some influence over their behavior. A protected environment is an option, but the voucher program is deemed a less expensive alternative. The goal is to have this incentive program play a major role during the initial 12 weeks of treatment, during which time CRA therapy is ongoing as well. CRA assists clients in restructuring their lifestyle, so that naturalistic rein    Drug Use Disorders  I, , agree to take disulfiram at the regularly scheduled time outlined below. I agree to do this for days. After this time,I agree to talk to my therapist and to discuss whether or not to continue taking disulfiram. I also agree to have the person designated below witness the administration of the disulfiram each time it is scheduled.   I, administration of disulfiram. , agree to be present and witness each take-home Time: Days: Where: In response to scheduled, I agree to taking of disulfiram. taking disulfiram as asa means of reinforcing the   Patient’s Signature Partner’s Signature   Therapist’s Signature Date   figUre 14.3. Disulfiram contract.  forcers are in place to sustain cocaine abstinence once the vouchers are discontinued.  The voucher program is implemented in conjunction with a rigorous urinalysis monitoring program (see Principle 11, Table 14.1). We ask patients to sign an Abstinence Contract (Figure 14.4), which describes the voucher program and the urinalysis testing schedule. Urine specimens are collected from all participants according to a Monday, Wednesday, and Friday schedule during Weeks 1–12 and a Monday and Thursday schedule during Weeks 13–24 of treatment. Specimens are screened immediately via an onsite enzyme multiplied immunoassay technique (EMIT, Syva Company, San Jose, CA) to minimize delays in delivering reinforcement for cocaine-negative specimens. To decrease the likelihood of submitting bogus specimens, all specimen collection is observed by a same-sex staff member, and that staff member always reserves the right to request another specimen if he/she has any concerns regarding the integrity of a specimen. All specimens are screened for benzoylecgonine, a cocaine metabolite, and each  week one randomly selected specimen also is screened for the presence of other drugs of abuse. Breath alcohol levels (BALs) are assessed at the time urine specimens are collected. Failure to submit a scheduled specimen is treated as a cocaine-positive result. Participants are informed of their urinalysis and BAL results within several minutes after submitting specimens.  Urine specimens collected during Weeks 1–12 that test negative for benzoylecgonine earn points that are recorded on vouchers and given to participants. Points are worth the equivalent of $0.25 each. Money is never provided directly to clients. Instead, points are used to purchase retail items in the community. A staff member makes all purchases. The first negative specimen is worth 10 points at $0.25/point or $2.50. The value of vouchers for each subsequent, consecutive negative specimen increases by 5 points (second = 15 points, third = 20 points, etc.). To further increase the likelihood of continuous cocaine abstinence, the equivalent of a $10 bonus is earned for each three, consecutive negative specimens. A specimen that is cocaine-positive   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  This is an agreement between (the client) and  (the therapist) to help the client maintain abstinence from cocaine. By this agreement I direct my therapist to establish a schedule for collecting urine specimens from me for 24 weeks. I will provide urine samples three times per week on a Monday, Wednesday, and Friday schedule during the first 12 weeks of treatment. During the second 12 weeks of treatment (Weeks 13–24), urine samples will be collected two times per week on a Monday and Thursday schedule. A clinical staff member of my same sex will observe the urination. Half of each urine sample will be submitted for immediate analysis and half will be saved at the clinic. Samples will be assayed for a variety of drugs of abuse, among which are cocaine, amphetamines, opioids, marijuana, and sedatives.  Each specimen collection requires 3.0 ounces of urine. If the quantity is insufficient for analysis, that will be considered a failure to provide a scheduled sample.  If I travel out of town due to an emergency, I will inform my therapist in advance of leaving. My therapist is authorized to verify such absences with . If I require hospitalization, my therapist will arrange to collect urine in the hospital. If I am sick and do not require hospitalization, I will still arrange to produce scheduled urine specimens. If I have difficulty with transportation, or inclement weather makes it difficult to travel, I will work out (with the assistance of the clinical staff) a way to get to the clinic for urine collection. On certain major holidays the clinic will be closed. My therapist and I will mutually agree to altered urine schedules on these occasions.  If for appropriate medical reasons a prescription for one of the drugs which sometimes is abused is written, I will supply my therapist with copies of that prescription. The appearance of that drug in the urine will not be counted as a relapse to drug use. I hereby direct my therapist to communicate by mail or telephone with the prescribing physician or dentist when my therapist deems that action to be appropriate.  Cocaine-Free Urines: For each cocaine-negative urine sample collected during Weeks 1–12 of treatment, points will be earned. Each point is worth the monetary equivalent of $0.25, although they may not be exchanged directly for cash. A voucher stating the earned point value will be presented to me following the collection of a cocaine-negative sample. This voucher will specify the number of points earned for that day, as well as the cumulative points earned to date and their monetary equivalent.  During the first 12 weeks of treatment, the first cocaine-free urine sample will earn 10 points, with each consecutive cocaine-free sample collected thereafter earning an increment of 5 points above the previously earned amount. For example, if 10 points are received on Wednesday for a cocaine-free urine sample, Friday’s cocaine-free sample will earn 15 points, Monday’s will earn 20, and so on. As an added incentive to remain abstinent from cocaine, a $10 bonus will be earned for each week of three consecutive cocaine-negative urine samples collected at our clinic. Assuming there are no cocaine-positive urine samples collected, the monetary equivalent of $997.50 can be earned during the first 12 weeks of treatment. Since a major emphasis in our program is on lifestyle changes, primarily increasing activities that effectively compete with drug use, the money earned on this incentive system must be used toward social or recreational goods and activities agreed upon by my therapist and myself. A list of acceptable uses of vouchers has been developed for this purpose and will be shared with me. During the second 12 weeks of treatment, the incentive program will be changed. Rather than earning vouchers for cocaine-negative samples, I will be earning lottery tickets for clean samples.  For the entire 24 weeks of treatment, immediately after the urinalysis test results indicate that the urine sample is cocaine-negative, the following will happen. The vouchers (Weeks 1–12) or lottery tickets (Weeks 13–24) will be delivered. Following the presentation of each voucher, I will be asked if I would like to “purchase” any goods or services. Vouchers may be used at any time during the 24-week program. Earned vouchers cannot be taken away from me under any circumstances. The procedure for dealing with cocaine-positive urine samples is discussed below.  Cocaine-Positive Urines: All urine samples will be screened for drug use. A record will be kept of all drugs screened positive, although this contract will be in effect for cocaine only. For each cocaine-positive urine sample collected I will  (continued)  figUre 14.4. Sample abstinence contract.   Drug Use Disorders  not receive a voucher. In addition, the voucher earned for the next cocaine-free urine sample will be reset to 10. To reset the voucher value to where it was prior to the cocaine “slip,” I must provide five consecutive cocaine-free samples. The fifth “clean” sample will then earn me the same monetary equivalent as that earned for the sample preceding the cocaine-positive one, and the system outlined earlier will continue to be in effect (i.e., each clean sample will earn 5 points more than the previous one).  Failure to Provide a Urine Sample: Failure to provide a urine sample on the designated date (without prior approval of my therapist) will be treated as a cocaine-positive sample and the procedures noted earlier will be in effect. Although clinic staff will make an attempt to obtain the sample by coming to my home (with my permission, of course), cocainenegative urine samples collected in this manner will not earn voucher points, nor will they reset my voucher value to 10. In effect, cocaine-negative samples collected outside of our clinic (except in the case of hospitalization) are “neutral.” On the other hand, if clinic staff obtain a sample from me outside of the clinic, and the sample is cocaine-positive, it will be treated in the manner outlined above for cocaine-positive urine samples.  My signature below acknowledges that I agree to the urinalysis monitoring system outlined above. This system has been carefully explained to me, and I understand the outcome of providing both cocaine-negative and cocaine-positive urine samples while I am a client at the clinic.  Client  Date Therapist  figUre 14.4. (continued)  or failure to submit a scheduled specimen resets the value of vouchers back to the initial $2.50, from which they can escalate again according to the same schedule. Submission of five consecutive cocaine-negative specimens following submission of a positive specimen returns the value of points to where they were prior to the reset. Points cannot be lost once they are earned.  Patients and therapists jointly select retail items to be purchased with points. The items commonly obtained are quite diverse, including YMCA passes, continuing education materials, fishing licenses, gift certificates to local restaurants, hobby materials, and so forth. Therapists retain veto power over all purchases. Purchases are only approved if therapists deem them to be in concert with individual treatment goals of increasing drugfree, healthy activities.  The voucher program is discontinued at the end of Week 12. During Weeks 13–24, participants receive a single $1.00 Vermont State Lottery ticket per cocainenegative urinalysis test. Across the 24 weeks of treatment, patients can earn a maximum of $997.50 in vouchers during Weeks 1–12 and $24 in lottery tickets during Weeks 13–24. No material incentives are delivered during the recommended 6-month aftercare  period. There is strong evidence that vouchers worth only several hundred dollars over the 12-week course of treatment are efficacious, although the magnitude of the treatment effect decreases significantly as the size of the incentive decreases (Lussier et al., 2006).  Getting Therapy Under Way  The therapist has many tasks to accomplish during the first two sessions (Week 1) of treatment, in addition to simply getting to know the client and developing rapport. These sessions are critical to enhancing motivation and setting the tone for treatment. Hence, we provide detailed descriptions of the specific tasks to accomplish during initial therapy sessions.  As discussed earlier, urinalysis and cocaine use test results are the first areas addressed. By starting the session with a direct assessment of cocaine use, the therapist provides a clear message that the focus of this treatment is the cocaine use disorder.  After a discussion of cocaine use and voucher earnings, the therapist should make sure that the client has completed all the intake materials. Here the therapist can also answer any new questions the client may have.   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  If practical needs, such as housing, transportation, or child care, are issues for treatment attendance, these needs should be a primary focus of the first session. Therapists should do everything possible to assist clients in finding solutions to these problems.  The therapist should discuss alternative activities or strategies for coping with high-risk situations for cocaine use, especially situations that are likely to arise during the upcoming week. As discussed earlier, having the client use appointment books or photocopies provided by the clinic is very helpful for scheduling alternative plans or activities. The next session should also be scheduled, and the client should record the day and time in the appointment book.  The therapist should begin to formulate a comprehensive treatment plan with specific goals and methods. He/she might introduce this task in the following way:  “A treatment plan will allow us to write down the things you and I think are important to accomplish and how we plan to go about trying to accomplish them. We will use the plan to keep us focused on the task at hand—that is, making lifestyle changes that will help you stop using cocaine and other drugs, and also increase your satisfaction with other important areas of your life. The treatment plan will be developed through a cooperative effort between you and me. It is important that you think the goals we set are important and will help you achieve what you want in life. My job in this process is to assist you in coming up with meaningful, effective goals, and to offer advice based on my knowledge and experience with treating persons with cocaine and other drug problems.”  The therapist should then present ideas about which areas of the client’s life need changes. For each suggested change, it is important that the therapist provide a rationale that draws from the information collected from the client, as well as from research findings and clinical experience. An open discussion and exchange of ideas should then follow.  If the client is reluctant to participate, the therapist should ask for his/her thoughts on each potential area for change. The therapist can facilitate client participation with questions such as “What do you think?”; “Do you have any thoughts on this?”; “Does this make sense to you?”; “Do you think this is important?”; and “Is this type of change possible?” It is important  for therapist and client to agree on which areas of life present problems and should be changed. If a client disagrees with the therapist’s opinion, those areas should be dropped and discussed later in treatment if they continue to pose problems.  After the areas for change are agreed upon, therapist and client should discuss each one. Therapists should use active listening skills (reflection and empathy) and try to keep the focus on the specific areas. They should inform clients that they will focus on these problem areas in each session. Progress and problems are openly discussed, and additions or deletions to the plan are decided upon by therapist and client together.  Next, therapist and client together decide the order in which these problem areas should be addressed, always remembering that to increase cocaine abstinence is the primary goal. Mutual agreement is important, and a therapist may need to compromise to achieve such agreement.  Specific goals should then be set for each problem area. It is important that the therapist provide a rationale for setting specific goals:  “Setting specific goals is important. They will help us stay focused on the primary changes we agreed are important for stopping your drug use and achieving a more satisfying life without drugs. Specific goals also provide a way to measure progress. This can be very important because many times progress can be slow. You may feel you are getting nowhere. In reality, you may be progressing in making changes, but you don’t feel much different. Information about specific goals will help us both see more clearly whether we are heading in the right direction, even if the progress is slow.  “This information can also show when you are not progressing as we planned and can lead us to either reconsider the goal or find other ways to meet the goal. Keeping track of progress on specific goals also provides us with a reminder to reward or praise you for the hard work you are doing. Lifestyle changes are often difficult to make. We would also like you to learn to pat yourself on the back and take credit if you are doing well.”  These goals should be quantifiable, so that progress can be graphed. Targets for change should be set in the priority areas listed in the treatment plan and categorized as primary or secondary behavior change goals. Examples of typical goals are as follows:   Drug Use Disorders  •• Five job contacts per week or making an appointment for vocational rehabilitation. •• Engaging in three recreational activities each week during high-risk times. •• Spending 4 hours each week engaging in fun ac   tivities with a family member or friend. •• Attending class one night each week. •• Doing 2 hours of homework toward obtaining a  general equivalency diploma (GED).  •• Planning and doing activities with a person who does not use drugs on nights when one typically used cocaine.  A therapist and client should mutually decide on these goals. Basic principles of effective goal setting should be followed:  •• Set relatively low goals at first, so that the client can experience success early.  •• Thoroughly analyze all possible barriers to achieving selected goals, so that unrealistic goals are avoided.  •• Make sure that the client understands how a goal relates to the overall treatment plan.  It is essential to maximize the probability that the client will carry through and achieve the desired behavior change. The therapist’s responsibility is to use the appropriate counseling style and behavioral procedures to increase the probability of compliance with a targeted behavior.  The treatment plan should be updated regularly because treatment planning is a process of constant reevaluation, assessment, and change based on objective indices of progress (Principle 4, Table 14.1). The client and therapist together should review, discuss, and assess the treatment plan frequently as goals are achieved or as interventions fail, or as new information becomes available. These changes should also be reviewed at the regular clinical supervision meeting.  Implementing the treatment plan, monitoring progress, and modifying and updating the treatment plan according to client needs, progress, and problems are the “meat” of the remainder of treatment.  Clinical Supervision  Doctorate-level psychologists who have expertise in behavioral psychology and substance abuse treatment provide supervision in our clinic. Supervisors provide  significant input into treatment plans and selection of targets for behavior change. The supervisor provides guidance about how to monitor progress.  Supervision is provided weekly in sessions that usually last 2–3 hours, during which all cases are reviewed. Therapists update the supervisor and other clinic therapists on each patient’s progress based on specific treatment goals and whether progress has been made since the last supervision meeting. Progress is presented graphically for all goals.  A supervisor’s style in this model should include a balance of support, feedback, problem solving, and instruction. Considering that CRA plus vouchers requires an active therapeutic approach that can be effortful, the supervisor must serve as a stable source of support, encouragement, and direction in implementing the treatment plan.  We follow a fixed protocol in reviewing cases. First, review begins with examination of a graph of the patient’s cocaine urinalysis results from the start of treatment. Second, we review use of alcohol or any other drugs that are being targeted for change. Then we review attendance at therapy sessions, primary goals for lifestyle changes, and secondary goals for the same. Once those treatment targets have been reviewed and modified as necessary, any recent crises or relevant clinical issues, such as suicidal ideation or newly identified problem behaviors, are discussed.  At any point in treatment, treatment goals and targets may be changed. Changes in goals may be precipitated by achievement of prior goals, failure to make any progress toward a specific goal, and clear indication that the goal is not functionally related to cocaine use.  iMPleMeNtiNG the cra Plus vouchers treatMeNt: a case stuDy  In this section we review the case of a client treated in our clinic with the CRA plus vouchers treatment. We chose this case because it illustrates well a number of different aspects of using this treatment approach. Outcome was quite good but certainly not perfect, which is to be expected with this population. The case also illustrates the multifaceted problems with which cocainedependent clients present.  Bill, a 24-year-old, single (never married), European American male, was self-referred to the clinic for help with problems with cocaine use. He had been living with a friend, who also used cocaine, until several   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  weeks prior to the intake interview, when Bill moved in with his parents. He had a 5-year-old daughter who lived with an estranged romantic partner. The client currently was without legal visitation rights with his daughter because of her mother’s concerns over Bill’s record of drug use.  Bill, a high school graduate, had been employed full-time in a retail business for the past 3 years. He reported that most of the individuals with whom he associated were drug abusers. Bill reported a history of healthy social and recreational activities, including golf and skiing, but he had not engaged in those activities with regularity for a number of years.  He had a history of involvement with the criminal justice system, with one conviction for a weapons offense. Bill was incarcerated for 3 months related to that charge but was not under criminal justice supervision at the time he sought treatment.  Presenting Complaint  Bill reported being on a 3-day binge prior to intake and wanted help with stopping cocaine use. He reported numerous prior attempts to stop on his own, but with minimal success. Bill reported being “fed up” with how he felt after bingeing episodes of cocaine use and was concerned about the financial problems his cocaine use caused. He also expressed serious concerns that his drug use and related lifestyle had resulted in the strained relationship with his child and ex-girlfriend that interfered with his getting visitation privileges.  Assessment  Cocaine Use  Bill met DSM-IV-TR criteria for cocaine dependence. He reported a 6-year history of intranasal cocaine use. In his most recent use, 7 days prior to intake, Bill used  10.5 grams of cocaine at home with friends, reporting that this was his typical pattern of use. At intake, Bill reported three episodes of cocaine use during the prior 30 days, with each episode lasting approximately 48 hours, usually during weekends. He typically used cocaine with friends at bars or at friends’ houses. His cocaine use was often preceded by spending time in bars or working excessive hours, or by certain moods that included feeling bored, depressed, anxious, or upset. Bill reported a number of serious consequences as a result of his cocaine use, including physical and  financial problems; a relationship breakup; and psychiatric symptoms such as depression, anxiety, suicidal ideation, and violent impulses.  Other Drug Use  Bill’s first use of alcohol was at age 16. He reported a pattern of weekly binge drinking, during which he would ingest 13–15 shots of hard liquor. He reported drinking 5 days out of the past 30 days. Bill’s first use of cannabis was at age 14. He reported 10 years of daily use and having used cannabis on 30 of the prior 30 days. He reported limited prior use of amphetamines and hallucinogens but no regular or current use of those substances. A regular cigarette smoker, Bill smoked approximately 20 cigarettes per day. Bill reported no previous treatment episodes for substance abuse.  Bill also met DSM-IV-TR criteria for alcohol, cannabis, and nicotine dependence.  Other Psychiatric Problems  Bill reported a history of depression and suicidal ideation. He also noted problems with anger management, which he agreed had been a significant problem for him, and for which he had previously received counseling. His BDI score was 23 at intake (Beck, Ward, Mendelson, Mock, & Erbaugh, 1961), but he reported no suicidal ideation.  Motivation to Change  Bill’s score on the SOCRATES at intake indicated a strong commitment to cocaine abstinence. He expressed a moderate commitment to alcohol abstinence but agreed to disulfiram therapy for the duration of treatment. He noted plans to return to social drinking after completion of treatment. He was uninterested in discontinuing marijuana use, which he did not consider a problem, and was not currently interested in discontinuing cigarette smoking.  Conceptualization of the Case  Bill worked long hours, sometimes holding several jobs simultaneously. That practice left little time for other types of activities and, as might be expected, he reported minimal involvement in any form of ongoing recreational activities. Aside from work, then, there were few alternative sources of reinforcement to compete   Drug Use Disorders  with the reinforcing effects of Bill’s cocaine and other drug use. These situations typically snowball, so that cocaine and related drug abuse monopolize more and more the person’s activities. In this case, Bill’s practices of working long hours, frequenting bars, and using drugs, and his difficulties with anger management, were sufficient to destroy his relationship with his romantic partner, thereby greatly restricting his time with his daughter. Losing those relationships further eliminated any competing sources of reinforcement and also freed up additional time and resources to allocate to the bar and cocaine use scenes. While we deemed Bill’s long work hours to have likely increased his vulnerability to the drug-abusing lifestyle, his full-time employment also likely provided some protection against cocaine gaining even greater control over his behavior. Full-time employment is a positive prognostic variable with this and other treatments for cocaine dependence, as is the use of an intranasal route of cocaine administration, which was Bill’s preferred route.  Treatment Plan  Cocaine abstinence was the first priority in Bill’s treatment plan and is always the main focus in this treatment approach. Next, we recommended alcohol abstinence due to the close relationship between Bill’s cocaine and alcohol use. As mentioned earlier, Bill was unwilling to change his use of marijuana despite the rationales we provided regarding both the benefits of doing so and potential adverse consequences of continuing to smoke. Our clinical approach was to look for opportunities during the course of treatment to reinforce any movement toward reducing or discontinuing marijuana use, but not to make Bill’s reluctance to change this problem behavior a point of contention. Reestablishing a regular pattern of involvement in healthy recreational activities, especially activities that might substitute for cocaine and alcohol use on weekends, was a high-priority goal. The therapist provided the following rationale to Bill as to why we deemed participation in these activities to be a high priority:  tHeraPist: Many times, when cocaine or other drugs become a regular part of someone’s life, they stop doing many of the nondrug activities they used to enjoy. That seems to be true in your case. You used to do lots of healthy recreational activities, but after getting into cocaine use you got away from those other activities.  Bill: No doubt. It’s funny, too, because I’m not even sure how that happened. Just gradually got off into different things. Never really stopped liking the other stuff. Just seems like I sort of drifted away from them.  tHeraPist: That’s a pretty common report. You have a lot going for you though, Bill. You have a history of doing these healthier activities and having liked them. That’s a strength that you’ll be able to build upon during treatment.  Bill: Good, haven’t felt like I’ve had too many strengths lately. But how do we do this? What’s the connection to my cocaine use?  tHeraPist: Healthy social and recreational activities are important in people’s lives. They provide something positive to look forward to after work, a way to decrease boredom and to feel healthy, and a chance to be with people you like. Such activities can play an important part in becoming and staying cocaine free. When you give up using drugs, you have to do something else during the times you used to use. If the things you do are not satisfying or enjoyable, or you don’t do anything but sit around and feel lonely or bored, you are more likely to use drugs. That is why we have a specific treatment component to assist you in developing a regular schedule of healthy social and recreational activities.  Bill: Yeah, that could be important for me. I don’t find it easy to hang out around the house. I get bored, pretty antsy.  tHeraPist: OK, lets go right to work on these now. We gave you a daily planner. Lets plan some activities to do between today and your next clinic visit. We really have to think carefully about Friday night because that’s a high-risk night for you. We’ll be doing a lot of this throughout therapy.  Another high priority was to assist Bill in finding an alternative source of employment that would permit him to have a more reasonable work schedule, and that paid well enough that he would not feel compelled to hold several jobs simultaneously. To increase further Bill’s involvement in activities that were incompatible with the cocaine-using lifestyle, we assisted Bill in petitioning for visitation privileges with his daughter. Regarding other psychiatric problems, we decided to monitor Bill’s BDI scores weekly to see whether they followed the precipitous decline that typically occurs   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  with cocaine-dependent patients within a couple of weeks of entering treatment. Because anger management had been a problem for Bill previously in dealing with his estranged partner, and because he would have to interact with her if he was to obtain visitation privileges, we deemed anger-management treatment appropriate.  Below we outline the progress made in implementing this treatment plan.  Cocaine Abstinence  Contingent vouchers, as the primary intervention for promoting initial abstinence, were made available to Bill according to our standard 12-week protocol. Functional analysis was also implemented with Bill during Sessions 1 and 2. Circumstances that increased the likelihood that Bill would use were being at a bar or at certain friends’ houses, using alcohol, ending a particularly long work week, and experiencing depression or boredom. He identified going to the movies or to a  safe friend’s house, hunting, fishing, and skiing as circumstances that decreased his likelihood of using. That information was updated and used throughout Bill’s course of treatment in self-management planning and in planning for social and recreational activities.  Shown in Figure 14.5 is a cumulative record of Bill’s cocaine use and urinalysis results during the 24-week treatment. His only instance of use occurred 7 weeks into treatment. Bill reported being surprised by the results and said that he had smoked marijuana with several friends, and that perhaps some cocaine had been in the pipe.  tHeraPist: Hi, Bill. How have things been going?  Bill: Pretty good.  tHeraPist: Look, the lab just called with your urinalysis results. You’re positive for cocaine.  Bill: No way. That can’t be right. Wow, I haven’t used  cocaine. Didn’t do much of anything over the week   end.   figUre 14.5. Shown is a cumulative record of Bill’s urinalysis test results (Y axis) across 60 consecutive urinalysis tests (X axis) conducted during 24 weeks of treatment.   Drug Use Disorders  tHeraPist: That’s how the machine read the sample. Let’s talk more specifically about what you did over the weekend. Let’s review what did you on each of the days, and perhaps that will give us some insights into what might be going on.  Bill: Just shut down the shop around midnight and went home and went to bed on Friday night. I worked Saturday morning. After I got off work, I hung out with some friends for a while.  tHeraPist: No gym like you planned?  Bill: Nah. Should have, but got sidetracked by running into some buddies I hadn’t seen in a while.  tHeraPist: Any of those guys use cocaine?  Bill: Yeah, one does, but he knows I’m in treatment. I used to use cocaine with him. He doesn’t do any cocaine around me now, though.  tHeraPist: What exactly did you guys do?  Bill: Just hung out at this one buddy’s house, played video games, and watched some television. We smoked a couple of bowls of pot. You know, I’m still smoking. Could be that the bowl we used had been used to smoke cocaine in recently. Bet that was it.  tHeraPist: Could be. What is pretty clear is that by getting off track of what you had planned, you increased your vulnerability for problems.  Bill: Yeah, I agree. I’m not sure I understand why I did that. I’ve been doing really well with sticking with my plans even when I run into the guys. Was supposed to get a ride to the gym from my mom, but it was a nice day, so I told her I’d walk. Saw these dudes, started talking, and just sort of bagged my plans for the gym.  tHeraPist: I have no doubt about that. You’ve been doing a great job up to now with sticking with your plans. Bill, you’ve been doing terrific with abstaining from cocaine. That is not easy to do and you deserve a tremendous amount of credit for all of the work you’ve been doing.  Bill: Shoot, kind of blew it here.  tHeraPist: Important thing is to try to learn from what happened. As you know, my recommendation from the start of treatment has been to abstain from marijuana use. Marijuana has its own problems, plus it puts you into contact with other drug abusers, sometimes including cocaine users.  Bill: I agree with that to some extent, but I don’t re   ally think that marijuana was the problem here. I’ve been smoking regularly since starting treatment and have been able to stay away from cocaine. What is different here is that I hung out all day instead of sticking with my plan to go to the gym. That’s where I screwed up. That’s the big difference from what I had been doing on the other weekends.  tHeraPist: Good job with your analysis. Keep in mind though, if you weren’t still smoking, you wouldn’t have had any need to use a pipe—yours or theirs. Nevertheless, your point is well taken regarding what you did differently this weekend compared to the others since you’ve been in treatment. Sticking with the plans for alternative activities rather than just hanging out has really been working for you. I agree with you about that. The most important thing to do here is to learn from this situation and move on. What do you think you need to do to be sure you’ll be cocaine-negative on Wednesday?  Bill: Well, I guess just keep doing what I’ve been doing—sticking to my plans: work, visit Mom, and I have a date tomorrow night. I’m scheduled to go to the gym tonight, and I’m definitely sticking with that. Being clean next time won’t be a problem.  tHeraPist: How about minimizing your contact with any drug users, especially people you’ve used cocaine with in the past? We could even role-play how you might tell the guys how you have to be going, in case you run into them again.  Bill: I guess I could do that. I don’t see most of those guys that often anyway. Yeah, sure.  tHeraPist: Good. As you know, we have to go by the urinalysis results. So you won’t earn a voucher today and their value gets reset back to the original low value because of today’s positive result. However, if you can get back on track with providing negative samples, five consecutive negatives mean that the value of the vouchers get reset back to where they were before today’s positive.  Bill: That’s fair enough.  Our experience is that there is little need to quibble over a client’s denial of a single instance of cocaine use. If the client has resumed regular cocaine use, a pattern of positives will soon emerge. Instead, the therapist reviewed with Bill the risks of continuing to smoke marijuana while working on maintaining cocaine abstinence (continuing contact with drug-using friends,   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  high-risk places, using marijuana rather than other possible activities or way to relax). They also reviewed the importance of sticking with planned activities and prepared to role-play some social skills that Bill could use to resist changing his plans should he run into drugusing friends again. Bill was very insightful about how he had deviated from what had been working for him up to this point—planning activities and sticking to the plans—and the therapist reinforced his analysis. The matter of denying cocaine use was not pursued further. Bill and the therapist carried on with implementing the treatment plan, with the few modifications mentioned. There were no further instances of cocaine use during Bill’s 24 weeks of treatment. His record of documented cocaine abstinence was excellent.  Alcohol Abstinence  During the first session, the therapist discussed with Bill the rationale for disulfiram therapy:  tHeraPist: Bill, we want to go over a few reasons for you to give disulfiram therapy and alcohol abstinence a try. First, your history indicates that if you drink, you are more likely to use cocaine. You’re not alone in that regard. The scientific evidence is very clear that for many individuals who seek treatment for cocaine dependence, alcohol and cocaine use are closely linked.  Bill: I don’t want to get drunk any more. What about just a few drinks? Is that a problem, too?  tHeraPist: Use of even modest doses of alcohol, even just a few drinks, can significantly decrease your chances of successfully abstaining from cocaine use. Our experience, and the experience in other clinics around the country, is that you can make greater progress with cocaine abstinence by using disulfiram and abstaining from alcohol use than if you continue to drink.  Bill: How long are you suggesting I take the medicine? Are you saying I can never drink again?  tHeraPist: I’m not saying that you’ll have to take this medicine forever or for years, or anything of that nature, or even that you can never go back to drinking. We can cross those bridges a ways down the road. But for now, if you want to give yourself the best chance to succeed with quitting cocaine, I recommend that you give disulfiram therapy a sincere try.  Bill: I’m not sure how much of a problem drinking is for me. I know it’s caused some problems, but I’m just not so sure.  tHeraPist: Bill, the second thing I wanted to emphasize is that you also reported a history of depression and suicidal ideation. Substance use, particularly alcohol use, is a depressant and can worsen depressive symptoms and suicide risk. A period of abstinence may help a good deal with those problems. And still another point to consider is that agreeing to disulfiram therapy represents a concrete demonstration of your commitment to drug abstinence and substantial lifestyle changes. This would be helpful in general, but it could also be helpful in your pursuit of visitation privileges with your daughter.  Bill: Hey, I’m looking to make some progress here. When I’ve tried to quit cocaine on my own, it’s not worked for beans. Maybe it’s because I kept drinking, I’m not sure. I can’t continue like this. How about I take the medicine during treatment? That’s a pretty good commitment. What did you say, treatment is for 24 weeks? Lets say I’ll go on the medicine for that amount of time.  Bill agreed to disulfiram therapy for the duration of treatment. A schedule was set up for Bill to ingest a 250-mg dose three times per week, under the observation of clinic staff, and to ingest the same dose under the observation of his father at home on alternating days.  In addition to disulfiram therapy, the therapist worked with Bill on a functional analysis of his alcohol use, similar to the preceding process for cocaine. They reviewed specific circumstances under which Bill was more likely or less likely to drink, and listed the negative consequences he had previously experienced from his alcohol use. The therapist and Bill then began to develop a plan for finding alternative ways to relax that did not involve the bar or drinking, as well as to rehearse how to refuse alcohol when it was offered, and how to identify times that Bill might be tempted to have a drink.  Bill was compliant with disulfiram therapy throughout treatment. He reported only one instance of alcohol use while on disulfiram therapy, when he did not take the medication on a Sunday morning and drank two beers at home that afternoon. On Monday, the therapist did a functional analysis with Bill to identify what set   Drug Use Disorders  up the occasion for him to drink, and what had happened with his father serving as disulfiram assurance monitor. The therapist and Bill reviewed again his history of alcohol use and the negative consequences he had experienced in the past. Bill recommitted to alcohol abstinence and resumed disulfiram therapy.  When the end of the 24-week treatment approached (Week 23), Bill expressed a desire to “be able to have a drink if he wanted” and asked to discontinue disulfiram therapy, as planned. The therapist expressed his concerns about jeopardizing the substantial progress Bill had made.  tHeraPist: So you’re due to end disulfiram therapy this week?  Bill: Yep, stuck to it like I promised, but now I’d like to be able to drink if I want to, like having a beer after work to relax. Nothing major.  tHeraPist: Bill, you’ve done really well so far with this current plan. Most folks are not as successful as you’ve been in stopping cocaine use.  Bill: Oh, I agree. I just feel like I’ve done really well in treatment and now that it’s almost over, I’d like to be able to have that choice to drink if I want to.  tHeraPist: How risky do you think going off disulfiram is going to be for you in terms of continuing your success with abstaining from cocaine?  Bill: I really don’t think it’s going to be a problem. I’m feeling pretty confident about that.  tHeraPist: Bill, that’s great. That sort of confidence is important to success. Let’s talk about some specifics though. Remember, your alcohol history is still with you. In the past you’ve had periods of binge drinking combined with cocaine use. What’s going to be different now from that past history?  Bill: Well, first of all, I don’t plan on drinking like I used to. I’m not looking to get drunk. I’m not even sure I want to drink very often. Also, I’m not going to drink in bars. That’s how I’ve gotten into trouble in the past. And I’m not going to drink with the same old crowd. I just want to know that if I go out to dinner on a date or something and want to have a drink, I can do that.  tHeraPist: You’ve given this careful consideration, which is good. Those kind of plans are important to continuing your success. Let’s talk a bit more about how you can reduce your risk as much as possible  if you’re going to resume drinking. By that, I mean how often you drink, how much you drink per occasion, where and with whom you drink—more or less, anything you can do to protect yourself from excessive drinking and, subsequently, cocaine use. Does this sound reasonable to you?  Bill: Yeah, sure, that sounds really good.  At this time, the therapist began the clinic’s controlled drinking protocol (see Miller & Muñoz, 2005). Our primary clinical recommendation was abstinence, but Bill was not going to follow that recommendation. Hence, we felt that attempting systematically to provide him with some skills to decrease the likelihood of abusive or harmful drinking was indicated. The Miller and Muñoz approach aims to teach skills that enable the client to drink in a controlled manner. Some of these skills are the same as those involved with cocaine use, including functional analysis to identify the circumstances (location, people, times, feeling states) associated with heavy drinking. Others are specific to alcohol consumption (e.g., providing information about the alcohol content of common drinks, relationship between drinks consumed, body weight, and the blood alcohol curve). Bill and the therapist worked through some of the core elements of the controlled-drinking protocol during the final week of treatment, then covered the remaining parts during aftercare. Bill reported one instance of alcohol use during he final week of treatment. He had only two drinks and did not use cocaine. As we note below, Bill also has reported little drinking during posttreatment follow-up.  Other Drug Use  Bill continued the same pattern of marijuana use that he reported in the intake interview. He repeatedly asserted that marijuana use was not interfering with his other treatment goals. In turn, the therapist provided rationales for stopping or reducing marijuana use on numerous occasions but was not successful in initiating abstinence.  Recreational Activities  During the first several sessions, the therapist and Bill discussed the importance of developing new recreational activities. They decided on a goal of participating in four of these activities per week, as well as a   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  plan to sample some new activities in the company of clinic staff. The therapist reminded Bill that the vouchers he would be earning during treatment for cocaine abstinence could be used to help pay for these activities.   During treatment, Bill consistently met his goal of four recreational activities per week. Those activities included movies, hunting, golf, and dinners at local restaurants. He used his vouchers to buy tickets to a performance at a local theater, greens fees to play golf, a gym membership, hunting and fishing licenses, and gift certificates to a local restaurant for dinner with a new girlfriend.  Family/Social Support  During the first few sessions, the therapist discussed with Bill the need to expand his social network to include family, friends, and other social contacts with non-drug-using people. Bill expressed a desire for increased contact with his daughter. Toward that end, Bill and his therapist completed a task analysis identifying the sequence of steps that would have to be taken to try to attain visitation privileges. These included requesting and completing legal forms from the court, the therapist helping Bill to discuss his wishes appropriately with his former partner, role plays in preparation for the court date, and accompanying Bill to court.  Bill succeeded in obtaining visitation privileges. His goal then became twice-weekly contact with his daughter, which he maintained consistently throughout the remainder of treatment.  Regarding other types of social support, Bill also increased contact with a couple of safe friends during the course of treatment. He also was able to meet several women through his new employment (discussed below), one of whom he began dating regularly.  Employment/Education  Bill came to treatment with a history of full-time employment, which is a good prognostic indicator in itself. However, his job upon entering treatment did not pay well and involved being around drinking. He expressed a desire to find a job that offered better pay, thereby allowing him to work fewer hours per week and to spend more time with his daughter, and to be at reduced risk for alcohol use. Therefore, Bill began participating in Job Club, coming to the clinic three times per week to  go through local employment classifieds, complete a resume and cover letters with the help of staff, fill out job applications, and rehearse for job interviews. Bill successfully obtained a better paying job with fewer risks for alcohol use. Thereafter, his vocational goal was to focus on avoiding excessive hours.  Bill also expressed concern regarding the extensive debt he had accumulated during this prolonged cocaine use. The therapist began the clinic’s money management protocol, including developing a budget for repayment of outstanding loans and skills for managing personal finances. Bill opened a savings account at a nearby bank and arranged for direct deposit of his paychecks. He used the phone in his therapist’s office to arrange payback plans with several debtors. Bill consistently made payments on his debt throughout treatment, which the therapist graphed weekly and, by the end of treatment, had eliminated all back debt and was now paying current bills.  Bill had a long-term vocational goal of eventually opening his own retail business. He and his therapist completed a preliminary task analysis (see Sulzer- Azaroff & Meyer, 1991) related to that goal. They agreed that taking accounting and computer courses would be a good start. The therapist helped Bill collect information from the local community college on the classes being offered. Bill requested financial aid applications from the community college for assistance with tuition, which his therapist helped him complete.  Psychiatric Monitoring  Recall that Bill’s BDI score at intake was 23. His BDI score had dropped precipitously by the second week of treatment, and reached a score of 2 by the end of treatment.   Bill and his therapist worked through an anger management protocol for substance abusers (Monti, Kadden, Rohsenow, Cooney, & Abrams, 2002) that helped Bill identify situations that would likely make him angry, develop coping skills to deal better with those triggers, and role-play those coping skills to gain proficiency. The therapist had Bill document when potential anger-provoking situations arose outside of the clinic and how he handled them. The therapist reviewed that information weekly, provided social reinforcement for those situations that were handled well, and problemsolved and role-played alternatives when Bill needed assistance.   Drug Use Disorders  Summary of Treatment Progress  Bill made substantial progress toward establishing a stable record of cocaine abstinence, eliminating problem drinking, increasing his involvement in social and recreational practices, improving his job situation, increasing his skill in managing anger, and improving his relationship with his daughter. The one area in which we were unable to make progress was Bill’s use of marijuana and associated involvement with the illicit drug abuse community. This progress is reflected in the pre- to posttreatment changes in ASI composite scores shown in Table 14.5. Composite scores range from 0, representing No problems in the past 30 days to 1, representing Severe problems. Bill’s scores at the endof- treatment assessment generally reflected substantial improvements.  Follow-Up  Following completion of the 24-week treatment protocol, Bill participated in a 6-month aftercare program and completed periodic follow-up assessments for 4 years after treatment entry (see Table 14.5). Thus, we have a relatively good picture of his progress.  Bill largely sustained the excellent progress he made during treatment toward resolving his cocaine-use problems. All urine toxicology tests conducted during follow-up were negative for cocaine use. He reported two instances of cocaine use during the 3.5-year follow-up period, but they were separated in time, and neither resulted in a full-blown relapse. He reported moderate use of alcohol throughout follow-up, with  only one instance of drinking to intoxication. He continued to smoke marijuana regularly, as he had done during treatment.  Regarding other areas of functioning, Bill sustained full-time employment throughout the follow-up period. There was an episode of criminal justice involvement at the 12-month assessment, which, according to Bill, was unrelated to substance abuse and was resolved before the later assessments. His depressive symptomatology remained well below intake levels throughout the follow-up period. Progress in other areas of functioning largely was sustained through follow-up, until the 48-month assessment, when a medical crisis arose. Bill developed a neuromuscular condition involving periodic episodes of full paralysis. He was also experiencing more routine but nevertheless painful dental problems. At the time of that assessment, Bill was still undergoing testing for the neuromuscular problem and did not have a diagnosis. This crisis had not precipitated a relapse back to cocaine or other drug abuse, which underscores the substantial progress Bill had made with those problems. The increases in ASI drug scale scores at that 48-month assessment were related to taking pain medication for the dental problems. Clearly, though, the medical conditions were having a destabilizing effect physically and psychologically. Although Bill recognized that the situation put him at increased risk for relapse, he did not deem the situation at that time to warrant reentry into treatment. Treatment staff commended Bill on his sustained progress in abstaining from cocaine and alcohol abuse, and reassured him that he could return to treatment if the need arose.  table 14.5. asi subscale and bdi scores at intake, end of treatment, and Posttreatment follow-Up assessments  Score Intake End of treatment 12 months 24 months 36 months 48 months ASI subscales Medical 0.42 0.09 0.09 0.18 0.00 1.00 Employment 0.07 0.10 0.09 0.11 0.13 0.08 Alcohol 0.13 0.00 0.06 0.00 0.05 0.11 Drug (other than cocaine) 0.28 0.07 0.08 0.08 0.09 0.19 Cocaine 0.66 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 Legal 0.00 0.00 0.40 0.00 0.00 0.00 Family/Social 0.22 0.10 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.22 Psychological 0.36 0.00 0.09 0.09 0.18 0.53 BDI 23 1 3 5 10 6   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  coNcluDiNG coMMeNts  In this chapter we have presented the most up-to-date scientific information available on effective clinical management of illicit drug use disorders. In the process, we have tried to illustrate what have come to be considered principles of effective treatment for illicit drug use disorders in general, using cocaine dependence as a specific exemplar. We have emphasized one efficacious, multielement treatment approach but have underscored how it contains elements of all of the empirically based behavioral and cognitive-behavioral therapies except behavioral family therapy. We realize that limitations in resources and other practical constraints will prevent many clinicians from utilizing the treatment practices just as we have outlined them in this chapter. Costs for the treatment provided to Bill were covered exclusively through a research grant. However, we hope that this information offers insights into the important elements of effective treatment for illicit drug use disorders. We also hope that this information makes the job of clinicians who are out there in the trenches treating the drug-dependent population a little easier and, we hope, their practices more effective.  aCknowledgMent  Preparation of this chapter was supported in part by National Institute on Drug Abuse Grant Nos. DA09378, DA030534, and DA031928.  referenCes  American Psychiatric Association. (2000). Diagnostic and  statistical manual of mental disorders (4th ed., text rev.).  Washington, DC: Author. American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and  statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.). Arling   ton, VA: Author. Azrin, N. H. (1976). Improvements in the community   reinforcement approach to alcoholism. Behaviour Re   search and Therapy, 14, 339–348. Azrin, N. H., & Besalel, V. A. (1980). Job Club counselor’s  manual. Baltimore: University Park Press. Azrin, N. H., Donohue, B., Besalel, V. A., Kogan, E. S., &  Acierno, R. (1994). Youth drug abuse treatment: A con   trolled outcome study. Journal of Child and Adolescent  Substance Abuse, 3, 1–16.  Beck, A. T., Steer, R. A., Ball, R., & Ranieri, W. (1996). Comparison of Beck Depression Inventories -IA and -II  in psychiatric outpatients. Journal of Personality Assessment, 67, 588–597.  Beck, A. T., Ward, C. H., Mendelson, M., Mock, J., & Erbaugh, J. (1961). An inventory for measuring depression. Archives of General Psychiatry, 4, 561–571.  Bellack, A. S., Bennett, M. E., Gearson, J. S., Brown, C. H., & Yang, Y. (2006). A randomized clinical trial of a new behavioral treatment for drug abuse in people with severe and persistent mental illness. Archives of General Psychiatry, 63, 426–432.  Bickel, W. K., Amass, L., Higgins, S. T., Badger, G. J., & Esch, R. A. (1997). Effects of adding behavioral treatment to opioid detoxification with buprenorphine. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 65, 803–810.  Bouchery, E. E., Harwood, H. J., Sacks, J. J., Simon, C. J., & Brewer, R. D. (2011). Economic costs of excessive alcohol consumption in the U.S., 2006. American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 41, 516–524.  Budney, A. J., & Higgins, S. T. (1998). The community reinforcement plus vouchers approach: Manual 2. National Institute on Drug Abuse therapy manuals for drug addiction (NIH Publication No. 98-4308). Rockville, MD: National Institute on Drug Abuse.  Budney, A. J., Higgins, S. T., & Wong, C. J. (1996). Marijuana use and treatment outcome in cocaine-dependent patients. Journal of Experimental and Clinical Psychopharmacology, 4, 1–8.  Carroll, K. M., Nich, C., Ball, S. A., McCance, E., & Rounsaville, B. J. (1998). Treatment of cocaine and alcohol dependence with psychotherapy and disulfiram. Addiction, 93, 713–727.  Carroll, K. M., & Onken, L. S. (2005). Behavioral therapies for drug abuse. American Journal of Psychiatry, 162, 1452–1460.  Carroll, K. M., Rounsaville, B. J., Nich, C., Gordon, L. T., Wirtz, P. W., & Gawin, F. (1994). One-year follow-up of psychotherapy and pharmacotherapy for cocaine dependence: Delayed emergence of psychotherapy effects. Archives of General Psychiatry, 51, 989–997.  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2008). Smoking attributable mortality, years of potential life lost, and productivity losses—U.S. 2000–2004. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 57, 1226–1228.  Derogatis, L. R. (1983). SCL-90-R: Administration, scoring and procedures manual—II. Towson, MD: Clinical Psychometric Research.  Festinger, D. S., Lamb, R. J., Kirby, K. C., & Marlowe, D. B. (1996). The accelerated intake: A method for increasing initial attendance to outpatient cocaine treatment. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 29, 387–389.  Griffith, J. D., Rowan-Szal, G. A., Roark, R. R., & Simpson,  D. D. (2000). Contingency management in outpatient methadone treatment: A meta-analysis. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 58, 55–66. Griffiths, R. R., Bigelow, G. E., & Henningfield, J. E. (1980).   Drug Use Disorders  Similarities in animal and human drug taking behavior. In N. K. Mello (Ed.), Advances in substance abuse: behavioral and biological research (pp. 1–90). Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.  Henggeler, S. W., Pickrel, S. G., Brondino, M. J., & Crouch, J.  L. (1996). Eliminating (almost) treatment dropout of substance abusing or dependent delinquents through homebased multisystemic therapy. American Journal of Psychiatry, 153, 427–428. Herrmann, E. S., Heil, S. H., Sigmon, S. C., Dunn, K. E., Washio, Y., & Higgins, S. T. (2013). Characterizing and improving HIV/AIDS knowledge among cocainedependent outpatients using modified materials. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 127(1–3), 220–225.  Higgins, S. T., Heil, S. H., & Lussier, J. P. (2004). Clinical implications of reinforcement as a determinant of substance use disorders. Annual Review of Psychology, 55, 431–461.  Higgins, S. T., Sigmon, S. C., Wong, C. J., Heil, S. H., Badger,  G. J., Donham, R., et al. (2003). Community reinforcement therapy for cocaine-dependent outpatients. Archives of General Psychiatry, 60, 1043–1052. Higgins, S. T., Silverman, K., & Heil, S. H. (2008). Contingency management in substance abuse use treatment. New York: Guilford Press.  Higgins, S. T., Silverman, K., Sigmon, S. C., & Naito, N. A. (2012). Incentives and health: An introduction. Preventive Medicine, 55, S2–S6.  Hjorthoj, C. R., Hjorthoj, A. R., & Nordentoft, M. (2012). Validity of Timeline Follow-Back for self-reported use of cannabis and other illicit substances—systematic review and meta-analysis. Addictive Behaviors, 37, 225–233.  Irvin, J. E., Bowers, C. A., Dunn, M. E., & Wong, M. C. (1999). Efficacy of relapse prevention: A meta-analytic review. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 67, 563–570.  Kenford, S. L., & Fiore, M. C. (2004). Promoting tobacco cessation and relapse prevention. Medical Clinics of North America, 88, 1553–1574.  Lewinsohn, P. M., Muñoz, R. F., Youngren, M. A., & Zeiss,  A. M. (1986). Control your depression. New York: Simon & Schuster. Liddle, H. A., Dakof, G., Parker, K., Diamond, G. S., Barrett, K., & Tejeda, M. (2001). Multidimensional family therapy for adolescent drug abuse: Results of a randomized clinical trial. American Journal of Drug and Alcohol Abuse, 27, 651–688.  Lussier, J. P., Heil, S. H., Mongeon, J. A., Badger, G. J., & Higgins, S. T. (2006). A meta-analysis of voucher-based reinforcement therapy for substance use disorders. Addiction, 101(2), 192–203.  Martino, S., Carroll, K. M., & Rounsaville, B. J. (2006). A randomized controlled pilot study of motivational interviewing for patients with psychotic and drug use disorders. Addiction, 101, 1479–1492.  McLellan, A. T., Cacciola, J. C., Alterman, A. I., Rikoon, S.  H., & Carise, D. (2006). The Addiction Severity Index at 25: Origins, contributions, and transitions. American Journal on Addictions, 15, 113–124.  Meyers, R. J., & Smith, J. E. (1995). Clinical guide to alcohol treatment: The community reinforcement approach. New York: Guilford Press.  Miller, W. R., & Muñoz, R. F. (2005). Controlling your drinking: Tools to make moderation work for you. New York: Guilford Press.  Miller, W. R., & Rollnick, S. (2002). Motivational interviewing: Preparing people for change (2nd ed.). New York: Guilford Press.  Miller, W. R., & Tonigan, J. S. (1996). Assessing drinkers’ motivation for change: The Stages of Change Readiness and Treatment Eagerness Scale (SOCRATES). Psychology of Addictive Behaviors, 10, 81–89.  Monti, P. M., Kadden, R. M., Rohsenow, D. J., Cooney, N. L., & Abrams, D. B. (2002). Treating alcohol dependence: A coping skills training guide (2nd ed.). New York: Guilford Press.  Monti, P. M., Rohsenow, D. J., Michalec, E., Martin, R. A., & Abrams, D. B. (1997). Brief coping skills treatment for cocaine abuse: Substance use outcomes at three months. Addiction, 92, 1717–1728.  Morin, C. M. (2004). Cognitive-behavioral approaches to the treatment of insomnia. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 65, 33–40.  Muñoz, R. F., & Miranda, J. (2000). Individual therapy manual for cognitive behavioral treatment for depression. Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation.  National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA). (2009). Principles of addiction treatment: A research-based guide (2nd ed.; NIH Publication No. 09-4180). Rockville, MD: Author.  O’Brien, C. (2011). Addiction and dependence in DSM-V. Addiction, 106, 866–867.  O’Farrell, T. J., & Clements, K. (2012). Review of outcome research on marital and family therapy in treatment for alcoholism. Journal of Marital and Family Therapy, 38, 122–144.  Rawson, R. A., Marinelli-Casey, P., Anglin, M. D., Dickow, A., Frazier, Y., Gallagher, C., et al. (2004). A multi-site comparison of psychosocial approaches for the treatment of methamphetamine dependence. Addiction, 99, 708–717.  Reback, C. J., & Shoptaw, S. (in press). Development of an evidence-based, gay-specific cognitive behavioral therapy intervention for methamphetamine abusing gay and bisexual men. Addictive Behaviors.  Rodebaugh, T. L., Holaway, R. M., & Heimberg, R. G. (2004). The treatment of social anxiety disorder. Clinical Psychology Review, 24, 883–908.  Roozen, H. G., Boulogne, J. J., van Tulder, M. W., van den Brink, W., De Jong, C. A., & Kerkhof, A. J. (2004). A systematic review of the effectiveness of the community reinforcement approach in alcohol, cocaine and opioid addiction. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 74, 1–13.   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  Schnoll, R. A., & Lerman, C. (2006). Current and emerging pharmacotherapies for treating tobacco dependence. Expert Opinion on Emerging Drugs, 11, 429–444.  Selzer, M. L. (1971). The Michigan Alcoholism Screening Test. American Journal of Psychiatry, 127, 1653–1658.  Silverman, K., Robles, E., Mudric, T., & Stitzer, M. L. (2004). A randomized trial of long-term reinforcement of cocaine abstinence in methadone-maintained patients who inject drugs. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 72, 839–854.  Smedslund, G., Berg, R. C., Hammerstrøm, K. T., Steiro, A., Leiknes, K. A., Dahl, H. M., et al. (2011). Motivational interviewing for substance abuse. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 5, CD008063.  Sobell, L. C., & Sobell, M. B. (1992). Timeline Follow-Back: A technique for assessing self-reported alcohol consumption. In R. Z. Litten & J. P. Allen (Eds.), Measuring alcohol consumption: Psychosocial and biochemical methods (pp. 41–72). Totowa, NJ: Humana Press.  Sulzer-Azaroff, B., & Meyer, G. R. (1991). Behavior analy   sis for lasting change. Fort Worth, TX: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.  U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (USDHHS). (2012). National Survey on Drug Use and Health, 2010 (Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. Center for Behavioral Health Statistics and Quality). Ann Arbor, MI: Interuniversity Consortium for Political and Social Research [distributor]. U.S. Department of Justice. (2011). The economic impact of illicit drug use on American society [Product No. 2011Q0317- 002]. Washington, DC: United States Department of Justice, National Drug Intelligence Center. Vasilaki, E. I., Hosier, S. G., & Cox, W. M. (2006). The efficacy of motivational interviewing as a brief intervention for excessive drinking: A meta-analytic review. Alcohol and Alcoholism, 41, 328–335.  Washton, A. M., Stone, N. S., & Hendrickson, E. C. (1988). Cocaine abuse. In D. M. Donovan & G. A. Marlatt (Eds.), Assessment of addictive behaviors (pp. 364–389). New York: Guilford Press.   CHaPter 15  evidence‑Based relationships and responsiveness for Depression and substance Abuse  JohN c. Norcross larry e. Beutler  implicit in all chapters in this book is the necessity of tailoring the treatment in a flexible manner to the individual patient, as well as attending to patient, therapist, and relationship factors. some chapters also purposefully integrate and “match” techniques from different approaches into the treatment protocols described to accomplish specific goals, such as motivational interviewing (see Payne, ellard, farchione, fairholme, & Barlow, Chapter 6) or attention to the social and interpersonal context of the patient. But in this chapter the topics are made explicit by two senior and distinguished clinical investigators who have made it their life work to pursue these themes in a rigorous and empirical manner. The unique contribution of this chapter is that transdiagnostic patient and therapist factors, as well as matching the style of the treatment protocol (e.g., less directive or more directive depending on the level of resistance or “readiness” of the patient for therapy), are also evidence‑based procedures and deserve description in this book. Thus, it is important not only to choose the most effective change procedure for a given disorder, such as panic disorder, but also to attend explicitly to relationship factors; to provide for consistent, bidirectional feedback between patient and the therapist; and to establish a transparent, collaborative therapeutic style. The authors demonstrate this integrative approach in the context of the fascinating case of “Amber,” a young woman suffering from polysubstance abuse and depression. Awareness of this perspective will enrich the reader’s appreciation of all of the chapters in this book.—D. H. B.  Psychotherapy is a treatment method and a healing relationship fit to the individual patient and context. On this, virtually every practitioner (and patient) will agree. However, selection of the particular treatment method has received the lion’s share of attention in the movement toward evidence-based practice (Norcross, Beutler, & Levant, 2006). Matching the treatment method to the patient is helpful indeed, but it is also clinically incomplete given that the therapy relation   ship frequently accounts for much of the success (and failure) of psychotherapy (Norcross, 2011). Moreover, psychological science directs us to which relationship behaviors and matches contribute to treatment outcomes across the spectrum of psychological disorders (Beutler, 2009).  As virtually every psychotherapist also knows, psychotherapy should be tailored to the individuality of the patient and the singularity of his/her context. As  617   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  early as 1919, Freud introduced psychoanalytic psychotherapy as an alternative to classical analysis, based on the recognition that the more rarified approach lacked universal applicability (Wolitzky, 2011). The mandate for individualizing psychotherapy was embodied in Gordon Paul’s (1967, p. 111, original emphasis) iconic question: “What treatment, by whom, is most effective for this individual with that specific problem, and under which set of circumstances?” Every psychotherapist recognizes that what works for one person may not work for another; we seek “different strokes for different folks.”  Only in the past two decades has sufficient research been conducted to operationalize these noble intentions into specific matching guidelines. Particularly absent until recently has been research matching psychotherapy to the entire person of the patient, beyond his/her disorder. As Sir William Osler (1906), father of modern medicine, said: “It is sometimes much more important to know what sort of a patient has a disease than what sort of disease a patient has.”  The process of creating this optimal fit in psychotherapy has been accorded multiple names: treatment adaptation, responsiveness, attunement, matchmaking, customizing, prescriptionism, treatment selection, specificity factor, differential therapeutics, tailoring, and individualizing. By whatever name, the goal is to enhance treatment effectiveness by tailoring it to the individual and his/her singular situation. In other words, psychotherapists endeavor to create a new therapy for each patient.  In this chapter, we apply our integrative psychotherapy to comorbid depression and substance abuse. We begin with an overview of the approach and its research evidence, particularly the evidence-based therapy relationship and responsiveness or fit to individual patients. The co-occurrence of mood disorders and substance abuse is outlined, and the step-by-step treatment selection is demonstrated. We conclude with a detailed case illustration of “Amber,” a woman suffering from chronic depression, substance abuse, and a host of other psychological disorders.  overview of our aPProach  Our approach to psychotherapy is broadly characterized as integrative and specifically labeled “systematic eclectic” or “systematic treatment selection.” Psychotherapy integration is characterized by dissatisfaction  with single-school approaches and a concomitant desire to look across school boundaries to see how patients can benefit from other ways of conducting psychotherapy (Norcross & Goldfried, 2005). We attempt to customize psychological treatments and therapeutic relationships to the specific and varied needs of individual patients as defined by a multitude of diagnostic and particularly nondiagnostic considerations. We do so by drawing on effective methods across theoretical schools (eclecticism), by matching those methods to particular clients on the basis of evidence-based principles (treatment selection), and by adhering to an explicit and orderly (systematic) model.  The clinical reality is that no single psychotherapy is effective for all patients and situations, no matter how good it is for some. Evidence-based practice has come to demand a flexible, if not integrative, perspective. Psychotherapy universally applied as one size fits all is proving impossible and, in some cases, even unethical. Of course, that would simplify treatment selection— give every patient the same brand of psychotherapy!— but it flies in the face of what we know about individual differences, patient preferences, and disparate cultures.  Imposing a parallel situation onto other health care professions drives the point home. To take a medical metaphor, would you entrust your health to a physician who prescribed the identical treatment (say, antibiotics or neurosurgery) for every patient and illness encountered? Or, to take an educational analogy, would you prize instructors who employed the same pedagogical method (say, a lecture) for every educational opportunity? Or would you entrust your child to a child care worker who delivers the identical response (say, a nondirective attitude or a slap on the bottom) to every child and every misbehavior? “No” is probably your resounding answer. Psychotherapy clients deserve no less consideration.  Concisely put, we believe that no theory is uniformly valid, and no mechanism of therapeutic action is equally applicable to all individuals. As a consequence, we select different methods and relationships according to the patient and the context. The result is a more efficient and efficacious therapy—and one that fits both the client and the clinician.  On the face of it, of course, virtually every clinician endorses matching the therapy to the individual client. After all, who can seriously dispute the notion that psychological treatment should be tailored to the needs of the individual patient? Indeed, treatment manuals increasingly focus on ways to be flexible—but they all   Depression and Substance Abuse  still work within a confined set of theoretical parameters and technical procedures. In contrast, our integrative therapy goes beyond this simple acknowledgment of the need for flexibility in several ways:  •• Our integrative therapy is derived directly from outcome research rather than from an idiosyncratic theory or seat-of-the-pants syncretism.  •• Our therapy embraces the potential contributions of multiple systems of psychotherapy rather than working from within a single theoretical system.  •• Our treatment selection is predicated on many diagnostic and nondiagnostic client characteristics, in contrast to relying on patient diagnosis alone.  •• Our aim is to offer optimal treatment methods and healing relationships, whereas many therapists focus narrowly on selecting methods. Both interventions and relationships, both the instrumental and the interpersonal—intertwined as they are— are required in effective psychotherapy.  •• Matching methods and relationships to the client occurs throughout the course of therapy, not only at pretreatment as a case formulation.  •• As will be evident in the case illustration that follows, clients evolve and progress—and their initial complaints are not necessarily their primary disorders or goals at the conclusion of treatment. Our integrative therapy tracks their progress and evolves with them through termination.  research eviDeNce  The outcome research supporting our approach comes in several guises. First and most generally, the entire body of psychotherapy research has provided the foundation for the key principles on which integrative treatment rests. This is the basis from which we have systematized the process of treatment selection. A genuine advantage of being integrative is the vast amount of research attesting to the efficacy of psychotherapy and pointing to the differential effectiveness among different types of patients. Integration tries to incorporate state-of-the-art research findings into its open framework, in contrast to becoming yet another “system” of psychotherapy.  We embrace the robust common factors among the therapies and, at the same time, capitalize on their differences. Integration gathers, in the words of Abraham Lincoln, “strange, discordant, and even, hostile elements  from the four winds.” Diverse treatment methods are optimally employed with patients and in situations for which research has found evidence of effectiveness. We hasten to add that the incorporation of these treatments should occur within a systematic process and an integrative perspective, that is, be integrative, not syncretic.  A second and more specific source of research evidence is our ongoing programmatic research on treatment selection according to client characteristics (for details, see Castonguay & Beutler, 2006; Norcrosss, 2011). Below we summarize the research evidence underpinning evidence-based therapy relationships and responsive fit to transdiagnostic patient characteristics.  Relationships That Work  Decades of psychological science have identified many of the relational behaviors that contribute to and predict successful psychotherapy, and multiple meta-analyses have refined our understanding of which of these work to improve outcomes (Norcross, 2011). In fact, evidence-based therapy relationships have been highlighted on the National Registry of Evidence-Based Programs and Practices (NREPP; www.nrepp.samhsa. gov/norcross.aspx). Below we summarize the research evidence for those elements of the therapy relationship that are primarily provided by the psychotherapist.  The Alliance  The alliance is an emergent quality of partnership between therapist and client, built principally on a positive emotional bond between therapist and client, and their ability to agree on the goals of treatment and to reach a mutual consensus on the tasks. A meta-analysis of 201 studies, involving over 14,000 adult patients, found an effect size (d) of 0.60 (Horvath, Del Re, Flückiger, & Symonds, 2011), which describes the degree to which the alliance is related to and predicts psychotherapy outcome. (In all instances of reporting effect sizes in this chapter, we use d, where 0 indicates no effect; 0.20 represents a small effect; 0.50 represents a medium effect; and 0.80 and above, a large effect [Cohen, 1988].)  As in the adult research, the alliance in youth treatment is characterized as a collaborative bond between client and therapist, but the psychotherapist typically established two alliances: one with the youth and one with the parent or guardian. A meta-analysis of 29 studies with 2,202 youth clients and 892 parents estimated the association between alliance and outcome in youth   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  therapy (Shirk & Karver, 2011). The effect size (d) was 0.39, between both the therapist and the youth, and the therapist and the parent/guardian.  Just as in individual therapy, the alliance in couple and family therapy (CFT) involves the creation of a strong emotional bond, as well as negotiation of goals and tasks with the therapist. However, family members often vary in the degree to which they like and agree with the therapist about treatment goals and tasks, thus creating multiple alliances that interact systemically. A meta-analysis of 24 studies (7 couples, 17 family studies; 1,461 clients) was conducted in which CFT alliances were used to predict treatment improvement midtreatment and final outcomes (Friedlander, Escudero, Heatherington, & Diamond, 2011). The effect size  (d) was 0.53, indicating that the alliance accounted for a substantial proportion of variance in CFT retention and outcome. According to conventional benchmarks, this represents a medium effect size in the behavioral sciences; the success rate increases from 37 to 63% in low versus high alliance cases. Cohesion in Group Therapy  Probably the closest parallel of the alliance in individual therapy is cohesion in group therapy. A metaanalysis of 40 studies, comprising 3,323 patients, was conducted on the association between cohesion and the success of group psychotherapy (Burlingame, McClendon, & Alonso, 2011). The effect size was a moderate d of 0.52. This indicates that, as cohesion levels increase in groups, client outcomes improve and psychological symptoms decrease. This correlation was found for therapy groups across different settings (inpatient and outpatient) and diagnostic classifications.  Empathy  Much of the research continues to follow Carl Rogers’s (1957) definition of empathy as the therapist’s sensitive ability to understand the client’s thoughts, feelings, and struggles from the client’s point of view and communicate that understanding to the client. A meta-analysis examined the association between therapist empathy and treatment outcome (Elliott, Bohart, Watson, & Greenberg, 2011). The analysis of 57 studies resulted in an overall d of 0.61, a medium effect, between therapist empathy and client success (suggesting a success rate of 57% compared to 43% for higher vs. lower empathy). Empathy predicted treatment outcome consistently  across different theoretical orientations (e.g., cognitivebehavioral, psychodynamic, humanistic).  Collecting Client Feedback  In this relational behavior, the therapist systematically monitors a client’s mental health vital signs through the use of standardized scales and expected treatment response. Results of this monitoring are then fed back in real-time to the therapist and discussed in session with the client. A meta-analysis of nine studies on the impact of feedback methods on treatment outcomes showed effect sizes (d) between 0.49 and 0.70 (Lambert & Shimokawa, 2011). Rates of patient deterioration in psychotherapy were cut by two-thirds when client feedback was used with warning signals for at-risk patients. Accordingly, patients are better off when practitioners routinely monitor their ongoing mental health functioning. Such monitoring leads to increased opportunities to repair alliance ruptures, enhance motivation, and reduce premature termination. Systematic feedback is especially useful in helping clinicians identify the possible failure of ongoing treatment and collaborate with the client in restoring positive outcomes.  Goal Consensus  Agreement about the nature of the problem for which the client is seeking help, goals for treatment, and the way that the two parties work together to achieve these goals are the essence of goal consensus. A meta-analysis addressed how patient–therapist goal consensus relates to psychotherapy outcome (Tryon & Winograd, 2011). The goal consensus–outcome meta-analysis—based on 15 studies with a total sample of 1,302 patients— yielded an effect size (d) of 0.72. This substantial result reflects the meaningful positive outcomes that are associated with higher agreement between therapists and clients about the aims of treatment and how to accomplish such aims.  Collaboration  To help clients fulfill mutual treatment goals, professionals and patients should function as a team. The collaboration–outcome meta-analysis—based on 19 studies involving 2,260 patients—yielded an d of 0.70 (Tryon & Winograd, 2011). As with goal consensus, this result suggests that patient well-being is considerably enhanced with a better collaborative relationship.   Depression and Substance Abuse  Affirmation/Positive Regard  To investigate the association between therapists’ positive regard and treatment outcome, Farber and Doolin (2011) performed a meta-analysis of 18 studies. The overall effect size among these studies was 0.57, indicating that positive regard has a moderate association with therapeutic outcomes. Thus, like many other relational factors, positive regard appears to be a significant but hardly an exhaustive part of the process–outcome equation.  Researchers cannot study all of these relationship behaviors simultaneously, and there is considerable overlap in these constructs and in the amount of variance they account for in psychotherapy. At the same time, it is demonstrably true that these relationship behaviors are important predictors and contributors to psychotherapy success that can be learned and, in most cases, taught.  Patient–Treatment Fits That Work  The question of fit or responsiveness becomes which patient transdiagnostic dimensions can reliably guide us in adapting psychotherapy to different clients or with the same client at different points in time. More than 200 client variables have been proposed as potential matchmaking markers, and at least 100 of these have been subjected to some research scrutiny (Clarkin & Levy, 2004). We commissioned a series of original meta-analyses on the research linking treatment outcome to patient characteristics, and the results of those analyses point to at least five potent matches: reactance level, stages of change, coping style, preferences, and culture (Norcross, 2011). Following are thumbnail descriptions of each, and we demonstrate their respective uses later in our case study.  Reactance Level  Research confirms what one would expect: High patient reactance or resistance is consistently associated with poorer therapy outcomes (in 82% of studies). But matching therapist directiveness to client reactance mightily improves therapy outcome. Specifically, clients presenting with high reactance benefited more from self-control methods, minimal therapist directiveness, and paradoxical interventions. By contrast, clients with low reactance benefited more from therapist directiveness and explicit guidance. This strong, consis   tent finding can be expressed as a large effect size (d) averaging 0.76 (Beutler, Harwood, Michelson, Song, & Holman, 2011).  Stages of Change  The amount of progress clients make in psychotherapy tends to be a direct function of their pretreatment stage of change—precontemplation, contemplation, preparation, action, and maintenance. A meta-analysis of 39 psychotherapy studies (Norcross, Krebs, & Prochaska, 2011) found a mean effect size (d) of 0.46, indicating that the stages reliably predict outcomes in psychotherapy. This effect has been found to be true for patients suffering from dozens of mental and medical disorders immediately following intervention, as well as 12 months afterward.  More importantly, research in behavioral medicine and psychotherapy converge in showing that different processes of change are differentially effective in certain stages of change. A meta-analysis (Rosen, 2000) of 47 studies examining relationships among the stages and the processes of change showed large effect sizes (d = 0.70 and 0.80). That is, adapting psychotherapy to the client’s stage of change significantly improves outcome across disorders (Prochaska & Norcross, 2013).  These client markers provide prescriptive as well as proscriptive guidance to the psychotherapist. In reactance, the prescriptive implication is to match the therapist’s amount of directiveness to the patient’s reactance, and the proscriptive implication is to avoid meeting high client reactance with high therapist direction. In stages of change, action-oriented therapies are quite effective with individuals who are in the preparation or action stages. However, these same therapies tend to be less effective or even detrimental with individuals in the precontemplation and contemplation stages.  Coping Style  The research has been devoted primarily to the externalizing (impulsive, stimulation-seeking, extroverted) and internalizing (self-critical, inhibited, introverted) coping styles. Approximately 80% of the studies investigating this dimension have demonstrated differential effects of the type of treatment as a function of patient coping style. A meta-analysis of 12 of those studies, involving more than 1,000 patients, revealed a medium effect (d = 0.55) for matching therapist method to pa    CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  tient coping style (Beutler, Harwood, Michelson, et al., 2011). Specifically, interpersonal and insight-oriented therapies are more effective among internalizing patients, whereas symptom-focused and skill-building therapies are more effective among externalizing patients. This pattern is frequently known for child patients—say, a depressed internalizing girl versus a hyperactive externalizing boy—but less well known for the adult patients on whom the meta-analysis was conducted.  Preferences  Client preferences and goals are frequently direct indicators of the best therapeutic method and healing relationship for that person. Decades of empirical evidence attest to the benefit of seriously considering, and at least beginning with, the relational preferences and treatment goals of the client. A meta-analysis of 35 studies compared the treatment outcomes of clients matched to their preferred treatment to outcomes of clients not matched to their preference. The findings indicated a medium positive effect (d = 0.31) in favor of clients matched to preferences. Clients who were matched to their preference were one-third less likely to drop out of psychotherapy—a powerful effect indeed (Swift, Callahan, & Vollmer, 2011).  Culture  A meta-analysis of 65 studies, encompassing 8,620 clients, evaluated the effectiveness of culturally adapted therapies versus traditional, nonadapted therapies. The most frequent methods of adaptation in the studies involved incorporating cultural content and values, using the client’s preferred language, and matching therapists of similar ethnicity. The results revealed a positive effect (d = 0.46) in favor of clients receiving culturally adapted treatments (Smith, Rodriguez, & Bernal, 2011). Cultural “fit” works, not only as an ethical commitment but also as an evidence-based practice.  DePressioN aND suBstaNce aBuse  Depression is the most prevalent comorbid condition among the behavioral health disorders, co-occurring at very high rates in almost all behavioral and many medical disorders. It is especially likely to co-occur among those with substance abuse; posttraumatic stress disor   der (PTSD) and other anxiety disorders; and heart disease, cancer, and many other physical diseases (Beutler, Clarkin, & Bongar, 2000; Kessler et al., 2005). As many as 80% of patients with chronic medical conditions suffer from comorbid (unipolar) depression. The prevalence rates of comorbid depression and substance abuse are so consistent that many have suggested that substance abuse may be a manifestation of depressive spectrum disorders). This may also be true for other disorders, such as PTSD, in which both depression and chemical abuse frequently seems to substitute for the PTSD symptoms following mass trauma (Housley & Beutler, 2007).  The lifetime prevalence rates for comorbid depression and substance abuse are high, reaching a figure of nearly 10%, closely approximating the lifetime prevalence rates of substance use disorders alone. What is more, co-occurring depression and substance abuse tend to follow similar patterns of response to treatment. Virtually all structured treatments produce similar effects among either depressed or substance-abusing patients (Beutler & Malik, 2002). Likewise, the course of recovery and relapse from depression is extremely variable and generally more similar to that of the extant comorbid conditions than to other instances of depression. Reviews of the literature conclude that there is little evidence of either a specific course of depression or a specific treatment that is uniquely effective (e.g., Cuijpers, van Straten, Andersson, & van Oppen, 2008; Cuijpers et al., 2010); rather, depression functions more as an indexing symptom of distress and impairment than as a separate disorder in its own right.  As we discuss throughout this chapter, it is also now relatively clear that the therapy relationship and matching strategies that positively impact the treatment of depression work in the same manner to ameliorate substance abuse. Beutler and colleagues (2003), for example, studied a group of patients with comorbid depression and substance dependence, comparing the relative and absolute influence of patient predisposing factors (e.g., reactance level, coping styles), treatment characteristics, the therapy relationship (as measured by the alliance), and the fit between the treatment characteristics and the patient factors. Cross-cutting categories of psychotherapy included therapist level of directiveness and the relative proportion of insight and symptomfocused interventions (Beutler et al., 2000).  Figures 15.1 and 15.2 show that all of these factors— patient factors, treatment methods, therapy relationship, and the degree of fit between the treatment and   Depression and Substance Abuse  end of treatment follow-up 100% 90% 80% 70% 60% 50% 40% 30% 20% 10% 0% patient treatment alliance matching  figUre 15.1. Relative contributions of patient, treatment, relationship, and treatment fit to changes in depression (Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression [HRSD]) among comorbid substance-abusing and depressed patients.  patient—contributed to the success of psychotherapy. substance abuse, maximal treatment gain was associ- Depression symptoms were somewhat easier to change ated with a psychotherapy that fit both the treatment at both the end of treatment and 6-month posttreatment method and the healing relationship to the individual follow-up, but the pattern and relative effects of each patient and context. That repeated research finding class of factors were similar and collectively added to has become the leitmotif of applying our approach, to the effectiveness of treatment. For both depression and which we now turn.  end of treatment follow-up 100% 90% 80% 70% 60% 50% 40% 30% 20% 10% 0% patient treatment alliance matching  figUre 15.2. Relative contributions of patient, treatment, relationship, and treatment fit to changes in substance abuse (Addiction Severity Index [ASI]) among comorbid substance-abusing and depressed patients.   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  aPPlicatioN of our aPProach  Treatment selection invariably involves iterative, recursive decisions about setting, format, intensity, pharmacotherapy, therapy relationship, and treatment methods. Why? Because each client responds best to a different configuration or mix of components. We cannot and should not assume that the treatment will automatically be outpatient individual psychotherapy on a weekly basis. Below we consider each of these decisions, devoting more time to selection of treatment methods predicated on the patient’s diagnostic and transdiagnostic features.  Treatment Settings  The setting is where the treatment occurs—a psychotherapist’s office, a psychiatric unit, a halfway house, an outpatient clinic, a secondary school, or a medical ward. The choice of setting depends primarily on the relative need for restricting and/or supporting the patient given the severity of psychopathology and the amount of support in the patient’s environment. As applied to depression and substance abuse, the urgent question is whether hospitalization or detoxification is required for either.  Each treatment decision is related to the other treatment decisions, as well as to certain patient characteristics. The optimal setting, for example, is partially determined by the level of functional impairment and partially reflects reactance level. Those clients who are most impaired and resistant have the greatest need for a restrictive environment. Outpatient treatment is always preferred over a restrictive setting; indeed, preference is nearly always for the least restrictive setting.  Therapy Formats  The format indicates who directly participates in the treatment, the interpersonal context within which the therapy is conducted. The typical treatment formats— individual, group, couples, and family—are characterized by a set of treatment parameters, all determined largely by the number and identities of participants.  Decades of research support the effectiveness and especially the cost-efficiency of group, couple, and family therapy. Therapy conducted in these formats is generally as effective as individual therapy, but patients and therapists usually prefer the individual format. Even so, a multiperson format is indicated when social  support systems are low and if one or more of the major problems involves a specific other person.  Treatment Intensity  The intensity of psychotherapy is the product of the duration of the treatment episode, the length of a session, and the frequency of contact. It may also entail the use of multiple formats, such as both group and individual therapy or both pharmacotherapy and psychotherapy.  Intensity should be gauged as a function of problem complexity and level of impairment in the context of the patient’s resources. For example, a patient with a multiplicity of treatment goals, severe functional impairment, few social supports, and a personality disorder is likely to require substantially longer, more intense, and more varied treatment than a patient with a simpler problem. Patients suffering from both mood disorders and substance abuse almost always require intense and long-term care.  Pharmacotherapy  Psychotropic medications are particularly indicated for more severe and chronic disorders, which is the case with the majority of depressed substance abusers. Unlike some systems of psychotherapy, integrative psychotherapies are well suited to the integration of pharmacotherapy and psychotherapy. This position, of course, is consistent with the pluralism underlying treatment selection. But like most health care professionals, integrative therapists are especially keen to avoid treating substance abuse with only another substance.  Thus, we offer a cautionary note here: Medication alone is not an integrative treatment. Tightening insurance reimbursements and restricting psychological services unduly favor pharmacotherapy at the expense of psychotherapy for virtually every disorder. This situation is clinically and empirically appalling to us because decades of research indicate that, in fact, there is frequently no stronger medicine than psychotherapy for both clinical depression and substance abuse (e.g., Antonuccio, 1995; Antonuccio, Danton, & DeNelsky, 1995; DeRubeis et al., 2005; Hollon, 1990). The preponderance of scientific evidence shows that psychotherapy is generally as effective as medications in treating nonpsychotic disorders, especially when patient-rated measures, side effect profiles, and longterm follow-up are considered. This is not to devalue the salutary impact of pharmacotherapy; rather, it is to underscore the reliable potency of psychotherapy.   Depression and Substance Abuse  Therapy Relationship  All psychotherapy occurs within the sensitive and curative context of the human connection. Although we emphasized this point and its research underpinnings earlier in this chapter, we hasten to dispute the unfortunate misperception of treatment selection as a disembodied, technique-oriented process. Our integrative approach attempts to fit not only therapy methods but also relationship stances to individual clients. One way to conceptualize the matter, paralleling the notion of “treatments of choice” in terms of techniques, is how clinicians determine “therapeutic relationships of choice” in terms of interpersonal stances (Norcross & Beutler, 1997). Conducting the best of evidence-based treatment all comes to naught unless the client feels safe, cared for, and connected.  Early on, then, we strive to develop a working alliance and to demonstrate empathy for the client’s experiences and concerns. We proceed collaboratively in establishing treatment goals, in securing the patient’s preferences, in allaying the initially expected distrust and fear, and in presenting ourselves as caring and supportive. Of course, the therapy relationship must also be matched or tailored to the individual patient and his/ her cultures.  This imperative to fit or match psychotherapy to the patient can be misconstrued as an authority figure/ therapist prescribing a particular form of psychotherapy for a passive client. The clinical reality is precisely the opposite. Our goal is for an empathic therapist to work toward an optimal relationship that enhances collaboration, is consistent with the client’s preferences, and secures the patient’s sense of safety and commitment. The nature of such an optimal relationship is determined by patient preferences, cultures, and personality. If a client frequently resists, for example, then the therapist considers whether he/she is pushing something that the client finds incompatible (preferences), or whether the client is not ready to make those changes (stage of change) or is uncomfortable with a directive style (reactance). We lead by following and respecting the client (Norcross, 2010).  Treatment Methods  When clinicians first meet clients, they are tempted to focus immediately and intensely on particular therapy methods and strategies. However, as we have noted, treatment selection always involves a cascading series  of interrelated decisions. A truly integrated treatment requires that the therapist recursively consider these other decisions before jumping to therapy methods.  The selection of methods and strategies is the most controversial component of integrative therapy for depression and substance abuse. While there may be occasional professional disagreement about the ideal treatment setting and format, proponents of disparate theoretical orientations frequently endorse decidedly different positions on which methods should be used. Moreover, any given method can be used in different ways. Thus, rather than focusing on specific techniques per se, we prefer prescribing change principles. Principles are flexible, yet specific. Each principle can be implemented in a number of ways and with diverse techniques, depending on the predilections and skills of the therapist. By mixing and matching methods from different therapy systems, we tailor the treatment to the particular patient (Norcross, 2013).  Humans, including psychotherapists, cannot process more than a handful of matching dimensions at once (Halford, Baker, McCredden, & Bain, 2005). As discussed earlier, we principally consider five transdiagnostic patient characteristics (reactance level, stage of change, coping style, preferences, and culture) that have a proven empirical track record as prescriptive guidelines.  What about diagnosis in treatment selection? When it comes to the psychological treatment of unipolar depression and substance abuse, the diagnosis does not suggest a particular treatment, other than to favor those with the most research support. That is, diagnosis has the least evidence of differential treatment effects. In any case, we reiterate that reliance on diagnosis alone to select a treatment plan is empirically questionable and clinically suspect. Instead, as applied to depression and substance abuse, we select treatment methods on the basis of matching the outcome research to those transdiagnostic patient features of reactance, stage of change, preferences, coping style, and culture.  Clinical Assessment  Our approach strongly values clinical assessment that guides effective treatment (Harwood, Beutler, & Groth-Marnat, 2011). Such assessment is conducted early in psychotherapy to select treatment methods and therapy relationships that are most likely to be effective, throughout therapy to monitor the patient’s response and to make midcourse adjustments as needed,   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  and toward the end of psychotherapy to evaluate the outcome of the entire enterprise. Thus, assessment is continuous, collaborative, and invaluable.  Clinical assessment of the patient in integrative therapy is relatively traditional, with one major exception. The assessment interview(s) entail collecting information on presenting problems, relevant histories, and treatment expectations and goals, as well as building a working alliance. As psychologists, we also typically use formal psychological testing as a means of securing additional data and identifying disorders. We recommend both symptomatic rating forms (e.g., Beck Depression Inventory–II [BDI-II], Symptom Checklist 90—Revised) and broader measures of pathology and personality (e.g., Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory–II, Millon Clinical Multiaxial Inventory– III).  The one way in which our assessment departs from the usual is that we collect, from the outset, information on multiple patient characteristics that will guide treatment selection.  The five patient characteristics identified in the research (as noted earlier) guide us in identifying a beneficial fit between patient and treatment. Of course, we are not confined to these five considerations, but they do illustrate our process of clinical assessment and treatment matching.  A free, online program has been developed (www. innerlife.com) to guide patients in selecting an optimal treatment and finding a clinician who can best implement that treatment. A companion program is available to clinicians (at the same website) for a modest cost to help them plan a research-informed treatment that is both broad and flexible in applying fundamental principles of change. Completing the assessment requires approximately 15 minutes and takes the person through a series of item-branching questions. At completion, the Innerlife STS renders a report to the patient that addresses treatment issues tailored to the person:  •• Potential Areas of Concern  •• Treatments to Consider  •• Treatments to Avoid  •• Compatible Therapist Styles  •• Picking a Psychotherapist  •• Self-Help Resources  A similar set of treatment issues are addressed in more detail in the parallel report directed to the clinician, and available through the same website. This  more detailed report also includes programmatic considerations that should be addressed in structuring the environment and directing the staff of treatment centers in what is needed for effective change.  case stuDy: aMBer  Initial Encounters  Amber’s father initially contacted our private practice office seeking psychotherapy for his 32-year-old, divorced European American daughter following her scheduled release from prison the next month. The father was informed of the 3-month waiting list, referred to an office mate psychiatrist to begin pharmacotherapy, and offered names of other psychologists. Amber and her parents decided to wait to see one of the authors  (J. C. N.) but she began attending Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) meetings 5 days a week and started an antidepressant (fluoxetine, to 80 mg) and an anxiolytic (BuSpar, 20 mg three times a day) for 2 months before commencing individual psychotherapy. Although the delay was not clinically advisable, it did fortuitously provide a baseline and control comparison for the subsequent effects of psychotherapy. That is, at our initial evaluation, we were able to establish the extant effects of the medications and AA participation apart from and predating the psychotherapy. The two medications were continued over the course of psychotherapy and were monitored by a psychiatrist throughout. At our first session, I began with standard open-ended questions:  tHeraPist: Ms. Smith, what brings you here today? What do you hope to accomplish?  client: Well, I am depressed and a recovering addict. I was released a couple of months ago from prison, where I was diagnosed with borderline personality disorder. I suppose I want to work on all of that.  We begin with Ms. Smith’s story and with respect. I address the client as Ms. Smith until or if she grants me permission to call her Amber, which she does within 10 minutes. We also begin with the client’s narrative story and concerns. The primary task in the first session is twofold: to cultivate an accepting, empathic relationship, one in which she will feel understood and prized, and to collect sufficient information to begin planning treatment together.   Depression and Substance Abuse  A tumultuous and complicated history pours out of Amber: For as long as she can remember, she has felt depressed, lonely, and incompetent despite having a loving and stable family. Three courses of psychotherapy, ranging from 3 months to a year each, and multiple antidepressants did little to relieve her misery. Approximately 5 years ago, she began embezzling funds from the legal firm where she worked as a paralegal and assisted with the bookkeeping. The stolen money was used to finance an escalating and expensive addiction to opiates, benzodiazepines, and alcohol. “They help me get numb.” Her pathological gambling and shoplifting escalated as the drugs loosened her impulse control and impaired her judgment further. She descended into burglary to support her habit and into infidelity with men who supplied her with drugs. Her self-cutting, emotional lability, and fear of abandonment intensified. Amber’s embezzlement was discovered by her law firm, the police caught her with stolen items, and her husband of 3 years learned of the serial affairs. Amber was fired, incarcerated, and divorced in a matter of weeks. She then spent 2 years in county and state prisons until she was released early for good behavior and sentenced to several years of parole.  An abbreviated mental status examination reveals that this well-oriented, well-nourished woman appears younger than her stated age. Amber is polite, deferential, and verbal throughout the interview. She is visibly distressed by her condition and acknowledges suicidal ideation, but no intentions or plans. Her mood is depressed and anxious but appropriate. There is no evidence or complaints of psychosis, mania, or aggression. Detailed assessment of her functioning will be undertaken between sessions and in subsequent visits.  Upon learning that Amber’s three previous experiences with psychotherapy did not prove particularly successful, I began to explore what did and did not work in those treatments, thereby defining and aligning our collaborative relationship.  tHeraPist: From those experiences, Amber, you certainly learned how a psychotherapist could be most useful to you. What would he or she ideally do? And what should he or she not do?  amBer: Well, I don’t really know . . . (sounding hesitant and incredulous)  tHeraPist: I did not mean to put you on the spot [attributing her reluctance to voice preferences to my  unexpected question rather than her core deference to authorities]. In our work together, I will be asking you to provide feedback on our progress and on what we do here. That’s the honest partnership we hope to create. Perhaps you have had some thoughts about what worked and what did not in your previous treatment?  amBer: Well, the one with Dr. X did not teach me anything, but he was very nice and supportive. I liked him but I did not make any progress. Dr. Y asked me to keep free associating and tell him my dreams. That was interesting, but did not leave me feeling any better.  tHeraPist: Do I have it right that we should not repeat those mistakes: only nice without teaching you new skills and leaving you too . . . unstructured?  amBer: . . . and too passive. I need some skills, directions, ways to deal with all of this [her problems].  Amber nominates additional preferences for transparency in the process, between-session goals (also known as homework), and reading materials. Amber’s preferences naturally segue into an exploration of our respective roles and her active collaboration in psychotherapy. She intellectually understands the importance of an active client but, emotionally, feels inadequate to undertake the task: “I’ve felt like this my entire life. I know what I want, but can’t get there.”  Thus, psychotherapy begins with both an explanation and an experience of the way we might proceed. To ensure that treatment proceeds with her informed consent and active collaboration, we jointly develop three between-session activities. First, Amber grants me permission to speak with the psychiatrist and to secure her psychological records from prison, and asks me to respond to her probation officer, should he contact me. Second, at my request, Amber agrees to complete a life history inventory and a series of comprehensive computer-administered psychological tests to cover the essential ground. We will review her test responses next session. And third, Amber will prioritize her treatment goals. Among the desirable changes, which would she like to focus on at the outset?  All of these activities are designed to jump-start the therapy process and to activate Amber’s collaboration, despite her unsuccessful therapy experiences in the past. We both leave the first session feeling connected, more optimistic, but a bit overwhelmed by the magnitude of her conditions.   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  History and Background  Amber was the youngest of three children (girl, boy, girl), and experienced normal developmental milestones. According to her recollections and her mother’s independent report, Amber had suffered pervasive anxiety “since birth” and throughout adolescence. Neither the patient nor her parents reported any history of trauma; instead, all agreed that family life was stable and relatively benign. Both parents were professionals, and both appeared to care deeply about Amber and her future.  The patient succeeded in academics but flailed at friendships. She completed high school with fine grades and went on to earn a college degree and another year of paralegal training. Starting early in school, Amber suffered from feelings of inadequacy, low self-esteem, avoidance, and school reluctance. It was the latter and a brief bout of being bullied that led her to the guidance counselor in elementary school for several sessions of counseling.  Her adolescence was punctuated by quiet academic achievement but a series of internalizing disorders: “secret” shoplifting, nonsuicidal self-mutilation, and alcohol use before high school classes (“to lift my mood and soothe my nerves”). In college, she became bulimic for a year. She related that “no one ever knew” about the eating disorder or the other dysfunctions, and that she was “keeping it all inside of me.”  At that point Amber entered into individual therapy on three occasions over a span of about 5 years, while simultaneously working with two different psychiatrists. When those treatments did not materially reduce her distress, Amber reported that she “gave up” and began the downward spiral of addiction, impulse dyscontrol, and embezzlement that led to her being fired, incarcerated, and divorced in a matter of weeks.  Medical history was unremarkable: a bout of childhood asthma that she outgrew, a broken limb secondary to a sport accident, and seasonal allergies. With the exception of the psychotropic medications, Amber was not taking medications and was followed regularly by her primary care physician and gynecologist. She enjoyed robust physical health and was an avid exerciser. She had begun to smoke a few cigarettes daily since release from prison but had been abstinent from alcohol and drugs for 60 days when we first met.  By contrast, the family history was positive for multiple mental disorders. Her older sister was hospitalized for an eating disorder and suffers from anxiety disor   ders, for which she continues in psychotherapy. Her brother experiences clinical levels of anxiety and depression, which periodically leads him to psychotherapy and pharmacotherapy. Amber’s mother, by multiple accounts, suffers from strong obsessive and agoraphobic tendencies, for which she has also sought professional care. Her father was characterized as “very anxious” but apparently did not receive treatment.  Assessment and Formulation  In addition to a mental status examination conducted during our second meeting and the life history inventory completed between meetings, Amber completed the Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory–2 (MMPI-2), the BDI-II, and the Beck Anxiety Inventory (BAI). Scores on both the Beck instruments were in the severe range at intake (BDI-II = 37; BAI = 49), as shown in Figure 15.3. Amber’s ratings of urge intensity in the last week on a 11-point visual analogue scale (0 = None to 10 = The worst) were 3 for alcohol, drugs 2, gambling 8, and shoplifting 9.  Amber’s MMPI-2 profile was clinically elevated on multiple scales, including the D, Pt, and Sc scales, and suggested unusually severe psychological problems (Welsh code 87**21*3460”‘9+/5:F***+L-K/). Depression, anxiety, and social introversion were all spiking above the 99th percentile. So, too, were two scales measuring PTSD symptoms. The computer-generated interpretive report indicated that “a pattern of chronic psychological maladjustment characterizes individuals with this MMPI-2 clinical profile. The client is overwhelmed by anxiety, tension, and depression. She feels helpless and alone, inadequate and insecure, and she believes that life is hopeless and that nothing is working out right. She attempts to control her worries through intellectualization and unproductive self-analysis, but she has difficulty concentrating and making decisions.” Her coping style was markedly introverted (at the 99th percentile) and avoidant (above the 95th percentile); her interpersonal relationships tended to be ambivalent, “never fully trusting or loving anyone. Many individuals with this profile never establish lasting, intimate relationships.” The two negative treatment indicators were also quite elevated: Amber’s low motivation and inability to disclose were both above the 95th percentile.   At the same time, several of Amber’s strengths were evident despite the dismal symptom picture. Amber had survived years of incarceration, she was voluntari    Depression and Substance Abuse  50 45 40 35Test Score 30 25 20 BDI-II BAI 15 10 5 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 16 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48 50 Number of sessions  FIGURE 15.3. Amber’s scores on the Beck Anxiety Inventory (BAI) and Beck Depression Inventory–II (BDI-II) across sessions.  ly seeking psychotherapy following three disappointing efforts, and she was pushing herself to relate to me in an honest, forthcoming manner. She was a resilient survivor with a keen intellect and a supportive family. And she knew in her heart, as she put it, “this time, it (psychotherapy) must work or I end up back in prison.”  At the same time, our treatment approach is less concerned about formal diagnoses and more concerned with understanding Amber in her uniqueness and complexity. But this is not to say that diagnoses are inconsequential. At the second session, Amber and I reviewed her completed life history inventory and psychological test results. Although not flattering, the test results struck Amber as “exactly me.” She appreciated the candid discussion of her multiple disorders, which she did not experience or recall occurring in her previous treatments. She was particularly struck by her high levels of anxiety, which she typically labeled depression, and multiple indications of PTSD stemming from her arrest and incarceration.  Her mental status examination, clinical history, and the psychological test results converged on a series of diagnosable DSM-5 disorders: major depressive disorder, polysubstance dependence, generalized anxiety disorder (chronic), PTSD, pathological gambling, klep   tomania/shoplifting, borderline personality disorder, and prominent avoidant personality features. Her Global Assessment of Functioning (GAF) was 50.  But assessment falls short for treatment purposes if it stops with disorders and even strengths. What about Amber as a person, beyond a list of diagnoses? What are her treatment preferences, her reactance level, stage of change, coping style, and cultures? In terms of personality traits, Amber is low in reactance, almost pathologically unassertive and dependent, and her coping style is fundamentally internalizing. Although kleptomania and substance abuse typically indicate an externalizing style, she has kept most of her problems hidden from others. In terms of problem-specific stages of change, Amber is in the preparation stage for her anxiety, early action stage for depression, action stage for gambling and shoplifting, and in the early maintenance stage for her substance abuse. Two fear-charged exceptions arise from this pattern of “wanting to tackle problems:” Amber is in contemplation for the borderline personality disorder and PTSD. She acknowledges that she does not understand well the borderline diagnosis made in prison, and what she understands is scary and pessimistic. Nor is she willing yet to discuss treat    CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  ment methods for her prison-related PTSD. We accede to her preferences and respect her early contemplation stage for those conditions. In terms of culture, Amber identifies herself as a female recovering addict of European American persuasion and heterosexual orientation.   Preparing the Patient  Amber presents for the second session looking more comfortable and less distressed. I share this observation, and Amber responds, “I did feel better this past week.” I ask for her impressions of our first session, as a means of developing collaboration, collecting feedback, and communicating the need for goal and task consensus. We discuss Amber’s experiences, including her perception of comfort with me and her feelings of shame and guilt in revealing her “awful mess of a life.” I offer that I was impressed with her openness and honesty, particularly given her history of secrecy and the fact that it was our first meeting Within a few minutes, we agree that the therapist–patient fit is “good” and proceed to review the test results (as summarized earlier).  Consistent with her stages of change, Amber decides to focus in early sessions on treating her depression and maintaining her drug abstinence. I concur with these preferences because they coincide with the usual sequencing of treatment goals with multidisordered patients: Accord first priority to decreasing suicidal (and return-to-prison) behaviors, then to therapy-interfering behaviors, and then to decreasing behaviors that interfere with quality of life (Linehan, 1993a). We agree to begin with weekly individual psychotherapy with the caveat that we will increase the frequency if her distress and impairment do not decline soon.  Preparing the patient for psychotherapy occurs in two guises: one for the role demands of psychotherapy in general, and one for the specific treatment methods in particular. A good portion of the second session is occupied with laying the groundwork for psychotherapy—confidentiality, cancellations, contacting the therapist, handling crises, answering service, payment, and so on—and then Amber’s role induction as an active, informed patient of the process. As an experienced therapy patient, Amber grasps this information rapidly, asks a few clarifying questions, and readily agrees to the frame of treatment. With a less experienced patient, more time would (and should) be devoted to these matters.  An additional element of preparation is introducing the view that psychotherapy is a single part of the more inclusive treatment plan. The research indicates that patients who are functionally impaired respond best to a comprehensive treatment. Specifically, more impaired or disabled patients profit from more treatment, lengthier treatment, psychoactive medication, multiple therapy formats (individual, couple, group), and explicit efforts to strengthen their social support networks (Beutler, Harwood, Alimohamed, & Malik, 2002). Patients suffering from both mood and substance disorders are cases in point; to put it simply, complex problems require complex treatments.  The second guise of preparation is explaining the particular treatment methods, in this instance, beginning with cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) for the depression and relapse prevention for the substance abuse, gambling, and shoplifting. These particular treatments immediately suggest themselves for Amber on several counts: They match her stage of change (action and maintenance, respectively), her low reactance level (calling for more directive and therapist guided treatments), and her preferences for change tools and homework assignments. And, of course, both CBT and relapse prevention enjoy solid research evidence of their effectiveness in treating Amber’s disorders.  Psychotherapy is more effective when both the method and relationship are tailored to the client’s stage of change and then evolve as the client moves along the stages during the course of treatment. With contemplators, the optimal role as therapist is akin to a Socratic teacher who encourages clients to achieve their own insights into their condition. Because Amber is into the action stage, the stance morphs into an experienced, supportive coach who has been through many crucial matches and can provide a fine game plan.  Although the research clearly indicates that Amber’s action and maintenance stages and her low reactance favor the therapist’s use of directive methods, the therapist must also sensitively broach the topic of transferring more responsibility and self-direction to the client over time. Amber, with a lifelong history of dependency and low reactance, will respond best to a directive stance on the part of the therapist. At the same time, we must be careful not to reenact, in conscious and unconscious ways, Amber’s unassertive and subservient relationship with the powerful therapist. Thus, I broach this matter early in the third session and contract for an evolving relationship in terms of our respective roles.   Depression and Substance Abuse  tHeraPist: Last time, we agreed that I would be an active and directive therapist with action plans and homework in addressing your depression and drug use. (Amber nods in agreement.) The research evidence also supports that. My concern is that doing so may reinforce in here your tendency to behave dependently and defer to others. Does that make sense?  amBer: Ummmm. Yes, I had not thought about that, but I see how that would probably happen. I would depend more on you.  tHeraPist: That will be fine in the short run, while we are reducing your depression and keeping you abstinent. In the long run, your depending too much on me compounds your unassertive personality style. Might I suggest this as a way out of the paradox? In our early sessions, I will be more directive, in the lead, so that you can become less depressed and certain in your sobriety. Once that happens, in the later sessions, then we will ask and teach you to become more assertive, more in the lead. It will sort of be like AA—right now you depend a lot on your sponsor, but one day you will be probably sponsoring others. How does that sound?  This distinction between mediating goals and ultimate goals is almost always enthusiastically received, as it was by Amber. The mediating goal is to reduce symptomatic distress; the ultimate goal is to restructure interpersonal behavior. Psychotherapy can be more directive in the short term to work toward more mature and assertive relationships in the long term.  Ongoing assessment will, of course, refine Amber’s goals, and her early success will lead to further goals. Her immediate goals and, as she puts it, “where she is at” (in the stages of change) are to reduce depression and maintain her abstinence. Those goals reflect where her commitment and action lie, representing the best chances of reducing her suicidal ideation and her probability of returning to prison Her chronic anxiety, PTSD, and matrix of borderline personality symptoms are addressed more fully in later sessions.  Monitoring Progress  We routinely collect real-time client feedback over the course of psychotherapy regarding three crucial areas: patient functioning/symptoms; task and goal consensus; and satisfaction with the therapy relationship. In  terms of symptom monitoring, Amber and I agree that she will complete the BDI-II and the BAI every four sessions (once a month) to monitor her progress. (Figure 15.3 presents these results). We have found that more frequent measurement in lengthier psychotherapy proves unnecessary and frequently annoys patients. In most sessions, Amber will rate her urges to drink, drug, gamble, and shoplift in the last week on a 11point visual analogue scale, where 0 = None and 10 = The worst.  In terms of treatment and relationship satisfaction, we typically rely on asking direct questions of clients following the scoring and review of the measures of symptom outcome. These begin with broad, open-ended questions, such as “How is the psychotherapy going? How are we (the relationship) doing?” Then we follow up with more focused inquiries as the patient’s responses and situations dictate. For Amber, these might be on the order of “What has been the most help so far? The least helpful? How are we doing on honoring your preferences? Do you experience me being directive enough and providing enough tools? How can we improve things?”  Several standardized measures are available for assessing two or more of these crucial areas: the COM- PASS (Lueger et al., 2001), the Clinical Outcomes in Routine Evaluation (CORE) system (widely used in the United Kingdom; Barkham et al., 2001), the Partners for Change Outcome Management System (PCOMS; Miller, Duncan, Sorrell, & Brown, 2005), and the Outcome Questionnaire–45 (OQ-45; Lambert et al., 2004). Our favorite, the Innerlife STS system (www.innerlife. com), provides both clinician and client versions, and offers both pretreatment and across-treatment information. The important point here is not the particular outcome monitoring system but that the therapist regularly collects the information. For novice therapists unaccustomed to asking these questions, particularly those related to treatment and relationship satisfaction, we strongly encourage the use of the formal measurement systems.  Treatment Process  Having now created a sufficiently empathic alliance, collected sufficient diagnostic and transdiagnostic information to create a treatment plan, and prepared the patient, we proceed in the fourth session to conducting CBT for depression and relapse prevention.   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  The CBT follows a fairly standard protocol: The patient is oriented to the cognitive model of depression, guided in identifying depressogenic thoughts, asked to record those thoughts between sessions, and instructed in challenging and disputing those thoughts, replacing them with healthier attributions and coping statements. The patient also agrees to behavioral activation: getting out of her home for at least 3 hours a day initially (graduating to 6 hours later in therapy) and volunteering 4 hours a week (eventually progressing to 15 hours a week). Amber is presented with a list of psychologistrecommended and research-supported self-help books on depression (Norcross et al., 2013), and decides to read Feeling Good: The New Mood Therapy (Burns, 1999). She later decides to purchase the accompanying workbook and often brings it to session to review the worksheets.  We devote about half of the session time to the CBT for her depression and the other half to relapse prevention (RP) for her drinking, drugging, shoplifting, and gambling. Amber has become aware in her AA meetings that relapse is the most common long-term outcome in the treatment of addictions. More urgently, Amber feels the pressure of returning to prison if she is found taking drugs or shoplifting.  RP is self-management training designed to avoid recycling and to enhance the maintenance stage (Marlatt & Donovan, 2007). Through in-session discussions and between-session readings, Amber is taught how to understand relapse as a process, identify high-risk situations, learn to cope with cravings to engage in the addictive behavior, and achieve a balanced lifestyle. Her riskiest triggers pertain to inactivity, negative mood states, and a particular subset of friends. Fortunately, the first two of these are being fruitfully addressed by the CBT for her depression. A lot of time in session is spent on actualizing the “avoid people, places, and things” slogan of her AA meetings to minimize time spent with those friends. We also practice and rehearse urge-surfing for those times when, in spite of avoiding the triggers, Amber confronts the cravings.  As an eager computer user, Amber decides to search the Web for research reviews on RP and finds a metaanalysis (which she understandably does not fully comprehend) on its effectiveness in 26 studies representing a sample of 9,504 patients (Irvin, Bowers, Dunn, & Wang, 1999). The results reveal that RP is generally effective, certainly more so than no-treatment controls, and particularly effective for alcohol and polysub   stance use disorders. “Just like me,” Amber smilingly acknowledges in session.  In one session, the 13th or 14th, Amber appears uncharacteristically reticent to participate in the therapeutic work. I ask about her interest, and she unconvincingly responds, “Oh, I’m just tired today.” The pattern persists into the next session:  tHeraPist: You do not seem into it [psychotherapy] today. It seems different to me, like last week. Not as much energy and zip like we usually have. What are you experiencing or feeling in session of late?  amBer: Well .. . I don’t know .. . feeling annoyed.  tHeraPist: Thanks for telling me. I realize that’s a hard thing for you to do—voicing your annoyance, disappointment, with someone. Good for you.  amBer: It’s hard .. . (about a 30-second pause) Last time [session] I think that you did not understand how hard I have been working to do all of these things. You seemed critical of me like I’m not doing enough.  tHeraPist: You’re feeling that I am not appreciating your hard work, in psychotherapy and at home, and that I’m critical of your efforts .. ..  amBer: Yeah, that’s right. But now I’m afraid that I’m disappointing you or making you angry .. .  tHeraPist: Certainly not, Amber. I’m feeling the opposite: I’m pleased and proud that you took the risk of being assertive and telling me how you feel today. That’s a wonderful way for us to be, but not wonderful feelings inside you. Huh?  Amber concurs that these are troubling feelings for her: Assertion triggers her fear of rejection or abandonment. When I inquire when she has felt this way before, she immediately says—literally, immediately, speaking before I finish the question—“my father.” That leads into an extended process of Amber speaking about how she perceives her father to be supportive in his remarks but critical and unaccepting of her in his behavior. Without prompting, she observes, “Ohh. That’s what I am saying now about you.. ..”  At the end of her psychotherapy, Amber and I both nominated this session as a memorable turning point for her. She found her voice to express her displeasure with me—a male authority figure—and discovered that she was transferring or projecting feelings originally associated with her father to me (and probably others).   Depression and Substance Abuse  It is quite possible that an empathic failure or a neutral look on my part sparked her feeling, but the underlying feelings certainly belonged to her father.  Beyond that self-awareness, this session also solidified our relationship in that it demonstrated in vivo a way for us to repair any ruptures in the alliance (Safran, Muran, & Eubanks-Carter, 2011). The therapist can respond nondefensively, attend emphatically and directly to the relationship, understand the mutual dynamics, adjust behavior (if necessary), and attend to the patient’s conflictual relationship pattern. In several studies, rupture repair positively predicts treatment outcome (Safran et al., 2011). At the end of session, Amber said that she experienced “like a breakthrough,” and I felt that is was one of the good moments in our work.  In approximately 20 to 22 sessions, Amber is less depressed. Her BDI-II score has been cut in half (Figure 15.3), and her suicidal ideation has disappeared. Her urges to use are down to 0–2, accompanied by no slips in drugging, drinking, gambling, or shoplifting.  Brimming with a new-found confidence and a genuine trust in the process, Amber is ready to address her anxiety and PTSD. However, she remains conflicted and fearful. “Depression” is her favored term, and understanding “anxiety” is novel and unsettling.  There are many therapeutic means to address ambivalence and resistance, of course, but I select motivational interviewing (MI) for Amber. MI fits our therapeutic relationship, matches Amber’s contemplation stage, and comes with impressive research support for large effects in a small number of sessions (Hettema, Steele, & Miller, 2005). MI expands on person-centered therapy by providing specific methods to move the patient toward behavior change (Miller & Rollnick, 2002). Following the guiding spirit of MI, I try to:  •• Express empathy by using reflective listening to  convey understanding of Amber’s ambivalence  about tacking the anxiety problem and PTSD, and  to communicate my respect for her need for self   preservation.  •• Develop discrepancy between Amber’s convic   tion that she suffers only from depression and sub   stance abuse, and the clinical findings that she also  experiences high anxiety.  •• Roll with resistance by meeting it with reflection  and curiosity rather than confrontation.  •• Support self-efficacy by actively conveying the  message that the client is capable of change.  MI leverages the inherent energy that resistance brings to the therapeutic interaction, seeking to redirect it in a manner that avoids a rupture in the therapeutic relationship and allows the emergence of client change talk. Just as a canoeist would probably not paddle upstream against a strong current, so, too, the motivational interviewer does not argue with clients. Instead, I roll with the resistance by using the energy in the client to steer the interaction (Moyers & Rollnick, 2002).  MI is used to enhance Amber’s intrinsic motivation to change and to explore and resolve her ambivalence. After three sessions of primarily MI methods, Amber opts to confront her anxiety and PTSD. Just as Carl Rogers predicted, clients can go a long way in a short time when provided with facilitative conditions, an accepting therapist, and considerable autonomy. MI’s flexibility of use permits it to be integrated into other psychotherapies to reduce client ambivalence and to minimize their resistance (Miller & Moyers, 2005).  The majority of session time now focuses on treating Amber’s anxiety-fueled avoidance and her prison-related PTSD. The cognitive restructuring for depression has already prepared her for the cognitive work of exposure therapy in her daily life. Amber decides initially to target her fear of speaking in AA meetings and driving on highways. In order to promote her choice and autonomy, I ask Amber to read descriptions of two leading treatments for PTSD: prolonged exposure with response prevention and eye movement desensitization and reprocessing (EMDR). After doing so, Amber elects to try the EMDR, reasoning that whereas prolonged exposure requires extensive daily homework, EMDR does not.  Simultaneously, she begins to read Getting Past Your Past (Shapiro, 2012), a recent self-help book by EMDR’s developer. When Amber mentions this to me, I congratulate her for taking the initiative, and then somewhat sheepishly admit that I should have thought of recommending it to her when she expressed interest in self-help materials. In an exchange that Amber nominated at the end of her therapy as a pivotal moment, she smiles and cautions me against thinking in terms of “shoulds.” I laugh for a full minute, barely able to contain myself, congratulate her on mastering cognitive therapy, then observe that the “student is becoming the master.” Amber responds deadpan, “Yes, grasshopper”— an allusion to an old television series (favored by her father!) in which the seasoned master calls the eager student “grasshopper.”   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  We introduce breathing exercises and practice selfsoothing skills before undertaking the EMDR proper. Amber then undergoes five elongated sessions (90 minutes) of EMDR to address a series of traumatic events during her incarceration. Amber tolerates the sessions well and successfully uses the breathing and selfsoothing between sessions for a couple of nightmares and daytime flashbacks. Her anxiety noticeably drops, as do her subjective units of distress (SUDs) ascribed to the traumatic events. At the conclusion of the five EMDR sessions, the SUDS are 1 or 2 for each event, which she deems ecologically valid.  Meanwhile, the exposure to speaking in AA meetings and highway driving continues successfully. Amber participates verbally in a frequency of the “average person,” which is her goal. Driving on the highway at or above the posted speed limit becomes “no big deal anymore.” Quite apart from accomplishing these goals, Amber learns the larger lesson that avoidance reduces anxiety in the short run but brings far more misery in the long run.  The in vivo exposure work continues but occupies less of our attention in session as Amber now tackles the amorphous borderline personality disorder. Amber and I begin slowly and didactically with education about her unassertive, approval-seeking style through bibliotherapy. I offer a selection of assertion and borderline personality self-help resources rated highly by mental health professionals (Norcross et al., 2013), again asking Amber to choose actively instead of passively accepting a prescription. She selects not one but three: Your Perfect Right (Alberti & Emmons, 1995), Sometimes I Act Crazy (Kreisman & Straus, 2006) for her parents, and Skills Training Manual for Treating Borderline Personality Disorder (Linehan, 1993b) for herself.  We begin with assertion training in the behavioral and feminist traditions: exploring differences between assertion and aggression; cognitive restructuring for her guilt and fear of rejection when assertive; examining gender scripts in her family and in society about power; role-playing specific responses in session; taperecording Amber during role plays to fine-tune her voice and words; and jointly developing homework assignments with family members. Assertion is a goal not only outside therapy but within it as well. I remind Amber of our compact several months earlier when we agreed that she would move forward and take more control over the work. She agrees, and I chuckle as I remind her, “I am the grasshopper now.”  Amber’s underlying identity or schema as inadequate is now more fully explored. It is difficult to summarize the constellation of intersecting therapy methods used for our final 20 sessions—emotional processing, cognitive restructuring, assertion training, transference interpretations, and active practice. The emotion-focused work follows in the experiential tradition, including a few two-chair dialogues between Amber’s competent part and her inadequate part. The exercise provide, in Amber’s words, “clarity—I can really see how they clash and result in strange behavior.” Her symptoms continue to fade away.  Amber’s emerging self is now confronted with endless choices in her life and in therapy. Should she secure employment? What about her love life? Would graduate school make sense? What would she like to tackle in therapy? I participate in these discussions, of course, but ultimately Amber will decide, knowing that I support Amber and her decisions.  By way of summary, here is how Amber courageously tackles these life challenges. She decides to continue her volunteer work (now at 20 hours per week) and to pursue part-time employment. Submitting job applications forces her to explain her legal and addiction travails, which prompts considerable anxiety, but she successfully avoids the avoidant pull and does so. She obtains part-time employment. Amber begins to date casually and decides that she is not ready yet for a romantic commitment; she is charmed that several men ask to date her and two of them seek something “deeper.” She will make that decision “in time—when I am ready.” She explores several career options with the assistance of a vocational interest inventory I administer and, like many clients engaged in psychotherapy and AA, decides to reorient her career trajectory to a human service field. Finally, the cumulative work on assertion deficits and borderline personality disorder prompts Amber to create different boundaries with her parents and to invite them in for a few conjoint sessions to renegotiate a competent adult to competent adult connection, in contradistinction to years of parent– crazy child relating.  Fifty or so sessions into the psychotherapy, Amber notes, “We have not rated my urges [to drink, drug, gamble, shoplift] lately.” I reflect for a moment and respond, “There does not seem to be any need to do so, is there?” We mutually decide to recognize Amber’s progress by changing from weekly sessions to sessions every 2 or 3 weeks.   Depression and Substance Abuse  As psychotherapy winds down, and as Amber consolidates and internalizes her progress, my mind turns to her future. I gently suggest that the best protection against slipping back into depression, substance abuse, avoidance, anxiety, and patterns of inadequacy is selfnurturance. Amber thinks on this for a few weeks, then at our next session presents a self-nurturance list. This includes reducing her cigarette smoking, continuing her AA attendance and physical exercise, and a host of assertive and social pursuits.  Maintenance or booster sessions are indicated when the problems are complex, when addictions are present, when the patient is highly impaired, and when a personality disorder is present. Those features certainly apply to Amber, at least the “old Amber,” and constitute strong indicators of the tendency to relapse. For these reasons, Amber and I decide on a schedule of monthly maintenance sessions for several months.  Typical Problems  For patients undergoing integrative therapy, the typical problem entails the burden of a lot of work within and between sessions. As purposefully more inclusive and ambitious, integrative treatment probably asks more of the client. We routinely collaborate on homework— because the research strongly supports it (Kazantzis, Whittington, & Dattilio, 2010), and because Amber explicitly requested it. In collaboration with the client, the therapist must properly pace or “dose” the amount of work and ensure that the client’s motivational distress remains motivating, not disabling. With Amber, the recurrent question was “Does this feel challenging but not overwhelming for you?”  For therapists conducting integrative therapy, a common problem involves retreat into their standard relationship style and default treatment method. When the research advises a more directive stance, for example, therapists may begin in a directive way but then gradually slip back into their customary less-directive stance. Or as another example, therapists more accustomed to working with patients in the action stage will start in a more exploratory stance compatible with the patient’s contemplation stage, but subsequently provide actionoriented processes well before the patient is ready to plunge into the action stage. Periodic reevaluations, ongoing client feedback, and therapists’ self-awareness to fit the patient (not only themselves) tends to correct these lapses.  For neophyte therapists, the core challenge in our approach is to avoid the extremes: overemphasizing either the treatment method or the healing relationship, adhering to either a rule-bound treatment manual or an intuitive seat-of-the-pants syncretism, relying exclusively on the empirical research or on participant preferences. We strive for balanced flexibility, the Aristotelian mean, that systematically incorporates all of these without succumbing to the human tendency of polarization. This can prove problematic for psychotherapists trained to think in either–or, binary ways about psychotherapy. It can also be daunting in a multidisorderd patient, like Amber, with multiple goals sequenced over time. “One treatment fits all” becomes an attractive, easier alternative to the hard work of tailoring psychotherapy to the unique individual and singular situation.  Outcome and Prognosis  Over the course of 50 weekly individual sessions and several maintenance sessions, Amber impressively reduced her depression and maintained her abstinence. Her depression consistently declined over time, as shown in Figure 15.3. The largest drop in her anxiety scores occurred between weeks 26 and 32, when the EMDR was conducted. Her cravings to drink, drug, and shoplift gravitated to 0 on the 0- to 10 scale after 3 months of psychotherapy, but her urge to gamble would periodically spike to the 3- or 4-point range. She did not behaviorally succumb to those temptations, however. Symptomatically, Amber’s test scores were in the normal range, and she was better than ever.  Interpersonally, the patient achieved impressive gains as well. She was less impulsive, more emotionally self-regulating, more self-soothing, and increasingly assertive and expressive. She certainly no longer met the diagnostic criteria for borderline personality disorder, but she was susceptible to some behavioral avoidance and abandonment fears in her new dating relationships. She mourned the years lost to drugs and addressed her existential guilt and shame, as much as most humans can.  Her medications were gradually halved over the year of our psychological treatment, from 80 mg to 40 mg of fluoxetine and from 60 mg to 20 mg of BuSpar. She continues on those medications as maintenance with plans eventually to reduce them. And Amber continues to attend AA meetings twice a week and monthly   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  maintenance psychotherapy sessions, where her most recent BDI-II and BAI scores were both 3, well within normal limits.  Despite all of these positive outcomes, as with most cases in psychotherapy, not all of Amber’s goals were realized. She continues to smoke cigarettes (a maximum of 3 per day), and full-time employment has proven elusive because her felony record leaves her ineligible for many positions. She does work the equivalent of three-quarters time between two jobs and is applying to graduate school in a human service profession. And Amber is prone to occasional bouts of anxiety and avoidance when confronting new situations.  From all accounts, the prognosis is promising indeed. She is the “new” Amber as I phrased it, or, as she memorably put it, the Amber “2.0.”  Case Commentary  We have chosen to illustrate our treatment approach for depression and substance abuse with a complex, multidisordered woman. As is typical, she suffered for many years and from more than two discrete disorders. The chronic course of comorbid disorders increases the need for integrative treatment, including, in Amber’s case, individual psychotherapy, pharmacotherapy, support groups, self-help resources, and a few conjoint family sessions. The high rates of comorbidity of personality disorders and PTSD among substance abusers complicates psychotherapy and increases the need to sequence treatment methods and goals thoughtfully.  The psychotherapist can accept some credit for the salubrious outcomes in this case, but Amber deserves the lion’s share. She worked hard to master new skills, prevent relapses, and intentionally expose herself to anxiety-provoking situations. She was a bright, motivated, and psychologically minded client who progressed from the contemplation stage to the action stage and ultimately to long-term maintenance. All these patient features predict more successful outcomes in all forms of psychotherapy.  Several circumstances also proved fortuitous. Amber participated regularly in AA meetings, was motivated by the “sobering” experiences of prison, and was supported by her parents, who contributed to payment for 50 sessions of psychotherapy. Fewer sessions with a therapist working in a public clinic would probably not have yielded the same benefits. Although Amber was not favorably impressed by her previous therapy experiences, it was clear the she had benefited from the so   cialization into psychotherapy and perhaps from moving from earlier stages of change to later stages before undertaking this course of treatment.  Where our integrative approach was probably most effective was in fitting or tailoring the therapy relationship and treatment methods specifically to Amber. The treatment proceeded stepwise in accordance with the research evidence, the patient’s preferences, stage of change, and her other transdiagnostic characteristics. The therapist systematically addressed depression, substance abuse, and others disorders by combining therapy methods (those traditionally associated with person-centered, behavioral, cognitive, exposure, feminist, psychodynamic, and experiential traditions) and healing resources (psychotherapy, pharmacotherapy, self-help, and AA spirituality) in a seamless and responsive manner.  Predictors of Success and Failure  No therapy or therapist is immune to failure. It is at such times that experienced clinicians often wonder whether therapy methods from orientations other than their own might more usefully have been included in the treatment, or whether another orientation’s strength in dealing with the particular problems might complement the therapist’s own orientational weakness. Integrative therapies assume that each orientation has its particular domain of expertise and that these domains can be linked to maximize their effectiveness (Pinsof, 1995). In this way, rival therapy systems are increasingly viewed not as adversaries but as welcome partners (Landsman, 1974); not as contradictory but as complementary.  When integrative therapy fails, it may be a result of failure to follow the guiding integrative principles, a dearth of skill in implementing a particular treatment, a poor fit between the particular patient and the particular therapist, or inaccurate evaluation of the patient dimensions that indicate the optimal therapist style and objectives. Each of these alternatives should be considered when a patient is not accomplishing his/her goals at a rate expected among similar patients. Our approach embraces an initial evaluation of the transdiagnostic patient dimensions, as well as periodic review of treatment processes to ensure that the therapy methods are a good fit as defined by the research. Finally, formal feedback about progress is helpful and often initiates a discussion of things that slow or block progress and of procedures that may help move through such impasses.   Depression and Substance Abuse  In the past few years, we have begun sharing with the patient the results of serial testing (e.g., that presented in Figure 15.3) or the Innerlife STS progress graphs to illustrate points of impasse and success.  coNclusioNs  Psychotherapy is a treatment method and a healing relationship fit to the individual patient and context. In this chapter, we have endeavored to demonstrate how psychotherapists can do exactly that for patients suffering from depression and substance abuse, thereby increasing treatment effectiveness and efficiency. Such treatment selection must be systematic, flexible, and evidence-based. For these reasons, integrative psychotherapy seems particularly indicated for complex patients with comorbid disorders, such as Amber, and for patients whom pure form or monotherapies have failed or been only partially successful.  Our chapter presentation and case illustration may convey the impression that integrative psychotherapy can be thoroughly planned from the beginning, but clinical reality is not so accommodating. Although we try to formulate the case and plan treatment at the outset, we expect and welcome the invariable turn of events. Treatment selection is nonlinear and dynamic; a behavior or change at one point in time impacts all subsequent behavior. “You never know what to expect the next session” is one of the fascinations of psychotherapy. We are continuously moving with the patient and evolving with the unanticipated, but we do so informed by clinical experience and research evidence.  This chapter has outlined our integrative therapy and detailed its step-by-step process of systematic treatment selection in substance abuse and depression. This process applies research knowledge from multiple theoretical orientations on both diagnostic and transdiagnostic patient characteristics to the optimal choice of technical and relational methods. Such a therapy posits that many treatment methods and interpersonal stances have a valuable place in the repertoire of the contemporary psychotherapist. Their particular and differential place can be determined through outcome research, seasoned experience, and positioning the client at the center of the clinical enterprise. Integrative therapy offers the evidence-based relationships, treatments, and responsiveness to meet the multifarious needs of individual patients and their unique contexts well into the 21st century.  referenCes  Alberti, R., & Emmons, M. (1995). Your perfect right: A guide to assertive living (7th ed.). San Luis Obispo, CA: Impact.  American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.). Arlington, VA: Author.  Antonuccio, D. O. (1995). Psychotherapy for depression: No stronger medicine. American Psychologist, 50, 450–452.  Antonuccio, D. O., Danton, W. G., & DeNelsky, G. Y. (1995). Psychotherapy versus medication for depression: Challenging the conventional wisdom with data. Professional Psychology: Research and Practice, 26, 574–585.  Barkham, M., Margison, F., Leach, C., Lucock, M., Mellor- Clark, J., Evans, C., et al. (2001). Service profiling and outcomes benchmarking using the CORE_OM: Toward practice-based evidence in the psychological therapies. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 69, 184– 196.  Beutler, L. E. (2009). Making science matter in clinical practice: Redefining psychotherapy. Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 16, 301–317.  Beutler, L. E., & Clarkin, J. (1990). Systematic treatment selection: Toward targeted therapeutic interventions. New York: Brunner/Mazel.  Beutler, L. E., Clarkin, J., & Bongar, B. (2000). Guidelines for the systematic treatment of the depressed patient. New York: Oxford University Press.  Beutler, L. E., & Harwood, T. M. (2000). Prescriptive psychotherapy: A practical guide to systematic treatment selection. New York: Oxford University Press.  Beutler, L. E., Harwood, T. M., Alimohamed, S., & Malik,  M. (2002). Functional impairment and coping style. In J. C. Norcross (Ed.), Psychotherapy relationships that work (pp. 145–173). New York: Oxford University Press. Beutler, L. E., Harwood, T. M., Kimpara, S., Verdirame, D., & Blau, K. (2011). Coping style. In J. C. Norcross (Ed.), Psychotherapy relationships that work (2nd ed., pp. 336– 353). New York: Oxford University Press.  Beutler, L. E., Harwood, T. M., Michelson, A., Song, X., & Holman, J. (2011). Reactance/resistance. In J. C. Norcross (Ed.), Psychotherapy relationships that work (2nd ed., pp. 261–278). New York: Oxford University Press.  Beutler, L. E., & Malik, M. L. (2002). Diagnosis and treatment guidelines: The example of depression. In L. E. Beutler & M. L. Malik (Eds.), Rethinking the DSM (pp. 251–278). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.  Beutler, L. E., Moleiro, C., Malik, M., Harwood, T. M., Romanelli, R., Gallagher-Thompson, D., et al. (2003). A comparison of the Dodo, EST, and ATI factors among comorbid stimulant-dependent, depressed patients. Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy, 10, 69–85.   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  Burns, D. (1999). Feeling good: The new mood therapy (rev. ed.). New York: Avon.  Burlingame, G., McClendon, D. T., Alonso, J. (2011). Group cohesion. In J. C. Norcross (Ed.), Psychotherapy relationships that work (2nd ed., pp. 110–131). New York: Oxford University Press.  Castonguay, L. G., & Beutler, L. E. (Eds.). (2006). Principles of therapeutic change that work. New York: Oxford University Press.  Clarkin, J. F., & Levy, K. N. (2004). The influence of client variables on psychotherapy. In M. J. Lambert (Ed.), Bergin and Garfield’s handbook of psychotherapy and behavior change (5th ed., pp. 194–226). New York: Wiley.  Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences (2nd ed.). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.  Cuijpers, P., van Straten, A., Andersson, G., & van Oppen, P. (2008). Psychotherapy for depression in adults: A metaanalysis of comparative outcome studies. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 76, 909–922.  Cuijpers, P., van Straten, A., Schuurmans, J., van Oppen, P., Hollon, S. D., & Andersson, G. (2010). Psychotherapy for chronic major depression and dysthymia: A meta-analysis. Clinical Psychology Review, 30, 51–62.  DeRubeis, R. J., Hollon, S. D., Amsterdam, J. D., Shelton,  R. C., Young, P. R., Salomon, R. M., et al. (2005). Cognitive therapy vs medications in the treatment of moderate to severe depression. Archives of General Psychiatry, 62, 409–416. Elliott, R., Bohart, A. C., Watson, J. C., & Greenberg, L. S. (2011). Empathy. In J. C. Norcross (Ed.), Psychotherapy relationships that work (2nd ed., pp. 132–152). New York: Oxford University Press.  Eysenck, H. J. (1970). A mish-mash of theories. International Journal of Psychiatry, 9, 140–146. Farber, B. A., & Doolin, E. M. (2011). Positive regard. In  J. C. Norcross (Ed.), Psychotherapy relationships that works (2nd ed., pp. 168–186). New York: Oxford University Press. Friedlander, M. L., Escudero, V., Heatherington, L., & Diamond, G. M. (2011). Alliance in couple and family therapy. In J. C. Norcross (Ed.), Psychotherapy relationships that work (2nd ed., pp. 92–109). New York: Oxford University Press.  Halford, G. S., Baker, R., McCredden, J. E., & Bain, J. D. (2005). How many variables can humans process? Psychological Science, 16, 70–76.  Harwood, T. M., Beutler, L. E., & Groth-Marnat, G. (Eds.). (2011). Integrated assessment of adult personality (3rd ed.). New York: Guilford Press.  Hettema, J., Steele, J., & Miller, W. R. (2005). Motivational interviewing. Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 1, 91–111.  Hollon, S. D. (1990). Cognitive therapy and pharmacotherapy for depression. Psychiatric Annals, 20, 249–258.  Horvath, A. O., Del Re, A., Flückiger, C., & Symonds, D. (2011). Alliance in individual psychotherapy. In J. C. Norcross (Ed.), Psychotherapy relationships that work (2nd ed., pp. 25–69). New York: Oxford University Press.  Housley, J., & Beutler, L. E. (2007). Treating victims of mass disaster and terrorism. Cambridge, MA: Hogrefe & Huber.  Irvin, J. E., Bowers, C. A., Dunn, M. E., & Wang, M. C. (1999). Efficacy of relapse prevention: A meta-analytic review. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 67, 563–570.  Kazantzis, N., Whittington, C., & Dattilio, F. (2010). Metaanalysis of homework effects in cognitive and behavioral therapy: A replication and extension. Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 17, 144–156.  Kessler, R. C., Berglund, P., Demler, O., Jin, R., Merikangas,  K. R., & Walters, E. E. (2005). Lifetime prevalence and age-of-onset distributions of DSM-IV disorders in the National Comorbidity Survey Replication. Archives of General Psychiatry, 62, 593–602. Kreisman, J. J., & Straus, H. (2006). Sometimes I act crazy: Living with a borderline personality disorder. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.  Lambert, M. J., Morton, J. J., Hatfield, D., Harmon, C., Hamilton, S., Reid, R. C., et al. (2004). Administration and scoring manual for the Outcome Questionnaire–45. Salt Lake City, UT: OQ Measures.  Lambert, M. J., & Shimokawa, K. (2011). Collecting client feedback. In J. C. Norcross (Ed.), Psychotherapy relationships that work (2nd ed., pp. 203–223). New York: Oxford University Press.  Landsman, J. T. (1974, August). Not an adversity but a welcome diversity. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Psychological Association, New Orleans, LA.  Linehan, M. M. (1993a). Cognitive-behavioral treatment of borderline personality disorder. New York: Guilford Press.  Linehan, M. M. (1993b). Skills training manual for treating borderline personality disorder. New York: Guilford Press.  Lueger, R. J., Howard, K. I., Martinovich Z., Lutz, W., Anderson, E. E., & Grissom, G. (2001). Assessing treatment progress of individual clients using expected treatment response models. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 69, 150–158.  Marlatt, G. A., & Donovan, D. M. (Eds.). (2007). Relapse prevention: Maintenance strategies in the treatment of addictive behaviors (2nd ed., pp. 267–271). New York: Guilford Press.  Miller, S. D., Duncan, B. L., Sorrell, R., & Brown, G. S. (2005). The Partners for Change Outcome System. Journal of Clinical Psychology: In Session, 61, 199–208.  Miller, W. R., & Moyers, T. B. (2005). Motivational inter    Depression and Substance Abuse  viewing. In G. P. Koocher, J. C. Norcross, & S. S. Hill (Eds.), Psychologists’ desk reference (2nd ed., pp. 267– 271). New York: Oxford University Press.  Moyers, T. B., & Rollnick, S. (2002). A motivational interviewing perspective on resistance. Journal of Clinical Psychology: In Session, 58(2), 185–193.  Miller, W. R., & Rollnick, S. (2002). Motivational interviewing: Preparing people for change (2nd ed.). New York: Guilford Press.  Norcross, J. C. (2010). The therapeutic relationship. In B. L. Duncan, S. D. Miller, B. E. Wampold, & M. A. Hubble (Eds.), Heart and soul of change (2nd ed., pp. 113–142). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.  Norcross, J. C. (Ed.). (2011). Psychotherapy relationships that work (2nd ed.). New York: Oxford University Press  Norcross, J. C. (2013). Changeology: Five steps to realizing your goals and resolutions. New York: Simon & Schuster.  Norcross, J. C., & Beutler, L. E. (1997). Determining the therapeutic relationship of choice in brief therapy. In J.  N. Butcher (Ed.), Personality assessment in managed care: A practitioner’s guide. New York: Oxford University Press. Norcross, J. C., Beutler, L. E., & Levant, R. F. (Eds.). (2006). Evidence-based practices in mental health: Debate and dialogue on the fundamental questions. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.  Norcross, J. C., Campbell, L. M., Grohol, J. M., Santrock, J. W., Selagea, F., & Sommer, R. (2013). Self-help that works (4th ed.). New York: Oxford University Press.  Norcross, J. C., & Goldfried, M. R. (Eds.). (2005). Handbook of psychotherapy integration (2nd ed.). New York: Oxford University Press.  Norcross, J. C., & Karpiak, C. P. (2012). Clinical psychologists in the 2010s: Fifty years of the APA Division of Clinical Psychology. Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 19, 1–12.  Norcross, J. C., Krebs, P. M., & Prochaska, J. O. (2011). Stages of change. In J. C. Norcross (Ed.), Psychotherapy relationships that work (2nd ed., pp. 279–300). New York: Oxford University Press.  Osler, W. (1906). Aequanimatas. New York: McGraw-Hill.  Paul, G. L. (1967). Strategy of outcome research in psychotherapy. Journal of Consulting Psychology, 31, 109–118.  Pinsof, W. M. (1995). Integrative problem-centered therapy: A synthesis of biological, individual, and family therapies. New York: Basic Books.  Prochaska, J. O., & Norcross, J. C. (2013). Systems of psychotherapy: A transtheoretical analysis (8th ed.). Pacific Grove, CA: Brooks/Cole.  Rogers, C. R. (1957). The necessary and sufficient conditions of therapeutic personality change. Journal of Consulting Psychology, 21, 95–103.  Rosen, C. S. (2000). Is the sequencing of change processes by stage consistent across health problems?: A meta-analysis. Health Psychology, 19, 593–604.  Safran, J. D., Muran, J. C., & Eubanks-Carter, C. (2011). Repairing alliance ruptures. In J. C. Norcross (Ed.), Psychotherapy relationships that work (2nd ed., pp. 224–238). New York: Oxford University Press.  Shapiro, F. (2012). Getting past your past: Take control of your life with self-help techniques from EMDR therapy. New York: Rodale.  Shirk, S. R., & Karver, M. (2011). Alliance in child and adolescent therapy. In J. C. Norcross (Ed.), Psychotherapy relationships that work (2nd ed., pp. 70–91). New York: Oxford University Press.  Smith, T. B., Rodriguez, M. D., & Bernal, G. (2011). Culture. In J. C. Norcross (Ed.), Psychotherapy relationships that work (2nd ed., pp. 316–335). New York: Oxford University Press.  Swift, J. K., Callahan, J. L., & Vollmer, B. M. (2011). Preferences. In J. C. Norcross (Ed.), Psychotherapy relationships that work (2nd ed., pp. 301–315). New York: Oxford University Press.  Tryon, G. S., & Winograd, G. (2011). Goal consensus and collaboration. In J. C. Norcross (Ed.), Psychotherapy relationships that work (2nd ed., pp. 153–167). New York: Oxford University Press.  Wolitzky, D. L. (2011). Psychoanalytic theories of psychotherapy. In J. C. Norcross, G. R. VandenBos, & D. K. Freedheim (Eds.), History of psychotherapy (2nd ed., pp. 65–100). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.   Chapter 16  Treatment of Sleep Disturbance  Katherine a. Kaplan allison G. harvey  Perhaps the best-kept secret among health and mental health practitioners everywhere is the marked superiority of brief psychological treatments for insomnia compared to popular and frequently advertised medications. With approximately 6% of members of the adult population suffering from insomnia to the degree that they meet diagnostic criteria, and as many as 12% reporting that insomnia interferes significantly with their daytime activities, the problem is significant and most often poorly treated. Insomnia very frequently accompanies other psychological disorders, and recent evidence indicates that insomnia predates and may contribute to or even cause these comorbid disorders, which is all the more reason why every health and mental health practitioner should be aware of the cutting-edge brief interventions presented in this chapter. Indeed, the American Academy of Sleep Medicine recommends these protocols as a first-line treatment for people with all forms of insomnia, including those currently using hypnotic drugs. Among the leaders in this burgeoning field, Kaplan and Harvey outline a state-of-the-art integrated behavioral and cognitive approach with strong evidence for both efficacy and durability that should be in the armamentarium of every health professional.—D. H. B.  Sleep disorders are common and associated with considerable morbidity and functional impairment. In this chapter we focus on insomnia, given its high prevalence and public health impact. We also briefly discuss hypersomnolence disorder given the rising possible role of psychological treatments for patients with this disorder. A wide range of other sleep disorders, which are beyond the scope of this chapter, are each prevalent and impairing. For example, obstructive sleep apnea/ hypopnea involves transient closure of the upper airway during sleep that results in pauses in breathing, leading to daytime sleepiness and cardiovascular problems. Restless legs syndrome involves an involuntary urge to move one’s legs during sleep that leads to partial or full awakenings, resulting in sleep fragmentation and day   time sleepiness. It is important for clinicians to have a working knowledge of these and other sleep disorders, as well as to know when to refer patients to a sleep center, neurologist, or other health professional (Kryger, Roth, & Dement, 2010).  Insomnia is a prevalent sleep disturbance that involves difficulty with falling asleep, staying asleep, or waking too early in the morning. It is associated with considerable functional impairment and health-related costs. Insomnia is often comorbid with, and predicts the development of, numerous psychological and medical conditions. As such, insomnia represents an important target for intervention. This chapter begins with a brief overview of human sleep, along with diagnostic and theoretical considerations, because this knowledge  640   Sleep Disturbance  provides the basis for delivering cognitive-behavioral therapy for insomnia (CBT-I), which is the focus of this chapter.  sleeP aND iNsoMNia  Sleep Stages  Human sleep can be divided into (1) non–rapid eye movement (or NREM) sleep that can be subdivided into three stages (N1, N2, and N3) through which sleep progressively deepens, and (2) rapid eye movement (or REM) sleep. In adults, each NREM–REM cycle spans 70 to 120 minutes (Kryger et al., 2010). NREM sleep is thought to be important for conservation of energy and restoration. This phase of sleep is associated with the most rapid cell division in some tissues, as well as increased protein synthesis (Kryger et al., 2010). The functions of REM sleep are understood to include a role in learning (Karni, Tanne, Rubenstien, Askenasy, & Sagi, 1994) and in the unlearning of irrelevant information (Crick & Mitchison, 1983), as well as memory consolidation (Walker & Stickgold, 2006), emotional processing, and mood/emotion regulation (Yoo, Gujar, Hu, Jolesz, & Walker, 2007). It is well established that sleep deprivation has detrimental effects in many domains of health (Zee & Turek, 2006), including the immune system, the neuroendocrine system, and the cardiovascular system (Banks & Dinges, 2010). Given these important functions, disorders of sleep have major public health implications.  Two‑Process Model of Sleep  The two-process model of sleep regulation (Borbely, 1982) is important in that it underpins the treatment we describe later. In fact, many clinicians describe this model to clients as part of the rationale for delivering stimulus control and sleep restriction described below. The model proposes that sleep and wakefulness are dependent on two processes, a homeostatic process and a circadian process (Achermann & Borbely, 2010). The homeostatic process influences sleep likelihood. Sleep pressure increases with time spent awake, resulting in an increased tendency to sleep when a person has been sleep-deprived, and a decreased tendency to sleep after having had a substantial amount of sleep or a substantial nap. The circadian rhythm is an internal biological clock that operates on roughly a  24-hour basis. It is responsible for variations in melatonin, temperature, and other biological functions, including levels of alertness throughout the day (Lack & Bootzin, 2003). These two processes work together such that sleep is likely to occur when sleep pressure (the homeostatic process) is high and level of alertness (the circadian process) is relatively low. Thus, if a person naps in the afternoon, he/she may have difficulty falling asleep that evening because homeostatic sleep pressure is low; likewise, if a person goes to bed early following a poor night of sleep, even if sleep pressure is high, circadian arousal may prevent sleep onset from occurring.  Some, but not all, studies have found impaired sleep homeostasis in persons with insomnia (e.g., Besset, Villemin, Tafti, & Billiard, 1998; Stepanski, Zorick, Roehrs, & Roth, 2000). There is a similar lack of consensus in the research about whether circadian rhythm abnormalities play a role in insomnia. Environmentally induced phase shifts, such as those occurring as a result of shift work or jet lag, can cause acute insomnia. There is also evidence that hyperarousal, a central notion in theories of insomnia that we discuss below, may not be a 24-hour issue for some but rather may fluctuate according to circadian influences (Perlis, Smith, & Pigeon, 2005).  Sleep across the Lifespan  Sleep changes across the lifespan. This is very important because it impacts therapists’ expectations of sleep outcomes when working with clients of different ages. With age, slow-wave sleep decreases, while lighter sleep and awakenings become more common across the night. Moreover, both circadian and homeostatic processes are influenced by age. For example, the circadian system grows increasingly less sensitive to zeitgebers such as melatonin and morning light with age (Van Someren, 2000). Throughout adolescence, there is a well-documented circadian shift in favor of later bedtimes and rise times, with a more slowly building homeostatic pressure to fall asleep (Jenni, Achermann, & Carskadon, 2005). This pattern can result in initial insomnia (difficulty falling asleep at night). In middleto- older adulthood, circadian shifts can again favor of early bedtimes and rise times, resulting in terminal insomnia (early morning awakening with difficulty falling back asleep; Ancoli-Israel, 2009). Along with circadian rhythms, the homeostatic process also shows age-dependent changes across the lifespan. Individuals   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  in their 60s and 70s showed reduced homeostatic pressure to sleep and achieve less total sleep time (TST) relative to members of a comparison group in their 20s (Klerman & Dijk, 2008).  the iNsoMNia DiaGNosis  The following section describes diagnostic considerations, reviews prevalence and comorbidity, and presents several models of insomnia that have been influential in conceptualizing CBT-I treatment targets.  There are three main classification systems for sleep disorders: the second edition of the International Classification of Sleep Disorders (ICSD; American Academy of Sleep Medicine, 2005), the Research Diagnostic Criteria (RDC; Edinger et al., 2004), and the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM5; American Psychiatric Association, 2013). Within DSM-5 criteria, a diagnosis of insomnia may be given when there is a subjective complaint of trouble falling or staying asleep. These difficulties must be associated with daytime impairment and must not be better accounted for by another medical or psychiatric condition.   The insomnia diagnostic criteria described earlier have been clarified with quantitative criteria. The quantitative criteria require that self-reported sleep-onset latency (SOL) and/or wake after sleep onset (WASO) must be greater than 30 minutes for at least 3 nights per week over a period of at least 6 months (Lichstein, Durrence, Taylor, Bush, & Riedel, 2003). Note that self-reports of insomnia complaints are sufficient for the diagnosis, without objective evidence for sleep disturbance (see “Assessment” below).  Insomnia Prevalence and Comorbidity  It is estimated that about 6% of the general adult population meets diagnostic criteria for a formal diagnosis of insomnia based on DSM-IV-TR criteria. Approximately 33% of the general population reports some significant symptoms of insomnia. Additionally, as many as 12% of individuals in the general adult population suffer from the daytime sequelae of sleep disturbance (Hohagen et al., 1993; Ohayon, 2002). More recent surveys suggest that health-related costs of insomnia are considerable, regardless of the diagnostic system used to define it (Roth et al., 2011).  Because insomnia can be associated with a wide range of medical illnesses and psychological disorders,  the previous DSM edition (i.e., DSM-IV-TR; American Psychiatric Association, 2000) made distinctions between “primary” and “secondary” or comorbid insomnia. The distinction between primary and secondary insomnia was blurred, however, by epidemiological research suggesting that insomnia may predate, and predict, psychological disorders (Breslau, Roth, Rosenthal, & Andreski, 1996; Ford & Kamerow, 1989). Indeed, a National Institutes of Health (NIH; 2005) state-of-the-science conference concluded that the term “secondary” should be replaced with “comorbid” on the basis of evidence that insomnia comorbid with another disorder likely contributes to the maintenance of the disorder (Harvey, 2001; Smith, Huang, & Manber, 2005). These conclusions were recognized in DSM-5, which does not distinguish between “primary” and “secondary” insomnia, but has only one “insomnia disorder.”  For older adults, insomnia is often accompanied by medical illnesses, which may complicate issues of assessment and treatment, further compounding burden and cost (Morin et al., 2006). In a large epidemiological study, Ford and Kamerow (1989) found that there is approximately a 50% comorbidity rate between insomnia and other psychological disorders or medical illnesses; other studies have yielded a rate as high as 75% (Lichstein, 2000). In cases of comorbid insomnia, additional empirical and clinical attention may be especially important because there appears to be a cyclical influence of sleep disturbance and medical illness or psychological disorders, with worsening sleep problems leading to a decline in general health and increased psychiatric symptoms that, in turn, worsen sleep problems. Fortunately, evidence suggests that insomnia responds to CBT-I treatment even if the accompanying disorder is not under control (Rybarczyk, Lopez, Schelble, & Stepanski, 2005). Smith and colleagues (2005) concluded that treatment effects are generally moderate to large for CBT-I administered in the context of accompanying disorders or illnesses, and are comparable to treatment effects in primary insomnia.   Models of Insomnia  This section begins with a discussion of an influential overarching framework, the Spielman model. We then move on to describe several behavioral, cognitive, and combination models of insomnia that help to explain particular facets of the disorder that should be addressed and treated in CBT-I.   Sleep Disturbance  Spielman’s Three-Factor Model  This is a diathesis–stress model often referred to as the three-factor or the three-P model. According to Spielman, Caruso, and Glovinsky (1987), acute or short-term insomnia occurs as a result of predisposing factors (e.g., traits) and precipitating factors (e.g., life stressors). This acute form can then develop into a chronic or longer-term disorder as a result of perpetuating factors (e.g., poor coping strategies). Predisposing factors (e.g., a tendency to worry) constitute a vulnerability for insomnia, and this vulnerability remains across the life of the disorder. Precipitating factors trigger acute insomnia, but their influence tends to wane over time. In contrast, perpetuating factors take hold of and maintain insomnia. CBT-I targets these perpetuating factors, seeking to reduce the additive effects of predisposing, precipitating, and perpetuating factors below the threshold for insomnia diagnosis.  Behavioral Models  One of the most important behavioral models for insomnia is the stimulus control model (Bootzin, 1972). It is based on the conditioning principle that insomnia occurs when the bed or bedroom ceases to be paired specifically with sleep, but has become paired with many possible responses (e.g., being awake and anxious about not sleeping). As will become evident later in this chapter, this theory has led to the development of “stimulus control,” an intervention with strong efficacy (Morin et al., 2006).  Cognitive Models  Some of the earliest research on cognitive processes in insomnia noted that individuals with insomnia tended to overestimate wakefulness and underestimate TST (Bixler, Kales, Leo, & Slye, 1973; Carskadon et al., 1976), and researchers began to explore the role of cognitive arousal in insomnia (Borkovec, 1982; Lichstein & Rosenthal, 1980). Seminal work in the 1990s highlighted the importance of unhelpful beliefs about sleep (Morin, 1993) and delineated the content of presleep intrusive thoughts (Watts, Coyle, & East, 1994; Wicklow & Espie, 2000). The last decade has ushered in an increase in empirical attention to other cognitive mechanisms in insomnia, including attention to threat and the use of safety behaviors to allay perceived threats (Espie, 2002; Harvey, 2005; Harvey, Tang, & Browning, 2005).  One cognitive model of insomnia aims to specify the cognitive processes that serve to perpetuate insomnia (Harvey, 2002a) and represents an important component of CBT-I as outlined here. According to this conceptualization, contributors to the maintenance of insomnia include the following cascade of cognitive processes that operate at night and during the day: (1) worry and rumination, (2) selective attention and monitoring, (3) misperception of sleep and daytime deficits,  (4) dysfunctional beliefs about sleep (based on Morin, 1993), and (5) counterproductive safety behaviors that serve to maintain beliefs. Many of the specific predictions generated by this model have been empirically tested, leading to refinement of the model (Harvey, 2005) and a new cognitive therapy treatment approach that has preliminary support in an open trial (Harvey, Sharpley, Ree, Stinson, & Clark, 2007). Combination Models  Morin’s (1993) cognitive-behavioral model of insomnia incorporates cognitive, temporal, and environmental variables as both precipitating and perpetuating factors, with hyperarousal as the key precipitating factor of insomnia. Conditioning can then exacerbate this arousal. For example, a person may associate temporal (e.g., bedtime routines) and environmental (e.g., bedroom) stimuli with fear of being unable to sleep. Worry and rumination may then result. Additional perpetuating factors may ensue, including, as in the cognitive model, daytime fatigue, worry, and emotional distress about sleep loss and maladaptive habits (e.g., excessive time in bed).  In summary, adequate treatment of insomnia targets both cognitive and behavioral processes to address their mutually maintaining effects. Each of the models reviewed earlier has been influential in conceptualizing the insomnia diagnosis and identifying treatment targets. In the next section, we review evidence for the effectiveness of CBT-I as a multicomponent treatment for insomnia.  eviDeNce for cBt‑i treatMeNt  CBT-I has been established as an effective treatment in multiple meta-analyses (e.g., Irwin, Cole, & Nicassio, 2006; Montgomery & Dennis, 2003; Morin, Culbert, & Schwartz, 1994; Murtagh & Greenwood, 1995) and in a review by the Standards of Practice Committee of the American Academy of Sleep Medicine (Chesson et   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  al., 1999; Morin et al., 1999), which has been updated (Morin et al., 2006).  A number of randomized controlled trials (RCTs) have compared one or more components of CBT-I to each other and/or to placebo. A recent review found CBT-I to be highly effective and to have sustainable gains over long-term follow-up, up to 24 months in adult and older adult samples (Morin et al., 2006). This review used the American Psychological Association’s Society of Clinical Psychology criteria for wellsupported, empirically based treatments (Chambless & Hollon, 1998) and concluded that these criteria are met by stimulus control, paradoxical intention, relaxation, sleep restriction approaches, and the administration of multiple components in the form of CBT-I. The sleep hygiene intervention alone has not been found to be effective as a treatment for insomnia. Cognitive therapy for insomnia is a promising new approach, but randomized trials are still needed for it to meet criteria for an empirically supported treatment.  There are multiple classes of medications, both prescribed and over the counter, that can be used to treat insomnia (Kryger et al., 2010), including benzodiazepines, nonbenzodiazepine hypnotics (e.g., zolpidem, zaleplon, and eszopiclone), antidepressants (e.g., trazodone and doxepin), and over-the-counter antihistamines (e.g., diphenhydramine and doxylamine). However, there is evidence that nonpharmacological interventions for insomnia are more acceptable to clients (Morin, Gaulier, Barry, & Kowatch, 1992) and produce more durable effects (Morin et al., 2009; Sivertsen et al., 2006) than do hypnotic medications alone. In the case of comorbid insomnia, the optimal intervention would alleviate insomnia without causing adverse interactions with other prescribed medication; therefore, a nonpharmacological intervention may be the best choice for these cases of insomnia (Harvey, 2008).  In summary, CBT-I appears to be an efficacious and promising intervention to address sleep disturbance, particularly in treating comorbid insomnia. In the next section, we discuss treatment objectives, setting, and client–therapist variables that are considered when administering CBT-I.  the coNtext of theraPy  Treatment Objectives and Structure  CBT-I aims to target and reverse the behavioral and cognitive processes that maintain insomnia. This is done in  a time-limited format. Treatment usually comprises six to eight sessions, each 50 minutes in length. Because there are multiple targets to address in a limited period of time, it is essential that treatment be agenda-driven, goal-oriented, and center around an individualized case formulation derived for each client.  The overall treatment structure is illustrated in Figure 16.1. The first session of treatment focuses on explaining treatment rationale and objectives, deriving a case formulation, and providing psychoeducation on sleep and insomnia. This is generally followed by two to three sessions with a behavioral emphasis, and two to three sessions with a cognitive emphasis. However, the therapist will decide whether to pursue behavioral targets or cognitive targets, or some combination of both in tandem, based on the individualized case formulation. For example, a client who presents with excessive worry, rumination, unhelpful beliefs about sleep, and myriad safety behaviors is likely to benefit from treatment that begins with cognitive targets. A client whose sleep disturbance is characterized by schedule irregularity, daytime napping, and excessive time in bed is likely to benefit from treatment that begins with behavioral targets. The final session summarizes tools learned, and anticipates and plans for sleep setbacks.  Setting  The CBT-I overview presented here is an outpatientbased treatment, delivered in an individual rather than group setting. Sessions are typically held weekly. The therapist will find it helpful to have a table on which to spread out materials (diaries, handouts, thought records), along with a calculator to derive weekly sleep averages and sleep efficiency scores. The client is encouraged to keep all treatment-related materials in a binder or folder and reinforced for bringing this weekly to session.  Though treatment is conducted on an individual basis, the social and familial context of the sleep environment should not be ignored. Clients will have bedmates, children, or pets that may disrupt sleep, and often the therapist will have to improvise to adapt treatment guidelines to the lives of individual clients. Social contexts, when used strategically, can also facilitate treatment adherence and behavior change. Encouraging the use of friends, family, and technology to aid in adherence to sleep principles—for example, in regularizing sleep–wake times, sleep restriction, and stimulus control, each of which is described below—can be helpful. Many clients use cell phone alarms as reminders   Sleep Disturbance  Session 1: Introduction • Treatment overview • Case formulation • Goal setting • Motivational Interviewing • Sleep and circadian education  • Sleep restriction • Stimulus control • Sleep hygiene • Wind-down routine • Wake-up routine 3 Sessions: Behavioral Targets • Worry •Attention and monitoring •Unhelpful beliefs about sleep • Safety behaviors • Daytime energy 3 Sessions: Cognitive Targets Session 8: Relapse Prevention • Treatment review • Anticipate obstacles • Lapse vs. relapse • Review goal attainment  figUre 16.1. Treatment flow diagram. Note the practitioner’s discretion in beginning with behavioral or cognitive targets as indicated by case conceptualization.  to begin a wind-down period or to wake up at the same time each morning. Likewise, recruiting the support of family and friends to call or visit in the morning so as to prevent oversleeping, or to respect a “no-calls” period in the hour before bed to promote a relaxing wind down, can be crucial to the success of the strategies.  Client Variables  The treatment described here is for individuals who experience “insomnia,” defined as difficulty falling or staying asleep at least three nights per week. This treatment is equally suitable for men and women. Though we present a treatment here that is suitable for adults, adaptations can be readily made for teenagers (Clarke & Harvey, 2012; Harvey, 2009). This treatment is ef   fective in clients who present with a variety of comorbid diagnoses, including anxiety, depression, and other psychological conditions, along with a variety of medical comorbidities. Special considerations are needed for clients with concurrent alcohol and substance use disorders given their myriad effects on sleep.  Many clients who present for treatment are taking concurrently a sleep medication, either prescribed or over the counter, and many of these medications are taken nightly. Clients may wish to reduce or cease their use of these medications. There is an evidence base for how to approach discontinuation of prescribed medication, and readers are referred to several protocols for more information (Belleville, Guay, Guay, & Morin, 2007; Lichstein et al., 1999). Any change to a prescribed medication regimen is made in collabora    CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  tion with the prescribing provider. Over-the-counter sleeping agents do not appear to have substantial discontinuation effects (Morin, Koetter, Bastien, Ware, & Wooten, 2005) and may be stopped without physician collaboration.  Therapist Variables  It is essential to establish a collaborative working relationship between clinician and client. Along with genuine empathy and support, a strong therapist–client alliance is necessary because much of the treatment depends on the client’s compliance with implementing different clinical recommendations. In this context, the therapist’s role is one of facilitator and problem-solver. He/she provides specific guidelines, instructions, and corrective feedback. Therapy is directive, taskoriented, and teaches clients problem-solving skills to improve sleep and to cope with residual insomnia after completing treatment. In turn, the client is also actively engaged in the therapeutic process and is responsible for implementing clinical procedures.  The treatment is highly structured and requires time, effort, and diligent adherence with homework assignments. This cannot be overemphasized. Although some procedures may initially appear simplistic and straightforward, the client is cautioned that regular and consistent adherence to the entire program, including homework, is the key to successful outcome.  It is often necessary to contrast the CBT-I approach with medication treatment for insomnia. It is essential to point out that, with CBT-I, there is no “quick fix” for chronic insomnia. To avoid premature termination, the client is cautioned that no immediate results should be expected after one or two office visits. A time commitment of 6–8 weeks is required. This time-limited format is emphasized to maximize compliance. Considering that most clients will have suffered with insomnia for years, this represents a very short investment of time.  It is also important to convey a sense of hope and model a positive yet realistic attitude regarding outcome. An occasional poor night of sleep, particularly associated with a stressor, is normal and should be anticipated. Also, it is important to emphasize that a goal of treatment is to equip the client with tools and methods to continue making sleep gains once therapy is over.  Finally, therapists work with clients to encourage a system of regular rewards and positive reinforcement  to facilitate behavior change. Clients can be motivated to comply with treatment recommendations with use of small daily rewards, such as a morning trip to the coffee shop or taking an enjoyable bath. Likewise, therapists are encouraged to highlight successes in sessions rather than failures. For example, if a client’s weekly sleep diary reveals that naps were taken on 4 of 7 days, praise the client for the 3 days naps were not taken, and perhaps do a functional analysis of how naps were avoided. Point out positive nighttime sleep parameters (e.g., reduced time to fall asleep or nighttime wakefulness) on days that naps were not taken.  assessMeNt  Subjective Estimates  As is evident from the DSM-5 criteria, insomnia is defined subjectively. As such, three levels of self-reported sleep data are collected from clients during an assessment for insomnia (see Buysse, Ancoli-Israel, Edinger, Lichstein, & Morin, 2006, for further information on insomnia assessment). First, a clinical sleep history is taken to assess for diagnostic criteria and the presence of comorbid problems. Information gathered includes the duration, frequency, and severity of nighttime sleep disturbance, including estimates of the key sleep parameters: SOL, number of awakenings after sleep onset, total amount of time awake after sleep onset, TST, and an estimate of sleep quality (SQ). Information about the onset and duration of the insomnia and type of symptoms (i.e., sleep onset, sleep maintenance, early morning waking problem, or combinations of these) is collected. A description of the daytime correlates and consequences of insomnia is key. In addition, obtaining information about medications (prescription and over the counter) and screening for the presence of comorbid psychological disorders and medical problems (including other sleep disorders) are also important.  Second, one or more validated measures can be used to index the presence and severity of sleep disturbance (e.g., Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index; Buysse, Reynolds, Monk, Berman, & Kupfer, 1989), insomnia (e.g., Insomnia Severity Index; Bastien, Vallieres, & Morin, 2001), and daytime sleepiness (e.g., Stanford Sleepiness Scale; Hoddes, Zarcone, Smythe, Phillips, & Dement, 1973). The Duke Structured Interview for Sleep Disorders (Edinger et al., 2009), a semistructured interview that assesses research diagnostic criteria for   Sleep Disturbance  sleep disorders, may also be used to establish sleep disturbance diagnoses.  Third, asking the client to complete a sleep diary (Carney et al., 2012) each morning as soon as possible after waking for 2 weeks can provide prospective estimates of sleep. A sleep diary provides a wealth of information, including night-to-night variability in sleeping difficulty and sleep–wake patterns, and can be used to determine the presence of circadian rhythm problems, such as a delayed sleep phase or an advanced sleep phase. Also, sleep diaries reduce several problems associated with the methods just discussed that rely on retrospective report, such as answering on the basis of saliency (i.e., the worst night) or recency (i.e., last night) (Smith, Nowakowski, Soeffing, Orff, & Perlis, 2003). Interestingly, the “enhanced awareness” of sleep patterns facilitated by diary keeping can reduce anxiety over sleep loss and thus contribute to better sleep (Morin, 1993, p. 71). A sample sleep diary is illustrated in Figure 16.2.  Objective Estimates  Polysomnography (PSG) is used to classify sleep into various stages. It involves placing surface electrodes on the scalp and face to measure electrical brain activity, eye movement, and muscle tone. The data obtained are used to classify each epoch by sleep stage and in terms of sleep cycles (NREM and REM). Disadvantages associated with PSG include its expense, discomfort for participants, and labor-intensive nature. Although PSG is not needed for the routine assessment of insomnia (Reite, Buysse, Reynolds, & Mendelson, 1995), it is important if the client is suspected of having a comorbid sleep disorder, such as sleep apnea or periodic limb movement disorder.  Actigraphy is an alternative means of providing an objective estimate of sleep. An actigraph is a small, wrist-worn device that contains a sensor, a processor, and memory storage. The sensor samples physical motion and can be downloaded and analyzed to generate various estimates of sleep parameters, though it cannot differentiate stages of sleep. Correlation between actigraphy- and polysomnography-defined estimates of TST is quite strong, ranging from .88 to .97 in adult nonpatients (Jean-Louis et al., 1997). It is worth noting, however, that actigraphy validation for insomnia patients has been met with variable success. Actigraphy appears to be less accurate in populations with fragmented sleep (Paquet, Kawinska, & Carrier, 2007) and  in periods of quiet wakefulness, such as the sleep-onset period (Lichstein et al., 2006). Numerous studies have documented that actigraphy has a tendency to overestimate TST and underestimate wake time during sleep in insomnia (Lichstein et al., 2006; Vallieres & Morin, 2003). Thus, although actigraphy is not required for the assessment of insomnia and may be subject to overestimation of TST, it nonetheless provides an overview of the sleep–wake cycle in a way that is minimally intrusive (Morgenthaler et al., 2007).  iNtroDuciNG treatMeNt  Following an assessment of insomnia history, severity, and collection of 7–14 days of diary data, a first treatment session with the client should be scheduled. This first session has several critical treatment components: to provide a treatment overview and rationale, to derive an individualized case formulation, and to educate the client about basic sleep processes. After this initial session, behavioral and cognitive processes are selectively targeted. The treatment concludes with a review of tools and a focus on relapse prevention.  Treatment Overview  As a first introduction to treatment, the therapist presents an overview of the therapy in the first session. This can take the following format:  “The treatment that you will receive is called cognitive-behavioral therapy for sleep (CBT for short). CBT is a psychological intervention that is designed to help you change some behaviors (sleep habits, sleep schedules) and thoughts and beliefs (worries about sleeplessness and its consequences) that contribute to and perpetuate your sleep problem. These are selected as the target because research shows this is an effective strategy. The main characteristics of CBT for insomnia are that it is sleepfocused, relatively brief compared to other types of psychotherapy, and you take a very active role in your own treatment. Your treatment will involve six to eight weekly, 50-minute individual therapy sessions. The main agenda of each of these sessions will include reviewing your sleep diary from the previous week, providing practical recommendations and home projects to facilitate changes sleep habits, schedules, beliefs, thoughts, and so forth, and   In the morning, fi ll out the night information for the prior night . . . mo/day Tuesday3/25 / / / / / / / 1. Yesterday, I napped from to (Note the times of all naps.) 1:30 to 2:30 P.M. 2. Yesterday, I took mg of medication and/or oz. of alcohol as sleep aid. Ambien5 mg 3. Last night, I went to bed and turned the lights off at _ o’clock (A.M. or P.M.). 10:45 P.M. 11:15 P.M. 4. After turning the lights off, I fell asleep in minutes. 40 min. 5. My sleep was interrupted times. (Specify number of nighttime awakenings.) 3 6. My sleep was interrupted for minutes. (Specify duration of each awakening.) 1045 7. Last night, I left my bed times. 3 8. This morning, I actually awoke at o’clock. (Note time of last awakening.) 6:15 A.M. 9. This morning I had planned to wake up at o’clock A.M. or P.M. (or leaveblank if you did not plan a specifi c time). 10. This morning, I actually got out of bed at o’clock (specify the time). 6:40 A.M. 11. When I got up this morning I felt . (Answer on a 1- to 5-point scale: 1 = Exhausted, 5 = Refreshed.) 2 12. Overall, my sleep last night was . (Answer on a 1- to 5-point scale: 1 = Restless, 5 = Very sound.) 3  figUre 16.2. Sample sleep diary.  648   Sleep Disturbance  to help you solve problems that may interfere with your progress and homework assignments. The main objective is to help you improve your sleep and your daytime functioning. To achieve these goals, you will be provided with direct guidance, but you will be responsible for implementing the recommendations at home.”  After presenting this overview, the therapist provides additional information about how this intervention was developed and about its clinical effectiveness. This information is useful to enhance treatment credibility and to induce a sense of hope in clients who have longstanding insomnia, and at the same time cautions others against expecting rapid changes in sleep.  ”This treatment has been developed by psychologists as an alternative to medication therapies. It is based on clinical research and has been tested extensively throughout the world. This treatment has been shown effective with hundreds of individuals suffering from insomnia problems similar to yours. This treatment will help improve your sleep and, most importantly, develop self-management skills to regain control of sleep and cope more adaptively with occasional sleep difficulties you may encounter even after completing this program. Although it may take more time to improve your sleep with this approach than with medication, research has shown that CBT produces sleep improvements that are well maintained long after completing treatment.”  Therapists are encouraged to emphasize the collaborative nature of the treatment and the importance of homework as core foundations in treatment. The cornerstone of this approach, which is common to most CBTs, is that the client assumes an active role in his/ her treatment. As such, he/she is encouraged to develop new skills to achieve better control of his/her sleep.  Maintaining a daily sleep diary is an essential requirement of treatment, and this is made very clear during first therapy session. Therapists explain that a daily diary is important to (1) document the nature and severity of the initial sleep problem; (2) assess night-to-night variations in sleep patterns and identify factors that contribute to improved or worsened sleep; (3) monitor treatment progress; and (4) evaluate compliance with treatment procedures. The treatment can become difficult if a client fails to monitor his/her sleep or forgets to bring in his/her diary. As noncompliance with self   monitoring is likely related to noncompliance with treatment procedures, therapists are encouraged to address this issue up front if it becomes a problem. There is no need for the client to monitor the clock in order to provide accurate times. Only one’s “felt sense” of the timing of sleep is needed. If self-monitoring is overlooked on a particular day, clients should be discouraged from going back and estimating sleep parameters retrospectively. Compliance with the diary daily is often enhanced when completion time and place is identified. For example, the client and therapist can discuss a time (breakfast) and location (kitchen) for filling in the diary.  Functional Analysis and Case Formulation  To derive a case formulation, the therapist and client discuss frequency, intensity, and duration of insomnia and its antecedents. Sleep-related behaviors and consequences are assessed: before bed (e.g., bedtime routine), during the night (e.g., cell phone left on), on waking (e.g., sleepiness, lethargy) and during the day (e.g., caffeine use, napping). The relationship between sleepspecific thoughts, emotions, and behaviors is charted across the night and day. Figure 16.3 is an example of a case conceptualization form for the nighttime period.  The case formulation is designed to elicit the client’s curiosity about his/her sleep and to start forming a picture of what is going on. The therapist can introduce the exercise as follows:  “It will be helpful in planning our sessions together to get a very detailed picture of what the experience of insomnia is like for you, almost like putting your sleep under a microscope. The way we do this is by identifying together a recent typical night and then after that a recent typical day. I’ll ask you lots of questions about each, so that I can get a sense of the kind of things that are going on. It’s like a fingerprint, everyone is a bit different so the treatment needs to be a bit different. Would that be all right?”  The first step is to help the client to choose a very specific recent example of an “insomnia episode” during the night. Make sure you work on deriving only one model (i.e., either the day or the night) at a time. A very specific episode is a situation that happened on one particular day and at a particular time. Be sure to check in regularly to ensure that the night was typical. Sometimes a selected night or day is not typical or it was not very distressing. The therapist should stop that   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  Antecedents  Typical Thursday, nothing unusual   Situation  Woke up at 2:00 am   Thoughts  Oh my God, it’s 2:00 am. I won’t be able to cope tomorrow, and I’ve   got such a big day ahead, with so much to do!   Feelings and Arousal  Anxious Frustrated Scared   Monitoring Safety Behaviors/Responses  Look at clock Stayed in bed Notice tension in neck Turned on TV Notice eyelids not heavy   Outcome: All of this made it hard to get back to sleep!  figUre 16.3. Case conceptualization form completed for the night.   Sleep Disturbance  model as soon as this becomes apparent and start again with a typical, distressing night. Examples of some very specific recent episodes may include “Last Tuesday night I worked until 1:00 A.M. and then I couldn’t get to sleep” or “On Friday at work I had a terrible day, I felt sick, looked terrible and performed badly.” Spend a few minutes asking information-gathering questions to explore the content of the nighttime or daytime model. The aim of this initial discussion is to obtain a very detailed description of exactly what happened, along with the consequences of it. The following is an example of a client who awoke at 2:00 A.M. (Figure 16.3):  tHeraPist: What woke you up?  client: Don’t know.  tHeraPist: How did you know what time it was?  client: I looked at my clock and saw it was 2:00 A.M.  tHeraPist: When you looked at the clock and noticed it was 2:00 A.M. what ran through your mind?  client: I thought, “Oh my God.”  tHeraPist: OK, so you looked at the clock and noticed it was 2:00 A.M. and you thought “Oh my God.” Could you tell me more? What do you mean by “Oh my God?”  client: Oh my, I won’t cope tomorrow, I’ve got such a big day ahead with so much to do.  tHeraPist: So when you thought, “Oh my, I’ve got such a big day ahead with so much to do,” how did you feel?  client: Really anxious.  Drawing on classic treatment development work by David M. Clark’s team (Clark et al., 1999, 2006), the following are useful questions to ask when deriving the model. The following illustrates questions for nighttime models, with analogous daytime questions in brackets [ ]:  For identifying negative thoughts:  •• “What went through your mind/what were you thinking before getting into bed [on waking], as you got into bed [as you got ready for the day], and as you noticed you weren’t getting to sleep [weren’t performing well]?”  •• “What did you think would happen as a result?” •• “What would that mean? What would be so bad about that?”  For identifying safety behaviors: •• “When you thought X might happen, did you do anything to try to prevent it from happening?” •• “Is there anything you do to ensure you get to sleep [perform well during the day]?”  For identifying feelings: •• “When you are afraid that X will happen, what do you notice happening in your body?” •• “What kind of emotions do you have as you think X?” •• “How about your energy level?”  For identifying monitoring: •• “How did you know that X would happen?” •• “How did you determine or measure how close to falling asleep you were or what the time was [that you were feeling so tired]?” •• “How do you monitor/measure when the insomnia is back?” •• “How do you know that you hadn’t fallen asleep [were still tired]?”  It is important for the therapist to ask questions to illustrate the cyclical relationship among thoughts, feelings, and behaviors that is often evident in insomnia. These questions focus on the arrows. It is often important to connect “monitoring” and “safety behaviors” back to thoughts. Here are some questions that will help:  For connecting thoughts, feelings and behaviors:  •• “When you are concentrating on (give examples of monitoring, like looking at the clock), what thoughts occur to you? Anything run through you mind?”  •• “When you are concentrating on (give examples of safety behaviors, like remaining in bed for long periods of time), what is its impact on your getting back to sleep?”  •• “When you monitor these things (when you cope by doing X), does that help you worry less or does it trigger more worries?”  Drawing out the consequences:  •• “Does watching out for fatigue and tension have any consequences [for your day]?” •• “Were there any consequences of these thoughts,   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  emotions or behaviors for getting back to sleep [how the rest of your day went]?”  Once the model has been derived, the therapist shares the personalized version with the client, asking for feedback and reactions. The therapist might say the following:  “This has been very helpful. Let me show you what I have been scribbling here, and I’d like for you to give me feedback about which parts I understand and which parts I have got wrong. This is so similar to what we very often find. These kinds of thoughts [name some] seem to lead to these kinds of feelings [name them]. Both put together make it difficult to sleep. On top of that, the thoughts and feelings can put us into a state of vigilance. Then we start monitoring the environment and our bodies [name some examples of the kinds of monitoring in which client engages], which often triggers more thoughts, which triggers more feelings. Then, very understandably, we try to cope by doing things like [name some of the safety behaviors]. Now some of these really are likely to be helpful in getting us back to sleep, but sometimes during the treatment we will test out the extent to which they are helpful by doing an experiment, to double check. That’s why we call them safety behaviors. Safety behaviors are things that people do in order to try and fix the problem they have but which, inadvertently, sometimes contribute to the problem. We may test out whether these behaviors are helpful or unhelpful. How does this model fit for you?”  Once the model has been completed, it is important to ask clients if they can think of ways to intervene. If an area is identified, draw a double line across the maintaining arrows to visually represent cutting into the cycle. Most often clients are not able to come up with ways to intervene, so the therapist can help them by saying something like the following:  “I suggest that one of our targets be these thoughts .. . if we can change them we will change your feelings. This alone will be very helpful for helping you get back to sleep. In addition, we’ll also target the monitoring. When we change the monitoring people typically feel much more relaxed and sleep much better. Then, as I have already said, if you are interested, we’ll test with experiments the things you are doing  to cope right now, just in case some are feeding into the cycle.”  Summarize by pointing out that a change in one or more parts of the perpetuating cycle will shift the system.  Goal Setting  Once the case conceptualization/insomnia models are derived, specific goals are collaboratively identified and written down in session. Goals are clearly stated (e.g., “falling asleep within 30 minutes each night” instead of “falling asleep more quickly at night”) and feasible (e.g., “sleeping through the night with only several brief awakenings” instead of “sleeping through the night without waking,” as the latter is not biologically feasible). Practitioners and clients can establish goals for both the nighttime (falling asleep, staying asleep, advancing bedtime) and the daytime (increasing energy, reducing caffeine consumption). Goals are revisited briefly midway through treatment and at the conclusion of treatment.  Therapy goals are set in Session 1 but may need to be reevaluated and readjusted periodically as the intervention unfolds. It is important to set realistic, operational, and well-defined goals. Goal setting is useful to keep the therapy focused. By setting well-defined goals, the therapeutic alliance remains oriented to the client’s needs and desires and minimizes diversion to irrelevant materials. It also provides useful information about the client’s sleep expectations, which sometimes need to be adjusted during the goal setting process.  Motivational Interviewing  Motivational interviewing (MI) is a communication method that emphasizes accepting the client as an individual, avoiding argumentation/lectures, and focusing on the process of eliciting and shaping language in favor of change (i.e., change talk; Miller & Rollnick, 2002). MI also includes regular, straightforward reviews of perceived pros and cons of change because many sleep-incompatible/interfering behaviors are rewarding.   A straightforward review of perceived pros and cons of the change is conducted. For example, clients often struggle with waking up at around the same time on both weekdays and weekends. Allowing the client to generate advantages and disadvantages with therapist guidance facilitates behavior change. MI is revisited   Sleep Disturbance  in future sessions as additional strategies are introduced.   Sleep and Circadian Education  Education on the circadian system and homeostatic sleep drive (see the earlier “Sleep and Insomnia” section) is presented to the client. This underscores the following two points: (1) Going to bed and waking up at the same time each day helps the circadian system adapt to the 24-hour sleep–wake cycle; and (2) daytime napping disrupts the natural buildup of homeostatic sleep pressure. Individuals across the age range may also benefit from education about specific changes in sleep across the lifespan. In adolescence and young adulthood, understanding the biological shift toward later bedtimes and rise times with puberty is helpful for later intervention. Likewise, explaining to adults that sleep grows lighter and more fragmented with age, and that sleep needs change with age, such that 7 hours of sleep per night may be sufficient, can go a long way to normalize and lay the foundation for intervention.  Behavioral coMPoNeNts  Sleep Restriction  Sleep restriction, as developed by Spielman and colleagues (1987), rests on the general premise that time in bed should be limited to maximize the sleep drive, and so that the association between the bed and sleeping is strengthened. This behavioral treatment begins with a reduction of time spent in bed, so that time in bed is equivalent to the time the client estimates he/ she spends sleeping. Thus, for instance, if an individual gets approximately 6 hours of sleep per night (an average across the week based on sleep diaries), but usually spends about an additional 2 hours trying to get to sleep, the sleep restriction therapy would begin by limiting his/her time spent in bed to 6 hours. This initial reduction in time spent in bed is intended to heighten a person’s homeostatic sleep drive (Perlis & Lichstein, 2003) and reduce the association between the bed and wakefulness. Following this restriction, sleep gradually becomes more efficient, at which point time spent in bed is gradually increased.  Practitioners begin sleep restriction by calculating TST, time in bed, and sleep efficiency based on the prior week’s sleep diary. “Sleep efficiency” is defined  as TST divided by time in bed, multiplied by 100 to form a percentage. So, in the previous example, if a client sleeps an average of 6 hours per night over the week and spends an average of 8 hours in bed, sleep efficiency for the week will be (6 ÷ 8) × 100, or 75%. The goal is to increase sleep efficiency to more than 85–90%. The therapist would set a “sleep window” equal to the prior week’s TST (6 hours), choosing a bedtime and rise time with the client (e.g., 12:00 A.M. to 6:00 A.M.). Once sleep efficiency reaches 85%, client and therapist can gradually expand the window (e.g., by 30 minutes per week) toward an optimal sleep time.  Clients are often hesitant about implementing sleep restriction. Many individuals with insomnia believe that they need to spend a great deal of time in bed in order to “catch” a minimum amount of sleep. Still others worry about the short-term sleep deprivation that sleep restriction is likely to impart—after all, clients are presenting with the desire to get more sleep, and sleep restriction is a strategy that, in the short term, is likely to give them less. Explain to the client that his/ her brain and body have developed habits that lead to time awake in bed and poor sleep efficiency. Sleep restriction is the most effective way to improve sleep efficiency by consolidating sleep time. Tell the client that, although initially he/she may not get more sleep, his/her sleep quality and sleep efficiency will likely improve. These are the first steps to remedying sleep problems. Reassure the client that, as his/her sleep efficiency improves, you will be expanding the “sleep window” to allow for more time in bed.  Stimulus Control  The rationale for stimulus control therapy lies in the notion that insomnia is a result of conditioning that occurs when the bed becomes associated with inability to sleep. The bed, bedtime, and bedroom have lost their properties previously associated with sleep, and the main therapeutic goal is to reestablish or strengthen the associations between sleep and the stimulus conditions under which it typically occurs. As described by Bootzin, Epstein, and Wood (1991), stimulus control requires clients to comply with a series of specific behavioral recommendations. These recommendations, along with suggestions for introducing them, are outlined below.  •• Only go to bed when sleepy. To reestablish the association between the bed and sleep, clients are   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  instructed to go to bed and to stay in bed only when sleepy and when sleep is imminent. Therapists explain that “sleepy” is different from “tired,” and that although an individual may feel tired in the evening, he/she must wait until he/she feels sleepy before getting into bed. Note that, if a sleep window has been set as part of sleep restriction (described earlier), the client is instructed to remain awake until the start of the sleep window, even if he/she feels sleepy.  •• Get out of bed if unable to fall asleep. Because time spent awake in bed can often be associated with worry, rumination, and arousal, clients are instructed to leave the bed if they do not fall asleep within 15–20 minutes, returning to bed only when they feel sleepy. This may be introduced in session as follows:  “If you are unable to fall asleep or return to sleep within 15–20 minutes, get out of bed, go into another room, and engage in a quiet activity that you find relaxing. You can read, listen to music, do a crossword puzzle, or find something else that is nonarousing. Return to bed only when sleepy, and repeat this step as often as necessary throughout the night—so that anytime you wake up and are awake for more than 20 minutes, you will be getting out of bed and going to another room. This regimen will help reassociate your bed/bedroom with falling asleep quickly.”  •• Therapists can brainstorm relaxing activities with clients and write them down in session, listening carefully for and discouraging potentially stimulating activities (Web browsing, watching certain TV programs, cleaning the house). Emphasize to clients that it will be difficult to comply with this recommendation. Encourage clients to put warm clothing by the bed to increase the desire to get out of bed. Brainstorm with clients who live in studios or single rooms to find an alternate place (a chair or pillow on the floor) to go to when getting out of bed.  •• Keep the bedroom for sleep and sex. Eliminate all sleep-incompatible activities (upsetting conversations, studying, watching TV) from the bed and bedroom. Many individuals get into bed early and read or watch TV in order to facilitate sleep onset. Remind clients that this time in bed spent awake, however, dilutes the association between the bed and sleep.  •• Discourage napping. Explain to clients that napping can offset homeostatic sleep pressure, making  it more difficult to fall asleep or stay asleep at night. Often it can be helpful to point to specific examples in the sleep diaries where a daytime nap led to greater difficulty falling asleep, or more wakefulness throughout the night, to illustrate this point. If clients regularly nap at a certain time, brainstorm activities that can be scheduled as an alternative. Tell clients that although naps may feel helpful in the short term, they can disrupt sleep–wake rhythms and perpetuate insomnia in the long term.  Sleep Hygiene  Information about sleep and sleep incompatible behaviors, and the daytime consequences of sleep disturbance, is often given to inform clients of the basic steps that they can take to improve their sleep. Interventions targeting sleep hygiene are behavioral in nature and target sleep-incompatible routines. Sleep hygiene interventions typically include the following components (Morin & Espie, 2003). First, education on the sleepdisrupting effects of alcohol, tobacco, and caffeine use are introduced to the client, who is encouraged to avoid caffeine in the evening and alcohol/tobacco at bedtime. Clients are encouraged to have a small snack before bedtime but to avoid heavy meals. Likewise, exercise is known to enhance sleep continuity and quality, and is recommended to client; exercising within several hours of bedtime, however, can delay sleep onset. Finally, the client is encouraged to keep the bedroom environment quiet, dark, and cool. Although sleep hygiene education is typically included as one component of CBT-I, its use as the sole intervention in treating insomnia has not been empirically supported (Morin et al., 2006).  Wind Down, Wake Up, and Regularity  Wind-Down Routine  Clients need assistance to devise a “wind down” of 30–60 minutes in which relaxing, sleep-enhancing activities are introduced in dim lighting conditions. A regular wind-down routine is beneficial across multiple domains: It promotes relaxation, increases positive associations with the bed/bedtime, and, when done in dim lighting conditions, helps the circadian phase advance in clients who are evening-types, maintaining entrainment (Wyatt, Stepanski, & Kirkby, 2006). Activities that are encouraged in the wind-down routine include reading, grooming/hygiene, bathing, complet    Sleep Disturbance  ing a light crossword, listening to soft music, and other relaxing activities of the client’s choosing. A central issue is the use of interactive electronic media (Internet browsing, cell phone use, social networking). Though clients may acknowledge that these activities are stimulating, they may be reluctant to surrender them in the period before sleep. MI can often be helpful given that many clients are socially isolated and rely on prebedtime, Internet-based social interaction. A behavioral experiment stretching across the week (e.g., three nights of bedtime “as usual” followed by three nights with a “wind-down routine,” with daily ratings of prebedtime relaxation and SOL) can be helpful to illustrate the sleep-promoting effects of a good wind-down routine (Harvey & Talbot, 2012a). Many clients voluntarily choose an electronics curfew and time at which the wind down will commence, opting to set an alarm on a cell phone as a reminder.  Wake-Up Routine  As mentioned earlier, clients benefit from education about sleep inertia upon waking, and about behaviors that can increase or decrease sleep inertia. Helpful behaviors to curb sleep inertia include not hitting “snooze,” exposure to sunlight upon waking (e.g., opening the curtains to let sunlight in, eating breakfast outside), encouraging morning physical activity, showering, listening to upbeat music, and encouraging social contact. Behavioral recommendations may be introduced to combat the desire to sleep in, including placing an alarm away from the bed so that it is necessary to rise to turn it off, and making the bed, so the incentive to get back in bed is reduced. Encouragement from family and friends can also help a person to comply with morning rise times.  Regularizing and Shifting Sleep and Wake Times  Regularizing sleep and wake times across the week can be a helpful intervention, particularly if schedule variability appears to be a prominent feature of the sleep disturbance. Building motivation for the client to wake at the same time, including on weekends (Crowley & Carskadon, 2010) is a key focus. This promotes consistent sleepiness in the evening, particularly when naps are avoided.  Often it is helpful to frame schedule variability around the phenomenon of “jet lag” as follows:  tHeraPist: Have you ever experienced jet lag?  client: Yes, I have.  tHeraPist: When was the last time?  client: Oh, I guess the last time was flying out east to visit relatives.  tHeraPist: What did you notice?  client: Let’s see . . . I felt kind of out of it, like I couldn’t focus. It was difficult to fall asleep, even more than it usually is for me!  tHeraPist: And flying out east . . . that’s a 3-hour time difference from here, correct?  client: Yes.  tHeraPist: Let’s take a look at your sleep diary from last week. What do you notice from weekday to weekend?  client: Well . . . I went to bed at 2:00 A.M. on Friday and Saturday because I went out both nights. And I guess I slept in as a result.  tHeraPist: And what time did you go to bed on Sunday and Monday?  client: Looks like I tried to sleep at 11:00 P.M. because I have to get up for work.  tHeraPist: So you just went from 2:00 A.M. on the weekend to 11:00 P.M. on the weekday. You just flew across the country!  client: Huh. I guess I never thought of it that way.  tHeraPist: No wonder you had difficulty falling asleep on Sunday and Monday. Your body was jet lagged, and with the “time change” it was hard to fall asleep.  client: No wonder I have so much trouble on Sunday nights!  For clients who wish to advance their sleep schedules, we work to achieve behavioral adjustments to adapt to earlier bedtimes. We do this in small, systematic shifts (e.g., by advancing bedtime by 20–30 minutes each week) to ensure mastery. We encourage exposure to light upon waking, which will help the circadian system advance, and work with clients to minimize variability around wake times. We reassure clients that any sleep pressure (i.e., sleep loss) accumulated initially with bedtime advancement will actually help the sleep schedule align by increasing likelihood of earlier sleep onset on subsequent nights.   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  coGNitive coMPoNeNts  Worry  It is well established that individuals with chronic insomnia worry while in bed about a range of topics, including the failure to fall asleep (Harvey, 2002b; Wicklow & Espie, 2000). Cognitive models implicating worry (e.g., Harvey, 2002a) posit that worry activates the sympathetic nervous system and corresponding physiological arousal, which hinders sleep onset (Espie, 2002). Therefore, an intervention targeting worry is an important clinical area in the treatment of insomnia.  Following well-established cognitive therapy approaches (Beck, 1995; Young, Rygh, Weinberger, & Beck, Chapter 7, this volume), the first step in addressing worry involves education on negative automatic thoughts (NATs) and mistakes in thinking. NATs can be introduced to clients as follows:  tHeraPist: Imagine there are two people outside of a movie theater, each waiting for a friend to arrive. The friend is late, and these two people have been waiting. Person 1 is thinking, “Gosh, I wonder why she is late. I hope everything is all right with her! Did she get into an accident on her way over?” Person 2 is thinking, “Gosh, I can’t believe she is late. She always does this. She has no respect for my time. She is not a good friend.” What kinds of emotions do you think Person 1 is feeling?  client: Probably some fear and concern.  tHeraPist: Right. And what about Person 2?  client: (chuckling) Anger, and maybe resentment.  tHeraPist: Exactly! So two people in the same situation can have very different emotional responses to an event based on what they were thinking. In other words, our thoughts can directly influence our emotions. Often we have dozens of thoughts, in rapid succession, and we don’t even realize it. We accept them at face value without stopping to look at them. We’re going to look for, and respond to, some sleeprelated automatic thoughts over the next few weeks.  The therapist then provides further education on automatic thoughts: (1) They are often a train of thought that runs parallel with spoken thought; (2) we are often not fully aware of them; (3) automatic thoughts are extremely rapid, and sometimes only a few words rather than sentences; (4) they do not arise as a result of delib   eration but just happen like a reflex; (5) they are often difficult to turn off; (6) we often accept their validity without stopping to question them; and (7) they often precede a powerful emotion. The therapist should underscore the point that we have hundreds and hundreds of NATs each day, and it is often helpful to look for NATs by paying attention to changes in emotion.  The therapist next works with a client to identify a recent powerful emotion from the previous 2 days, and use the emotion as the starting place to uncover related NATs. These are written down on a simple threecolumn form (Situation–Thoughts–Emotions). The client is asked to practice identifying additional NATs over the week by paying attention to changes in emotion and writing them down on the three-column form, emphasizing insomnia-related NATs (“I’m exhausted” or “I won’t be able to cope today”). The therapist also provides psychoeducation on common cognitive distortions (black-and-white thinking, catastrophizing, personalizing, mistaking feelings for facts, etc.) and asks clients to categorize some of the NATs they spot over the week.  At the following session, the practitioner reviews the client’s three-column NAT form and has a brief discussion/ review of NATs and NAT themes. The practitioner then introduces an extended thought record that guides the client in evaluating the validity of the thought with a series of questions, including evidence for–against the thought; alternative ways of interpreting the thought; considering the worst that could happen and whether the client would be able to live through it; the helpfulness of the thought and the effect of thinking in this manner; how others might see the situation; how important the thought will be when the client is 80; and whether the thought falls into one of the “mistakes in thinking.” Client and therapist pick a NAT together and work through the form together in session.  Once the client has fully grasped this procedure, the therapist assigns as homework completing one extended record daily or, at the very least, several examples each week. This is continued for several weeks. The therapist provides the following rationale for continuing to fill out the extended record on a daily basis: (1) By observing, reporting and evaluating NATs, it is easier to see them objectively and to get some distance from them; (2) observing, reporting, and evaluating NATs presents an opportunity to test their reality/logic and recognize that thoughts can be unreliable; and most importantly, (3) because it takes a long time to change thinking habits that have been around for many years,   Sleep Disturbance  reversing the old habits will take practice. Completing one form daily over a period of weeks will make the new style of thinking habitual.  Helpful and Unhelpful Worry Strategies  A menu of other worry interventions is offered, so that the client gets to create a personalized list of helpful and unhelpful strategies to manage worry. Unhelpful strategies might include suppression (Harvey, 2003a), positive beliefs about worry (Harvey, 2003b), and “why” questions (Watkins & Baracaia, 2001). For suppression, introduce the adverse consequences of thought suppression whenever it becomes relevant, sometimes as early as Session 1. For example, as soon as the client mentions something along the lines of “I try to suppress my thoughts” or “I clear my mind,” the therapist can do an in-session “white bear experiment” (“For the next minute, let’s close our eyes and think about whatever we’d like, anything except a big white fluffy bear”) to illustrate paradoxical effects of thought suppression. This helps the client become aware that suppression often leads to “thought rebound” or monitoring for the suppressed thought, which makes it more likely to occur. A helpful assessment for suppression and other thought control strategies is available (Ree, Harvey, Blake, Tang, & Shawe-Taylor, 2005). Therapists should also be on the lookout for clients who hold positive beliefs about the utility of presleep worry. Therapists can use Socratic questioning to discuss the pros and cons of presleep worry, or consider doing behavioral experiments to collect data on whether positive beliefs about worrying in bed are helpful or not. Finally, “why” questions are often implicated in the presentation of insomnia. Many clients ask questions such as “Why am I awake?” or “Why don’t I sleep as well as my partner?” Give your client the rationale that experimental studies suggest that “why” questions block processing and promote rumination.  After reviewing what not to do to manage worry, consider alternative, more helpful thought management strategies with the client. First, suggest the idea of not controlling or suppressing thoughts. Do the opposite— let them come. Let them drift in and out. Letting the thoughts come and go may give the thoughts less strength and power, and may even move them into the category of being boring. Another helpful alternative involves catching the thoughts and evaluating them with the extended thought record described earlier. Introducing the importance of a wind-down or buffer  zone to process and disengage from the day can be a helpful response to worry. Finally, practice “savoring” to focus on the positives in the client’s life. Savoring involves attending to, appreciating, and enhancing positive experiences the client has had during the day. It can be a small/everyday event like looking out the window and noticing the lovely trees and flowers, reminiscing over a favorite vacation, or anticipating a family reunion or a date with one’s spouse/partner. Encourage the client to focus on the positive experience, and when negative thoughts arise, return to the positive experience and savor it. The rationale is to associate bedtime with positive thoughts. Work with your client in the session to identify times in the present, past, and future that he/she can savor. Practice savoring together in the session and allow the client to reflect on the experience.  Set one or more of these alternative strategies as homework, introducing it as a behavioral experiment. Behavioral experiments, explained in Table 16.1, are powerful methods used across all of the cognitive components of CBT-I. (For further reading on behavioral experiments, see Perlis, Aloia, & Kuhn, 2012; Ree & Harvey, 2004a.) The goal is to give the client some experience and practice with each. Feel free to follow-up with additional experiments in subsequent sessions if needed.  Attention and Monitoring  As noted earlier, a number of studies have documented that individuals with insomnia underestimate their sleep time and overestimate time spent awake at night (e.g., Harvey & Tang, 2012). Individuals may become more anxious about their perceived sleep problem, and with increased vigilance towards the sleep state, may draw inaccurate conclusions about their prior sleep. Likewise, individuals may monitor for signs of daytime fatigue. A helpful measure of sleep-related monitoring is available (Neitzert Semler & Harvey, 2004). Behavioral experiments, both in and out of session, can be introduced to illustrate the effects of attentional bias and monitoring (Harvey & Talbot, 2012b; Ree & Harvey, 2004a).  To introduce the concept of monitoring, the therapist may wish to do the following:  tHeraPist: Close your eyes and focus on your knee joints and the sensations that are there. I’ll do it, too. Let’s both take 2 minutes to do this. (after 2 minutes) What did you notice?   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  table 16.1. steps involved in Creating, testing, and Processing behavioral experiments  Steps and description Example •• Step 1. Identify the thought, belief, behavior, or process Victor is unsure as to whether looking at the clock as he falls asleep the experiment will target. The rationale for completing the is helpful. He believes that knowing the time, and calculating how experiment, along with the target or aim, should be clear. much time he has left to sleep, may increase his anxiety at night; Targets can include challenging an unhelpful belief/behavhowever, he also feels that not knowing the time could increase ior or testing a new belief/behavior. The target is written worry and anxiety throughout the night. Victor and his therapist set down in session. out to test the following: “Is looking at the clock at night helpful or harmful to my sleep?” •• Step 2. Collaborate to brainstorm ideas for an experi-Victor and his therapist agree to set up an experiment to test the ment. Encourage clients to be specific, defining a place and impact of clock watching on sleep. They agree to spend 3 nights time for the experiment. Get creative and arouse clients’ watching the clock as usual, followed by 3 nights without looking curiosity. Be open and flexible to ideas the clients have, as at the clock. Victor states that he will be tempted to turn the clock this may increase motivation to complete the experiment. around on the “no-clock” nights, so he and his therapist collabora- Clients sometimes enjoy giving their experiments creative tively brainstorm to move the clock across the room to reduce this titles. temptation. •• Step 3. Write down predictions about the outcome and Victor has the following prediction: “Not looking at the clock at devise a method to record the outcome as soon as possible night will increase my anxiety and keep me up longer because I’ll after the experiment is completed. This is very important: be wondering what time it is all night.” He and his therapist decide A delay in recording the outcome could lead to vague and to record “last night’s anxiety” on a scale of 1–10 immediately upon inaccurate memory of the experiment itself. waking and use the sleep diary to look at time it takes to fall asleep. •• Step 4. Anticipate problems and brainstorm solutions. Ask Victor and his therapist discuss obstacles to completing the experiyour client what might prevent him/her from completing ment. Victor has a party to attend on one of the nights, which will this experiment. Identify obstacles and collaborate on how delay his bedtime slightly; he and his therapist decide to skip the to overcome them. If the experiment centers around a new clock-watching experiment on this “nontypical” night and complete skill, practice the skill together in session before making it it the other six nights of the week. a part of the experiment. •• Step 5. Conduct the experiment. Victor spends 3 nights looking at the clock and 3 nights not looking at the clock, recording anxiety and standard sleep variables on his sleep diary. •• Step 6. Review the experiment. Ask your client to summa-Clock nights: rize main points he/she has learned from the experiment. Anxiety ratings (on a scale of 1–10): 8, 6, 7 Assist him/her in filling in gaps, and write out conclusions Time to fall asleep (in minutes): 120, 45, 60 together. Remind your client of the conclusions drawn from each experiment in future sessions. If the outcome is other than anticipated, ask follow-up questions to review any factors (mood, behavior, cognitions) that may have No-clock nights: Anxiety ratings (on a scale of 1–10): 10, 6, 4 Time to fall asleep (in minutes): 140, 50, 15 influenced the outcome in a manner other than expected. Typically, via careful questioning, learning can be derived from an experiment regardless of the outcome. At first glance, the numbers above do not appear to “solve” the experiment one way or the other. However, with careful questioning, a subsequent testable hypothesis is generated. Victor reports that his anxiety levels and length of time to fall asleep were consistent on the clock-watching nights. On the no-clock nights, Victor reports that his anxiety was initially very high as he wondered what time it was; by the third day, however, he acknowledged hardly thinking about the time. Victor and his therapist discuss the possibility that he was experiencing initial anxiety with the new behavioral change, and speculate that he may need more time in the no-clock condition to “get used to” the shift. •• Step 7. Identify follow-up experiments if needed. If the Victor and therapist decide to extend the “no-clock” condition for experiment was not completed in full, or if the outcome another week, still rating anxiety and time to fall asleep immediwas ambiguous and/or raised another question, return to ately upon waking. Step 1 and devise a further experiment.   Sleep Disturbance  client: Hmm .. . some tingling, and pins and needles. Mild pain maybe.  tHeraPist: Imagine for a moment there was a lot of research to indicate that the things you mention are soft signs of a serious immune system disease. If you believed this were true, how would this impact your attention for the rest of the day?  client: I’d be paying attention to my knee all day! tHeraPist: And how would you feel about those sensations? client: Well, concerned, I guess. Wondering if they had gotten worse. tHeraPist: What if your sleep is like that knee? And the more you look out for symptoms of tiredness or fatigue, the more they appear?  The therapist can use this dialogue to brainstorm with the client about the monitoring in which he/she may engage during the day and night. Then, the therapist can introduce one or more of the following behavioral experiments to assess monitoring.  Monitoring for Fatigue  Go for a brief walk together in session. Instruct the client to spend 5 minutes focusing internally to monitor how his/her body feels, paying particular attention to signs of tiredness and fatigue. Ask your client to rate how tired he/she feels. Then spend 5 minutes focusing externally on the trees, flowers, and sky. Ask your client to again rate how tired he/she feels. Go back to your office to debrief.  Monitoring for Sounds  To instruct the client about monitoring at night it is often helpful to use the metaphor of a “radar.” One client who monitored for the garbage truck had her “radar” on all night for the sound of the garbage truck. She would wake up to many sounds during the night and think, “Oh no, it is the garbage truck, it must already be 5:00  A.M. I’m never going to get enough sleep.” This thought led to anxiety that made it difficult for her to get back to sleep. We used multiple strategies to address this monitoring: (1) evaluating whether hearing the garbage truck was really an indication of wakefulness or whether the truck could have caused the client to wake from a light sleep; (2) discussing the pros and cons of having a “radar” on during the night; and (3) asking the client to listen to sounds in the room, and further away, in the adjacent room, and still further away, to sounds on the road, and to sounds further away yet again, encouraging habituation to the full range of sounds.  Monitoring Physical Appearance  One client with whom we worked used to complain about her physical appearance on the days following poor nights of sleep. She would wake up and immediately look in the mirror, noticing bags under her eyes. When asked how bad the bags were on days when she had not slept poorly, the client admitted she never really looked for them. We devised a behavioral experiment whereby she was to look at the bags under her eyes upon waking every day of the week, regardless of how she had slept, and rate the appearance of baggy eyes. The client found that her bags did not really change from morning to morning, and that she had really just ignored them on days when her sleep was not poor.  Monitoring the Clock  Paying attention to the clock throughout the night can increase anxiety and vigilance, interfering with sleep. Client and therapist can create an experiment whereby the clock is displayed in full view 3 nights of the week, then hidden from view (i.e., turned to face the wall or placed under the bed) for 3 nights. Ask the client to rate overall anxiety about the prior night’s sleep in the morning and record it on the sleep diary. The sleep diary can then be reviewed in the following session to compare anxiety and wakefulness on clock-watching nights versus clock-hidden nights.  Unhelpful Beliefs about Sleep  In seminal research on insomnia from the 1990s, Morin (e.g., 1993) highlighted the role of unhelpful beliefs about sleep. It has been suggested that these unhelpful beliefs may exacerbate intrusive and worrisome thoughts throughout the day and night, contributing to the development and maintenance of sleep disturbance (Harvey, 2002a). An unhelpful belief about insomnia might take the form of an individual believing that he/ she needs to sleep through the night with no awakenings to feel refreshed. Such a belief is unhelpful in that awakenings are a natural part of nocturnal sleep (e.g., Akerstedt et al., 2002); worry related to this belief   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  might take the form of an individual who, once awakened at night, believes that this fragmented sleep will result in impaired work performance the following day. One large-scale correlational study (Jansson & Linton, 2007) surveyed unhelpful beliefs about sleep, depression, anxiety, and arousal at two time points spaced 1 year apart. The researchers found that unhelpful beliefs about sleep—in particular, beliefs about the longterm negative consequences of insomnia—predicted a chronic pattern of poor sleep over and above arousal, depression, anxiety, and beliefs about short-term consequences. Such research suggests that targeting unhelpful beliefs about sleep is important for reversing chronic insomnia.  In addition to thought records, unhelpful beliefs about sleep can commonly be addressed in two ways:  (1) gentle Socratic questioning to explore an unhelpful belief, and (2) creation of a survey to collect data related to the belief (Harvey & Eidelman, 2012). The following vignette illustrates how the therapist can use Socratic questioning to guide the client to explore and correct some unrealistic expectations about sleep needs and morning energy: tHeraPist: Some of your responses suggest that you believe quite strongly about the need for 8 hours of sleep every night.  client: Well, I’ve always thought that we need 8 hours of sleep to stay healthy.  tHeraPist: Do all people you know have the same height?  client: Of course not!  tHeraPist: What is the normal height for an adult?  client: Well, there is no norm that applies to everyone. It varies.. ..  tHeraPist: It is similar for sleep. There are individual differences in the amount of sleep we need to feel rested and function well during the day. Although most people report about 7 or 8 hours of sleep, some can get by with less than that and still feel rested in the morning. It is possible that 6.5 hours of uninterrupted sleep be more satisfying and refreshing than 8 hours of broken sleep. So, it will be important to experiment with various sleep durations to determine what the optimal duration is for you. What do you think happens if you assume that you need 8 hours of sleep but you really only need 7?  client: I guess I’m awake an hour .. . and I spend that hour worrying about why I’m not sleeping!  tHeraPist: Exactly. Pursuing unrealistic goals is counterproductive and may actually make you anxious and, as a consequence, perpetuate the underlying sleep difficulties. I also noted that you are very concerned when you are not fully rested in the morning.   client: Well, this concerns me because I assume that if I am not well rested in the morning, it must mean that I have not slept well the night before.  tHeraPist: This may be a valid assumption. However, even the best sleepers do not always arise in the morning feeling well rested and full of energy.  client: So you’re telling me that when I wake up in the morning feeling tired, it is not necessarily an indication of poor sleep.  tHeraPist: What I am suggesting is that you need to be careful with your expectations and interpretations. Even with good-quality sleep, you simply cannot expect to always feel refreshed and energetic during the day. There are day-to-day variations in how we feel and how energetic we are.  client: I guess I have noted that for myself.  tHeraPist: So, what alternative thoughts should you have the next time you catch yourself setting standards that may be unrealistic?  client: That 8 hours of sleep is not necessarily a “gold standard” that applies to everyone, and that even if on some days I am not fully rested, I may simply need to accept that and not jump to the conclusion that I slept poorly the night before and won’t be able to function the next day.  tHeraPist: Very good! This should reduce your anxiety about sleep as well.  As the above vignette illustrates, many clients have unrealistic expectations about their sleep requirements and their daytime energy level. An important goal is to help these clients realize that diminished sleep and daytime energy are not always pathological, and that even good sleepers do not always get 8 hours of sleep or feel completely refreshed every morning. With gentle Socratic questioning, clients may benefit from reappraising their expectations regarding both sleep requirements and daytime energy.   Sleep Disturbance  Surveys can also be designed to evaluate unrealistic beliefs about sleep. Before the session, the therapist should have an idea of unrealistic beliefs to target (e.g., “Good sleepers get 8 hours of sleep,” “Only people with insomnia feel tired in the daytime,” or “I am not normal for waking up four times a night”). The Dysfunctional Beliefs and Attitude Scale (Morin & Espie, 2003) is a terrific measure to assess and document change in unhelpful beliefs about sleep. The therapist can introduce the survey by saying:  “One of the components of this treatment that we have found to be very effective is for us to collaborate together to create and administer a survey. There are a number of things we get from this: advice from good sleepers about why they sleep so well; a reminder as to how well good sleepers really sleep; and data on our beliefs about sleep. Most of us have developed our ideas about sleep from magazine articles, from a parent, or on the basis of our own experience. What or who has most influenced your ideas about sleep? [Allow the client to respond.] In order to start to become more data driven we are going to devise a survey together and administer it to people in your age group. This is always an interesting exercise and an opportunity to learn from others about how they manage their sleep. We focus on people around your age given that sleep changes so much across the lifespan. Here are some questions we have found to be helpful in the past.”  At this point, the therapist asks questions that pertain specifically to the client’s unhelpful beliefs about sleep. Survey questions may include the following:  •• “Are you a good sleeper or someone with insomnia?” This question can be particularly useful to illustrate that individuals who regard themselves as “good sleepers” often feel tired in the morning, wake up at night, and feel sleepy in the afternoon.   •• “How many hours of sleep per night do you get?” •• “How long does it take to fall asleep at night?” •• “How many times do you wake up at night?” •• “How alert do you feel upon waking, on a 1- to  10-point scale? What have you found helpful to increase alertness?” •• “How often do you nap? Does it affect your subsequent sleep?”  •• “Do you have a bedtime routine? A morning routine?”   •• “Do you feel tired in the daytime? When? What do you do to increase energy when you feel tired?” This question often generates many strategies suggested by others, and only a small proportion of the strategies involve resting or sleeping. Common alternatives include changing the environment, getting fresh air, going for a walk, drinking cold water, or having a snack. Clients often realize that energy can be increased by things other than rest and sleep, and that boredom is a big trigger for feeling tired.  Be sure to add questions of the client’s choosing as well, so that the survey is truly collaborative and generates enthusiasm and interest. Clients are often curious about dreams, nightmares, or sleep patterns that can be added as questions to the survey. Also, questions about mood (“How often do you feel sad?” or “Have you noticed a relationship between your daytime mood and nighttime sleep?”) can provide normalizing evidence that sleep and mood are interrelated, even in good sleepers.  Safety Behaviors  Closely related to unhelpful beliefs are so-called “safety behaviors,” which are actions taken to avoid feared outcomes that are maladaptive in two ways: (1) They prevent disconfirmation of the unhelpful beliefs, and  (2) they increase the likelihood that the feared outcomes will occur. Individuals with insomnia, in an attempt to cope with anxiety related to unhelpful beliefs about sleep, often employ safety behaviors (Salkovskis, 1991). In the previous section, we described an individual who endorsed the unhelpful belief that only solid, uninterrupted sleep would allow unimpaired work performance the next day. To prevent nocturnal awakenings, this individual might develop a routine of safety behaviors that include never going out in the evening, wearing earplugs, and using a sound machine as she sleeps. Engaging in these behaviors, while understandable in a general way, will clearly prevent her from learning that she can get adequate sleep even if the routine is broken. Paradoxically, these behaviors may make the feared outcome more likely to occur. Not going out in the evening increases the chance that she will become preoccupied with her sleep, and may contribute to rumination/worry and sad mood. Earplugs  CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  can be effective in certain circumstances, but they can also contribute to sleep problems if they are uncomfortable, or if they cause her to strain to try and hear things in the environment. A sound machine can facilitate awakenings in the night.  To work with safety behaviors, a helpful assessment tool is available (Ree & Harvey, 2004b). Behavioral experiments are designed in which the safety behavior is selectively adopted and then dropped, providing an often stunning demonstration of their adverse impact. For example, if a client avoids going out in the evenings because of feared impact on sleep, practitioner and client can set up a behavioral experiment in which two of the evenings in the week are spent at home (the “control” condition), and two evenings in the week are spent outside the home (socializing with others, going to a movie, etc.; the “experimental” condition). The practitioner instructs the client to rate not only standard sleep variables on the weekly diary (SOL, TST, etc.) but also to add a simple scale to measure evening satisfaction or mood each night. Often it is helpful to point out that mood and satisfaction increased on nights the client left the home, as well as to emphasize minimal (or inconsistent) changes in sleep as a result of leaving the home.  Daytime Energy  Individuals with disturbed sleep often monitor themselves for signs of fatigue upon waking or throughout the day. Normalizing feelings of grogginess upon waking (so-called “sleep inertia”), and introducing behavioral experiments and attention strategies for daytime monitoring can reduce anxiety and preoccupation with sleep. Often clients believe the only way they can feel less tired in the daytime is to sleep more. Hence, a behavioral experiment is devised to allow the client to experience the energy-generating effects of activity (Ree & Harvey, 2004a). This is also an opportunity to develop a list of energy-generating and energy-sapping activities that can be used to manage daytime tiredness and inevitable bouts of occasional sleep deprivation.  Many clients believe that energy progressively drains away throughout the day, and that the only way to generate energy is to sleep or rest. Accordingly, many clients work particularly hard at conserving energy after a poor night’s sleep. As such, a behavioral experiment targets the following cognitions: “Energy is increased only by rest or sleep” and “I don’t have much energy, so I need to take care to conserve it.” We hope to use  the experiment to illustrate that factors other than sleep influence energy levels.  To set up this behavioral experiment, client and therapist begin by using the sleep diary as a basis for discussing sleep and energy during the day. They note examples where nighttime sleep was good but energy levels in the day were poor, or where nighttime sleep was poor but energy levels during the day were good. The therapist may wish to say something like: “That is really interesting. So if sleep isn’t the full account of how you feel during the day, then there must be other things that can account for it.” Set up a 2-day experiment to test energy as follows: On the first day, spend one 3-hour block conserving energy, then a 3-hour block using energy. After each 3-hour block, the client rates his/her energy and mood. The following day, the client does this in the reverse order. Be careful to define what conserving energy means for your client. Examples include avoidance of socializing with colleagues, setting work tasks at a slow pace, attempting only mundane tasks, not going out for lunch with work friends, and not returning phone calls. Also, spend time in the session brainstorming strategies for using energy. These might include going for a 10-minute walk, returning all phone calls, arranging to have a coffee with a colleague, getting on top of the paperwork, going to the water cooler to get a drink, or walking to a local shop to buy a magazine or snack. Ask the client to rate his/her mood and fatigue on a form developed collaboratively in the session. The client typically finds that his/ her mood and energy were improved by “using” energy, and using energy then becomes synonymous with generating energy. The therapist may comment that energy levels are like elastic that can be stretched quite easily.  treatMeNt suMMary aND relaPse PreveNtioN  The final treatment session is oriented around consolidating skills and preparing for setbacks. Relapse prevention is designed to build skills to minimize or prevent the reoccurrence of sleep disturbance in the long term. At the end of treatment, the therapist guides the participant in identifying potential high-risk situations for insomnia in the future and discusses skills to prevent or cope with these high-risk situations. Client and therapist together discuss potential obstacles to maintaining gains, and they problem-solve around areas of future sleep disturbance. An individualized summary  