Treatment: Building Acceptance  Most of Anne and Mark’s subsequent sessions were focused on building acceptance. Below are excerpts from a few sessions in which Dr. S helped Anne and Mark to increase acceptance by using techniques such as empathic joining, unified detachment, and tolerance building.  Session 12  The content of this session is about Anne and Mark’s search for a condominium, and some of the difficulties they were experiencing. The discussion includes Mark’s admission that he feels inadequate and insecure because he does not make enough money for them to afford Anne’s dream condo. This led to an opportunity to explore Anne and Mark’s theme of insecurity:   mark: If we settle for a condominium that we don’t really want, it will forever be a monument to my inability to get the condo she wants.  Dr. S: I’m wondering if there’s another part that wonders, “Will I ever really be able to give her what she wants?”   Couple Distress 725  mark: Yeah. If she married somebody who had a lot of money, she could get whatever condo she wanted.  anne: But if you married someone who was gorgeous, who was 20 years younger, you could have a trophy wife, but that’s not what happened. (Both laugh.)  Dr. S: So that may be part of your insecurity. If you looked the way that you experience as “the way he wants things,” then maybe he’d be happier.  mark: (to Dr. S) I think that’s how she feels about herself at her worst moments. Like maybe all men are attracted to younger women and that you have to harness yourself not to lose what’s important to you . . . (to Anne) maybe that’s how you look at your desire to have your dream condo. How do you keep from saying, “There’s that rich lawyer who looks at me all of the time”? ... (to Dr. S) I think that would be a pretty natural thing for her to think about.  This dialogue also reveals the unified detachment Anne and Mark are developing, when they both laugh at Anne’s comment about a “trophy wife.” What has previously been a very painful subject for Anne is becoming something about which they can joke. The discussion then moved to exploring Anne’s insecurities about Mark’s relationships with other women:  Dr. S: So what in your eyes is Mark’s ideal “bill”? You made reference to a “bill” that is his ideal.  anne: Well, probably someone younger, who is able to have children, someone who plays tennis, who goes running and also cooks and cleans, makes a good living, is very good in bed . . .  Dr. S: (to Mark) Because this is comparable to the richer man that you view with Anne. (to Anne) For you, it’s the woman who . . .  anne: But that woman’s out there. A lot of women are like that.  Dr. S: And the way that you see and experience Mark talking to women. And at times you kind of wonder to what extent he enjoys it, and you think it’s just a matter of time if you’re not willing to live up to it . . .  anne: Right, that some other women is going to be able to step right in there without a problem.  Dr. S: When the insecurities come up for both of you. For you, Mark, it’s the rich man who could come along and provide what Anne longs for, and for you, Anne, it’s that you don’t compete physically—with  the workout—so it’s just a matter of time until a woman comes along and decides, “I’m going after him.” Anne, can you tell me some of the things Mark does that make you feel threatened?  anne: When he makes comments about how attractive a woman is, like I’m one of the guys. When he tells me I’m fat, or makes comments like I have a double chin . ..  Dr. S: Which then tells you that you’re not cutting it.  anne: Yeah.  Dr. S then brought back the subject of condominium buying, and used this as a metaphor for Anne and Mark’s concerns about “settling” for less than what they want in making a major commitment:  Dr. S: When you make a commitment, whether it’s committing to a condo, committing to a relationship—it’s settling, you’re settling—you’re saying, “This is it.”  anne: That’s a good way of looking at it. I hadn’t thought of that. That’s what we’re having trouble with . . . the reality that we’re not going to get everything that we want. The insecurity, the scariness of making the purchase, is knowing that we’re never going to get what we want.  mark: Part of it is our concern that the next condominium we see is going to be the one we want.  anne: Right, it’s the condo over the next hill.  mark: So you have to think, “Is 60% of what we want what we should settle for?” I’m thinking, 60? I was thinking it’s more like 90. So I don’t know when you’re supposed to cut your losses and say we have to go for this—this is what reality dictates.  Dr. S: And if we can take it a step further, it might be that when you both decided to get married, you both made a settlement. You both start to wonder whether the other settled for 60 or 90%. You wonder, “What did I settle for? Did I settle for 60 or 90%?”  mark: Yeah.  anne: Right.  Dr. S: Now let’s put yourselves in a situation where you’re insecure. What’s gonna happen? When you’re in an insecure place, that 90% might feel like . . .  anne: 50%.  Dr. S: Exactly. When you’re feeling good, you think, “She got 90% of what she wanted in me,” or “I got   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  90%.” But when you’re in an insecure place, you think, “I settled for 50%.” Then when you look at your own insecurity, you think, “My God, she settled for 35 or 40%.” You both made a settlement when you married each other. You decided, “This is it, we’re gonna get married,” and you settled.  mark: But “settled” has such negative connotations. Dr. S: I think there’s some feelings associated with that. And a parallel to the word “settlement” is “acceptance.”   mark: Oh, I see.  Dr. S: When you go through the settlement, you think, “This is who this person is.” Whether it’s 90, 80, 60, or 35%, you’ve settled—you’ve basically said, “I accept this.”  By using condominium buying as a metaphor, Dr. S has underscored how Anne and Mark’s theme of insecurity feeds itself, and how it leads them both to question whether each has “settled” for less than he/she wanted in the relationship. Adding the additional component of “insecurity about settlement” to their theme helped Anne and Mark understand the things each of them do that “threaten” the other (e.g., when Mark talks about his attraction to younger women), and also build a bridge toward working on acceptance.  Session 17  In this session, Dr. S continues to process the theme of insecurity with Anne and Mark. In this particular part of the dialogue, when Anne and Mark are discussing a familiar polarization process, Mark suggests to Anne that she work out more. Anne interprets Mark’s suggestion as a criticism about her appearance, which makes her feel insecure and threatened. Anne then “fights back” against Mark’s suggestions by becoming depressed and “doing nothing,” which in turn makes Mark more critical of her.  Here Dr. S uses two IBCT acceptance-building techniques. The first technique is empathic joining. As Dr. S tries to “get to the bottom of” Mark’s suggestions/ criticisms of Anne’s appearance, Mark makes the following soft disclosure about his own insecurities:  Dr. S: This is a real, central question. There are some basic limits that you have, where you say, “Up to here, I accept you, but beyond that, you’d better change.” On the other hand, this is who you are. This is who  you are. But the irony of it is, that once we accept, change can come about. But there’s that push to determine within ourselves not only the other person’s limits but also our own. I get the sense that you’re both exploring yourselves and your own limits.  anne: Perhaps, yes.  Dr. S: You’re both looking at your own limits. With you, Anne, it’s about your looks, your appearance. And for you, Mark, it’s about you as a financial provider. And the temptation is, when that gets uncomfortable, that’s where your partner comes in kind of, to redirect your focus from that versus being able to talk about how you’re feeling.  anne: Yeah.  mark: Yeah, I think I’ve noticed, since we’ve started therapy, that’s what I do. When I get insecure about myself, I start looking outwards, saying, “You should do this,” and that makes me feel better.  Dr. S: Right, it’s active. It can be advice giving—it can be a real male thing, “Do this, do that.” mark: Right, I do that with her kids, too. I know I do.  Instead of focusing on the critical nature of Mark’s suggestions, Dr. S has placed an emphasis on why Mark becomes critical. Mark is encouraged to consider the reasons for his behavior, and as a result he discloses that he becomes critical when he himself is feeling insecure. Mark recognizes that this happens not only with regard to his attempts to direct Anne’s behavior but also in his interactions with Anne’s children.  The second acceptance-building technique Dr. S uses in this portion of the session is a tolerance intervention: emphasizing the positive aspects of a partner’s negative behavior. Dr. S continues:  Dr. S: In some situations it might work really well [to give advice]. People might like that—like in your work as a counselor, Mark. You feel really productive.   mark: Yeah, I change people’s lives. I know I do.  Dr. S: On the other hand, there might be some circumstances where it’s experienced as being critical, and I think of this in terms of the two of you. It feeds into Anne’s feeling criticized.  anne: Yes.  Dr. S: And then it feels threatening, like “If you don’t do something about it, then . . . ”   Couple Distress  Here Dr. S has positively reemphasized Mark’s suggestions to Anne as his attempts to give her guidance or advice. Mark, an employment counselor, is used to giving such suggestions to others as a way of being constructive or helpful. Dr. S underscores this aspect of Mark’s behavior—that this same “counselor” quality makes Mark very good at what he does in his career. However, Dr. S does not try to reframe Mark’s behavior as completely positive. Dr. S also underscores how Mark’s “advice” is experienced by Anne as critical and threatening.  At the end of the session, Dr. S recharacterizes Anne and Mark’s polarization process in terms of the information that has emerged from these two interventions:  Dr. S: I think you put it really well, Mark. When you start to feel uncomfortable, this is your process, this is what you do. You start to look outside yourself. From your end, it might be like you’re being a counselor when you start with Anne. You want to advise. But from her end, it might be like you’re being authoritarian, the drill sergeant, rather than the counselor. And you, Anne, start to feel you’re being berated. You start to feel worse about yourself.  anne: Yeah.  Dr. S: So you feel like you’ve gotta either take it, or you’ve gotta fight back. mark: I think I can . . . the fighting back is . . . well, I can understand that. I really can.  Session 25  In their final session, Anne described a recent insight she had had about feeling “undeserving” of happiness, and her belief that happiness comes at a cost of some kind. She said that happiness made her feel guilty because she felt that someone else must be suffering for her happiness, or that somehow she would suffer negative repercussions for being happy. Anne connected some of these feelings to her bout with an eating disorder as a teenager, and to the depressive episodes she sometimes experienced as an adult.  In the dialogue below, Dr. S uses several IBCT techniques to discuss Anne’s insights and the way that her feelings contribute to the couple’s polarization process. First, Dr. S uses empathic joining to help Mark understand the experience Anne is having when she gets depressed (a time when Mark regularly makes suggestions about how Anne “should” think, feel, or be   have). Then Dr. S detaches Anne and Mark from their problem—that Anne feels criticized whenever Mark makes these suggestions. Rather than engaging Anne and Mark in their emotional responses to each other’s behavior, Dr. S framed this problem as a consequence of basic communication problems. By describing their problem in terms of their methods of communication, Dr. S detaches Anne and Mark from the problem itself, and provides each with a new way of reacting to an old problem (without doing any formal communication training):  Dr. S: I think the idea around the conflict over happiness—having the happiness—is like savoring a good meal, and that it will cost you: “OK, so it has some high fat, but I’m going to enjoy it because I deserve this, I deserve this moment—the same way that I deserve this moment of happiness, even if soand- so doesn’t have it together. I deserve this happiness.” And that’s going to be the struggle, to be able to react to Mark in a way that expresses, “God, I’m really feeling guilty.”  anne: When I’m on the couch, and I’m totally immobile in my depression, that’s a lot of what’s going on. I’m beating myself up.  Dr. S: And so Mark needs to listen, to just listen and say, “Gee, that must be really hard.” Now there may be a pull, Mark, to problem-solve, to say, “Well, you shouldn’t feel that way,” or “So-and-so is that way because . . . ,” but that will only bring out Anne’s self-criticism and it could become argumentative. When you sense the pain, Mark, and what it’s costing Anne, the reaction that you have is “Let me show you what to do.” But that is only going to bring out in Anne the feeling of “You see, you idiot, you’re not doing it right,” which will then feed into the self-criticism. So it’s going to help to just listen, and simply to paraphrase, and she will hear that it’s not reasonable. If, rather than criticizing, you just say, “Gee, you really don’t feel worthy of these things,” if you just paraphrase those themes of her insecurity, her self-criticalness, that is kind of maintaining a connection.  Finally, Dr. S uses tolerance interventions to allow Anne and Mark to see their problem as a difference in their communication styles. As he continues to describe their problem in terms of communication difficulties, Dr. S describes Anne as responding to situations based   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  on how she feels, while Mark is more likely to use logic or reason to determine his responses to situations. Dr. S also points out how Anne and Mark’s problem is often a result of this difference, and that these differences actually complement one another:  Dr. S: (to Mark) And that’s what I want to encourage, maybe a new way of responding rather than using reason when you start to feel like Anne’s feelings don’t make sense. Rather than saying, “This doesn’t make sense,” say instead, “What I’m hearing you say is that you don’t deserve this”—whatever it is. And what I’m expecting, Anne, is that to hear Mark express that he understands you would make you feel close to him.  anne: Yeah, and it would definitely not be the wedge of “you should.” (Mark laughs.)  Dr. S: Anne, you talk about things from the emotional experience, and Mark, you talk about things from the rational experience—and both are needed, both are important.  This section of the dialogue also reveals how Anne and Mark have developed unified detachment from their problem. Anne uses the phrase “the wedge of ‘you should’ ” to describe what had previously been the “hot topic” of feeling criticized by Mark, and Mark is able to laugh about his own behavior.  coNclusioN  Although a single case study is useful for illustrative purposes, it obviously does not establish generalizable conclusions about treatment outcome. However, the studies we have described give some promising results for the efficacy of IBCT.  IBCT is part of what Hayes (2004) has called the “third wave” of behavior therapy. The “first wave” encompassed traditional classical and operant conditioning approaches. The “second wave” incorporated cognitive strategies. The third wave emphasizes “contextual and experiential change strategies in addition to more direct and didactic ones” (p. 6). Acceptance and mindfulness are key aspects of these third-wave therapies. Although these therapies have generated considerable enthusiasm and confirming data, only additional outcome research will establish whether these therapies in general or IBCT in particular will work to alleviate  human suffering, including the substantial suffering that occurs in couple relationships, in more powerful ways than the first two waves of behavior therapy.  notes  1. We use the more inclusive term “couple therapy” rather than the more limited “marital therapy,” because “couple therapy” can refer to unmarried couples, gay and lesbian couples, as well as married couples. 2. Identifying information has been changed to protect confidentiality, but clinical dynamics are accurately portrayed and quotations are taken directly from tapes of the therapy sessions but altered slightly to increase readability. 3. Not included here are case examples of the application of TBCT interventions, which can be found elsewhere (e.g., Cordova & Jacobson, 1993; Jacobson & Margolin, 1979). 4. In our project we assessed for violence using the CTS2 and excluded any couple in which the wife reported moderate to severe violence from the husband. We excluded the partners prior to their seeing one of our project therapists, and we referred them to appropriate individual treatment for violence. Dr. S could proceed with the knowledge that the wife had not endorsed this kind of violence from her husband on the CTS2 (although she could still do so in the individual session). In a clinical setting, we recommend that practitioners give the Couple Questionnaire or the CTS2 to all clients and follow up with individual sessions, in which they focus specifically on violent items on the questionnaire that the individual has endorsed as committing or receiving. Based on these interviews, the practitioner should refer clients when appropriate (Jacobson & Gottman, 1998). referenCes 