Avoidance and Rituals  To maximize treatment efficacy, all avoidance and ritualistic behaviors, even seemingly minor ones, should be prevented. Therefore, the therapist should gather complete information about all passive avoidance and rituals. When the therapist is in doubt as to whether a particular avoidance behavior is related to OCD, he/ she might suggest an “experiment” in which the patient is exposed to the avoided situation. If the patient experiences anxiety or distress, the avoidance behavior should be prevented as part of treatment. Similarly, if it is unclear whether a given action constitutes a ritual, a response prevention “experiment” may be implemented. If refraining from performing the action evokes distress, the action is identified as a ritual and should be addressed in therapy.  Individuals with OCD, like those with specific phobias, often attempt to avoid anxiety-evoking situations. Most passive avoidance strategies are fairly obvious (e.g., not entering public restrooms, not preparing meals, and not taking out the trash). However, the therapist also needs to be attentive to subtle forms of avoidance, such as carrying money in one’s pockets to avoid opening a wallet, wearing slip-on shoes to avoid touching laces, and using drinking straws to avoid contact with a glass or a can. Patients with obsessive– compulsive checking rituals also engage in subtle avoidance behaviors that are important to explore, such as arranging their work schedules to ensure that they are rarely, if ever, the last person to leave the business,   Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder  thus ensuring that the responsibility for checking the safe falls on a coworker.  Active rituals, such as passive avoidance, may be explicit (e.g., prolonged washing, repeated checks of the door, and ordering of objects) and/or subtle (e.g., wiping hands on pant legs, blinking, and thinking “good” thoughts). It is important that the therapist identify both explicit and subtle rituals, so that both may be addressed during treatment.  Although compulsive rituals are intended to reduce the distress associated with obsessions, patients sometimes report that the performance of these rituals is aversive in itself. For example, Ms. S, who was obsessed with the orderliness of objects on her shelves, found reordering the shelves aversive because she was unable to find the “perfect” place for everything. Similarly, Mr. J, who felt contaminated by chemicals, found the act of decontaminating himself by repeated handwashing aversive because he was unable to decide when his hands were sufficiently clean; therefore, he washed until his hands became raw. Rituals may also become aversive because of their intrusion into other aspects of the person’s life. For example, Mr. J, who would take 2-hour-long showers to feel adequately clean, was reprimanded repeatedly by his supervisor for arriving late to work.  When certain compulsions become aversive, some patients decrease the time they spend performing the ritual by increasing avoidance behaviors, or by substituting other, less time-consuming rituals. For example, Ms. E, who was obsessed with fears of contamination by funeral-related objects (e.g., cemeteries and people returning from a funeral), responded with hours of showering and handwashing. She eventually retreated into her bedroom and avoided all contact with the outside world. Mr. J, described earlier, avoided taking a shower for days at a time, but between showers he wiped his hands compulsively and avoided touching his wife. In some cases, seemingly “new” rituals may develop during the course of treatment to function in the place of those previously identified and eliminated. For example, Mr. F, who was concerned about his hands becoming contaminated, successfully resisted the urge to wash his hands, but soon after response prevention was implemented, he started to rub his hands together vigorously to “decontaminate” them. When such a substitute ritual is identified, it also needs to be addressed in treatment with ritual prevention. Therapists must not only remain alert to such shifts in ritualistic behaviors but also alert patients to the possibility of such shifts.  History of Main Complaint and Treatment History  Many individuals with OCD are unable to give a detailed account of the onset of their symptoms because the symptoms began subtly, many years ago. Nevertheless, therapists should attempt to collect as much information as possible about the onset and course of the disorder. Such information may provide clues about aspects of the fear network and variables associated with the maintenance of symptoms, and may help to anticipate difficulties that may arise during treatment (e.g., old obsessions or rituals that may resurface as more prominent ones diminish).  Many such individuals also have an extensive history of psychological and pharmacological treatments, and it is important to make a detailed inquiry about the outcome of previous treatments. If the patient has been treated with EX/RP, the therapist should assess whether the treatment was implemented appropriately and the patient was compliant with treatment demands. Knowledge that a patient experienced difficulty complying with response prevention instructions, or that previous therapy failed to provide adequate exposure experiences or response prevention instructions, is important for designing the behavioral program. Other factors that may have prevented successful outcome or caused relapse, such as job stress, death in the family, or pregnancy, should be discussed. At the same time, a prior failed course of EX/RP should not necessarily be viewed as prognostic, especially if the patient recognizes why the therapy was less successful in the past. One of our patients, who had failed multiple trials of less intensive EX/RP, came to our center with the knowledge that his noncompliance with exposure exercises between weekly sessions greatly reduced the effects of treatment. He also noted that the slow progress he observed in these previous therapies demoralized him and caused further disengagement from the treatment. When offered a choice of daily versus twice-weekly sessions, he opted for the daily treatment, noting that the more intensive approach might decrease the chance of similar lapses. He has now successfully completed the intensive regimen.  In our clinic we have observed that a substantial majority of our outpatients have been treated, or are currently being treated, with serotonergic medications. Some seek EX/RP to augment the partial gains they have achieved with the medication. Others wish to discontinue the medication because it was ineffective, it   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  had side effects, or they do not want to continue taking medicine indefinitely. Assessment of the patient’s treatment goals is necessary for planning his/her treatment program.  Social Functioning  Obsessive–compulsive symptoms may severely disrupt the daily functioning of patients. Therapists should assess the impact of OCD symptoms on the various areas of functioning. Where appropriate, this information should be used to design suitable exposure exercises. For example, Ms. D experienced difficulties completing assignments at work because she repeatedly checked each task. Treatment included exposures to performing tasks at work without checking. Even if the client is not currently working, exposures simulating work situations may be necessary if symptoms created difficulties in previous jobs.  OCD clearly has a deleterious effect on the intimate relationships of many patients. About half of married individuals seeking treatment for OCD experience marital distress (Emmelkamp et al., 1990; Riggs et al., 1992). Other family and social relationships may also suffer as a result of OCD symptoms. The impairment in social functioning may arise because social contact is either perceived as threatening (e.g., “I may spread germs to other people”) or so much of the patient’s time and energy is invested in performing rituals and planning ways to avoid distressing situations. Again, information about the relation of social dysfunction to OCD symptoms may lead the therapist to include specific exposures aimed at ameliorating these social difficulties.  The assessment of social functioning should also include an evaluation of what role, if any, other people play in the patient’s compulsive rituals. If the patient relies on others for reassurance or compliance with rituals (e.g., family members must remove their shoes before entering the house), the therapist should instruct family members how to respond appropriately when asked to participate in the patient’s rituals. A careful analysis of the relationship is called for before specific instructions are given to significant others. Moreover, if family members tend to criticize the patient when obsessional distress arises, it is important to address these negative exchanges in treatment. We have often addressed this issue with a combination of empathic discussion of the frustration experienced by the family member and role playing of more effective responses.  Mood State  Although some patients with serious depression and OCD may benefit from behavioral therapy for OCD (Foa et al., 1992), research suggests that severe depression may limit the extent of reduction of OCD symptoms and the maintenance of those gains (e.g., Abramowitz et al., 2000). Therefore, it is important to assess the mood state of the patient prior to beginning behavioral therapy. Patients with severe depression should be treated with antidepressant medication or cognitive therapy to reduce the depressive symptoms prior to implementing behavioral therapy for the OCD. Treatment with serotonergic antidepressants may reduce OCD symptoms, as well as depression. Because the effects of such medication on OCD symptoms may not be evident until 3 months after treatment begins, the therapist needs to use his/her clinical judgment to decide whether to begin EX/RP when the depression decreases or wait until the effects of the medication on OCD symptoms can be assessed.  Choice of Treatment  How should a therapist determine the most suitable treatment for a given patient? As discussed earlier, exposure and response prevention, as well as serotonergic medications, have demonstrated efficacy for OCD. Therapist and patient are faced with the choice of EX/ RP, pharmacotherapy, or a combination of the two. Neither treatment is effective with all patients, and no consistent predictors of who will benefit most from which treatment modality have been identified. Therefore, unless the patient has been particularly successful or unsuccessful with some previous course of treatment, the decision should be based on factors such as availability of treatment, amount of time the patient is able or willing to invest in treatment, and his/her motivation and willingness to tolerate side effects.  The intensive treatment requires a considerable investment of time over a period of several weeks. Many patients are unable, or unwilling, to devote 4–5 hours a day to treatment. These patients should be advised to try pharmacological treatment, which does not require the same extensive time commitment. Recent investigations of the effects of a twice-weekly EX/RP regimen compared to intensive treatment suggested comparable outcomes at follow-up (Abramowitz et al., 2003; Storch et al., 2007); thus, in our center, we routinely offer either program to patients considering EX/RP. Some   Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder  patients may be unwilling (sometimes expressed as “I can’t do that”) to experience the temporary discomfort caused by EX/RP. These patients, too, may be advised to try medications. The need to develop “readiness programs” designed to prepare such patients to accept EX/RP treatment is often cited in light of the relatively high refusal rate among patients offered EX/RP. Such programs may include testimonials from previously treated patients, cognitive strategies designed to help the patient calculate objective risks more accurately, psychoeducation about OCD and EX/RP, and a review of the outcome literature for various treatments (Tolin, Maltby, Diefenbach, Hannan, & Worhunsky, 2004). An initial RCT of EX/RP plus motivational interviewing (MI) did not yield outcomes that were superior to EX/RP alone (Simpson et al., 2010), but the study did not specifically recruit patients who were experiencing low motivation. Manualizing programs specifically for those patients and examining the acceptance rate and efficacy of EX/RP infused with MI constitutes the next step in this line of research.  Patients who are concerned about the potential (or have already experienced) side effects of medications or their unknown long-term effects often prefer EX/ RP. Other patients are concerned with the prospect of entering an “endless” treatment because, according to present knowledge, relapse occurs when medication is withdrawn (Pato et al., 1988; Thoren, Asberg, Chronholm, Journestedt, & Traskman, 1980). This concern is particularly relevant for women who plan to bear children and need to withdraw from the medication during pregnancy. EX/RP should be recommended to these patients because its effects are more enduring.  As discussed earlier, the long-term effects of combining EX/RP and medication are unclear; therefore, it is premature to recommend treatment programs that combine the two therapies. However, some patients who present for treatment are already on antidepressant medication. Because these medications were found not to interfere with the effectiveness of EX/RP (Franklin et al., 2000), it is recommended that patients continue to take the medication if they have experienced some improvement in either obsessive–compulsive symptoms or depression. However, if the patient has not experienced improvement with medication, withdrawal of the medication before or during EX/RP should be considered. Special consideration should be given to patients with severe depression concurrent with their OCD. It is recommended that these patients be treated with antidepressants or cognitive therapy for the  depression prior to entering intensive EX/RP for the OCD, given recent findings of somewhat attenuated outcome for severely depressed patients (Abramowitz et al., 2000).  iNteNsive ex/rP  The intensive treatment program comprises four phases: (1) information gathering, (2) intensive EX/RP, (3) a home visit, and (4) maintenance and relapse prevention.   Information Gathering and Treatment Planning  The first stage of information gathering consists of a thorough diagnostic evaluation to determine that the patient’s main psychopathology is OCD. The second step is to assess whether the patient is appropriate for EX/RP. We recommend that individuals who are abusing drugs or alcohol should be treated for the substance abuse prior to intensive treatment for OCD. Patients who have clear delusions and hallucinations are also poor candidates for intensive treatment. Individuals with severe MDD should be treated for depression before beginning treatment for OCD. The patient’s motivation to comply with the demands of intensive treatment should be carefully evaluated. It is important to describe the treatment program in enough detail that the patient is not surprised when treatment begins. If the patient does not express strong motivation and commitment to treatment, it might be preferable to delay implementation of intensive treatment or to offer alternative treatments, such as medication. As noted earlier, a study of less intensive EX/RP for patients who appear otherwise motivated, yet cannot accommodate the daily regimen into their schedules, suggested an outcome comparable to intensive treatment; future research with much larger samples is needed to determine whether patient factors predict differential outcome to either treatment schedule.   Once a patient is judged to be appropriate for intensive treatment, information gathering for treatment planning begins. This phase typically comprises 4–6 hours of contact with the patient over a period of 2–3 days. During this phase, the therapist collects information about the patient’s obsessive–compulsive symptoms, general history, and the history of treatment for OCD, as described earlier. During these sessions,   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  the therapist discusses the rationale for treatment, describes the program in detail, teaches patients to monitor their rituals, and develops a treatment plan.  First Information‑Gathering Session  It is very important to discuss the rationale for treatment and to describe the treatment program in detail. The program requires that the patient abandon his/her obsessive–compulsive habits, therefore temporarily experiencing substantial discomfort. If patients do not understand why they are asked to suffer this short-term distress or are not convinced that treatment will work, they are unlikely to comply with treatment instructions. The treatment rationale is explained as follows:  “You have a set of habits that, as you know, are called obsessive–compulsive symptoms. These are habits of thinking, feeling, and acting that are extremely unpleasant, wasteful, and difficult to get rid of on your own. Usually, these habits involve thoughts, images, or impulses that habitually come to your mind, even though you don’t want them. Along with these thoughts you have unwanted feelings of extreme distress or anxiety and strong urges to do something to reduce the distress. To try to get rid of the anxiety, people get into the habit of engaging in various special thoughts or actions, which we call ‘rituals.’  “Unfortunately, as you know, the rituals do not work all that well, and the distress decreases for a short time only, then comes back again. Eventually, you may find yourself doing more and more ritualizing to try to reduce anxiety, but even then the relief is temporary and you have to do the ritual all over again. Gradually, you find yourself spending so much time and energy ritualizing—which does not work that well anyway—that other areas of your life are seriously disrupted.  “The treatment we are about to begin is called exposure and response prevention. It is designed to break two types of associations. The first association is between sensations of anxiety and the objects, situations, or thoughts that produce this distress. [The therapist uses information collected as examples; e.g., ‘Every time you touch anything associated with urine you feel anxious, distressed, or contaminated.’] The second association we want to break is that between carrying out ritualistic behavior and the feeling of less anxiety or less distress. In other words, after you carry out [specifies the identified  rituals], you temporarily feel less distress. Therefore, you continue to engage in this behavior frequently. The treatment we offer breaks the automatic bond between the feelings of discomfort/anxiety/contamination of [specifies the obsession] and your rituals. It will also train you not to ritualize when you are anxious.”  After presenting the treatment rationale, the therapist should begin to collect information about the patient’s OCD symptoms. The rationale for information gathering and a description of the treatment is presented as follows:  “In the next two sessions, I will ask you specific questions about the various situations and thoughts that generate discomfort or anxiety in you. We will order them according to the degree of distress they generate in you on a scale from 0 to 100, where 0 means No anxiety and 100 means Maximum anxiety or panic. The exposure treatment program involves confronting you with situations and thoughts that you avoid because they generate anxiety and urges to carry out ritualistic behavior. Why do we want to expose you to places and objects that will make you uncomfortable, situations that you have attempted to avoid even at much cost? We know that when people are exposed to situations that they fear, anxiety gradually declines. Through exposure, then, the association between anxiety and [specifies the obsession] weaken because you are repeatedly exposed to these situations, so that the previously evoked anxiety decreases with time.  “For many people with OCD the obsessions occur within their imagination and rarely take place in reality. This makes it impossible to practice exposure by actually confronting those situations for prolonged periods. For example, if a person fears that her home will burn down, we certainly do not wish to have her house catch on fire in order to practice exposure. Similarly, someone who fears that he has run over a person who is now lying in the road cannot in reality be exposed to such a situation.  “If confrontation with the feared situation is necessary to reduce obsessions, how can you improve without directly confronting the situation? You can confront these fears through imagery, in which you visualize the circumstances that you fear will happen. In imagery practice, you create in your mind detailed pictures of the terrible consequences that   Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder  you are afraid will occur if you do not engage in the ritualistic behavior. During prolonged exposure to these images, the distress level associated with them gradually decreases.  “When people with OCD encounter their feared situations or their obsessional thoughts, they become anxious or distressed and feel compelled to perform the ritualistic behavior as a way to reduce their distress. Exposure practices can cause this same distress and urge to ritualize. Usually, performing rituals strengthens the pattern of distress and rituals. Therefore in treatment, ritual prevention is practiced to break the habit of ritualizing. This requires that you stop ritualizing, even though you are still having urges to do so. By facing your fears without resorting to compulsions, you gradually become less anxious. Behavior therapists call this process ‘habituation.’ Therefore, during the 3 weeks of intensive exposure, the association between relief from anxiety and carrying out [specifies the patient’s rituals] will become weaker because you will not be allowed to engage in such behaviors; therefore, you will find out that your anxiety decreases even if you do not resort to these activities.”  The initial information-gathering session is also used to begin training the patient to monitor his/her rituals accurately. Accurate reports of the frequency and duration of ritualistic behavior are important to evaluate the progress of treatment and to demonstrate the reality of changes to the patient. In some cases, the monitoring also serves an active role in treatment. Patients begin to recognize that rituals do not truly occur “all day long” and the act of monitoring the rituals may decrease their frequency and duration.  “It is very important for the treatment program that we have an accurate picture of the extent to which you engage in obsessive thinking and compulsive behavior. Having a clear picture of how much of your time is taken up by your problem will help us to monitor your progress and adjust the treatment program accordingly. Therefore, during this week, while I am still collecting information to form a treatment program, I would like you to record your symptoms every day. It is not easy to report accurately on how much you engage in your obsessive–compulsive behavior; therefore, we will spend some time now and in the next session going over some rules for how to record your symptoms. Here are some monitoring  forms on which you will record your thoughts and rituals.”  The therapist should specify which ritual(s) the patient is to record, go over the instructions carefully with the patient, and practice filling out the form with the patient using an “imaginary day” of his/her life. The following rules are helpful in monitoring rituals:  1. Use your watch to monitor the time you spend on your rituals. 2. Do not guess the time of ritualizing; be exact. 3. Write the time immediately on your monitoring form. 4. Do not save the recording to the end of the day or the beginning of the next day. 5. Write a short sentence to describe the trigger for ritualizing. Prior to beginning treatment, the patient identifies an individual (e.g., parent, spouse, or close friend) who can serve as a support person during the intensive treatment program. The patient is instructed to rely on this person for support during exposures, and the support person is asked to help monitor compliance with response prevention instructions. If the patient experiences difficulty resisting the urge to ritualize, then the support person is contacted for support. Because the support person is involved in the therapy, the therapist allocates time during the information-gathering phase to describe the treatment and discuss its rationale with him or her.  The therapist makes an effort to ensure that the support person and the patient mutually agree that the support person will offer constructive criticism and observations. In making these suggestions, the support person should be sensitive to any difficulties that have arisen in the past. For example, Mr. B, who served as his wife’s primary source of reassurance, also criticized her severely when he “caught” her performing her handwashing ritual. To prevent these responses from hampering treatment, to help the husband supervise his wife’s response prevention, the therapist spent time with the couple negotiating appropriate, uncritical responses to the wife’s requests for reassurance.  The support person is in regular (at least twice weekly) contact with the therapist and is not only informed about the specific homework exposures that the patient has to accomplish but also relays his/her observations about the patient’s behavior outside the therapy session.   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  In addition, with the consent of the patient, the support person should contact the therapist if major treatment violations occur (e.g., refusing to do homework or engaging in ritualistic behavior).  Second Information‑Gathering Session  At the beginning of the second information-gathering session, the therapist devotes time to the patient’s selfmonitoring form, which includes examining the descriptions of situations that trigger ritualistic behavior and offering constructive comments when necessary. The therapist reminds the patient to use short phrases or sentences to describe the trigger situations, assesses the accuracy of the patient’s time estimates, and emphasizes the need for accurate measurements.  Generating a Treatment Plan  The bulk of the second information-gathering session is allotted to gathering detailed information about the patient’s symptoms and, based on what is learned about the symptoms, developing a treatment with the patient. It is important to explain to the patient how the exposure exercises that comprise his/her treatment will reduce the OCD symptoms. For, example, the patient with religious obsessions is told that the imaginal exposure to burning in hell in excruciating detail is designed to reduce his obsessional distress when a less elaborate image of burning in hell comes into his mind. It is important that patients understand the rationale underlying the central concept in EX/RP, that confronting obsession-evoking stimuli during treatment increases their suffering in the short run but will reduce it in the long run. We often tell patients that the difficulties they experience during the first week of exposure sessions are likely to diminish with proper implementation of EX/RP.  Describing Homework  At the end of the second information-gathering session, the therapist describes the homework assignments included in the treatment program. The homework, which usually requires 2–3 hours, in addition to the 2-hour treatment session, comprises additional exposure exercises to be done between treatment sessions at the patient’s home or elsewhere (e.g., a shopping mall or a relative’s home). We suggest that the patient monitor his/her SUDS level every 10 minutes during  the homework exposures. In some cases, when it is impossible for the patient to maintain an exposure for 45–60 minutes, the therapist works with the patient to develop a plan that allows the exposure to be prolonged. For example, instead of asking the patient to spend 45 minutes sitting in the restroom of a local restaurant, the therapist might suggest that he/she contaminate a handkerchief on the toilet seat and carry this “contamination rag” in a pocket.  Treatment Period  The treatment program at our center typically comprises fifteen 2-hour treatment sessions conducted daily for 3 weeks. Clinical observation suggests that massed sessions produce better results than do sessions spread out over time; therefore, we recommend a minimum of three sessions per week. Each session begins with a 10- to 15-minute discussion of homework assignments and the previous day’s ritual monitoring. The next 90 minutes are divided into 45 minutes each of imaginal and in vivo exposure. The final 15 minutes are spent discussing the homework assignment for the following day. This format may be adjusted when necessary. For example, if an in vivo exposure requires that therapist and patient travel to a local shopping mall to contaminate children’s clothing, the entire session is devoted to this activity. Some patients have difficulty engaging emotionally in imaginal exposures (i.e., the images fail to elicit distress). In these cases, treatment should focus exclusively on in vivo exercises.  We recommend that the therapist discuss the plan for that session with the patient in the beginning of the session. Barring any unusual circumstances (e.g., patient’s stated objection to proceeding with the planned exposure), it is important to limit these discussions to no more than 15 minutes. Patients with OCD are usually very fearful of engaging in exposure tasks, and elaborate discussion of the task at hand may serve as a form of avoidance of going ahead with the exposure. These preexposure discussions are also fertile ground for assurance seeking (i.e., the patient asking the therapist if he/she is certain that the proposed exercise is safe). The therapist should answer such questions carefully, avoiding either extreme (i.e., neither providing compulsive reassurance nor conveying to the patient that the proposed exposure is objectively dangerous).  Imaginal exposure exercises are typically conducted prior to in vivo exercises in each session, often as a pre    Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder  lude to the scheduled in vivo exercise. During imaginal exposure the patient is seated in a comfortable chair and is given the following instructions:  “Today you will be imagining [describes scene]. I’ll ask you to close your eyes so that you won’t be distracted. Please try to picture this scene as fully and vividly as possible, not like you are being told a story, but as if you were experiencing it now, right here. Every few minutes I will ask you to rate your anxiety level on a scale from 0 to 100. Please answer quickly and try not to leave the image.”  The imaginal exposure sessions are audiotaped, and the patient is asked to repeat the exposure by listening to the tape as part of that day’s homework. The situations included in in vivo exposure vary greatly from patient to patient (particularly with patients with prominent checking rituals). Below are some examples of instructions that might be offered to patients during in vivo exposure exercises.  For patients with prominent washing rituals:  “Today, you will be touching [specifies item(s)]. This means that I will ask you to touch it with your whole hand, not just the fingers, and then to touch it to your face, hair, and clothing, all over yourself, so you feel that no part of you has avoided contamination. Then I’ll ask you to sit and hold it and repeatedly touch it to your face, hair, and clothes during the rest of the session. I know that this is likely to make you upset, but remember the anxiety will eventually decrease. I also want you to go ahead and let yourself worry about the harm you are afraid will occur—for example, disease—since you won’t he washing or cleaning after this exposure. I am sorry that this treatment has to be difficult and cause so much discomfort, but I’m sure you can do it. You’ll find it gets easier as time goes on. OK, here it is, go ahead and touch it.”  The therapist should give the patient the object to hold, ask him/her to touch it, and then ask the patient to touch the object or the “contaminated” hands directly to his/her face, hair, and clothing. Every 10 minutes the patient should be asked, “What is your level of anxiety or discomfort from 0 to 100 right now as you focus on what you’re touching?” This can be shortened to “What is your SUDS?” once the patient understands the question.   For patients with prominent checking rituals:  “Now, I’d like you to [e.g., write out your checks to pay your monthly bills without looking at them after you’ve finished; just put them in the envelope and then we will mail them right away, without checking even once after you’ve done it]. Then we will go on and do [e.g., drive on a bumpy road without looking in the rearview mirror] in the same way. While doing this, I would like you to worry about what harm might occur because you aren’t checking your actions, but don’t let the thoughts interfere with actually doing those activities.”  Patients should be reminded of the specific instructions for response prevention on the first day of treatment and periodically during treatment. We have found that giving patients a printed copy of the rules for response prevention can help them to understand and remember the rules. If the rules as outlined for the patient do not adequately cover the type of ritual(s) the patient exhibits, the therapist should provide a written set of instructions modeled after these forms.  During the last few sessions of treatment, the patient should be introduced to rules of “normal” washing, cleaning, or checking. Response prevention requirements should be relaxed to enable the patient to return to what is considered a normal routine.  Home Visit  It is important to ensure that the patient’s gains from the treatment program generalize to the home environment. Usually homework assignments function to produce this generalization, but we have found that visits by the therapist to the patient’s home can be quite helpful, especially in cases where the patient is not able to return home daily during the intensive treatment phase (e.g., patients who are from out of town or are hospitalized). The home visit also offers therapist and patient an opportunity to discuss guidelines for “normal” behavior. The therapist should discuss the plans for these visits with the patient and his/her family before the treatment ends. It is also important to note that, in some cases, the majority of the treatment sessions need to be conducted at the patient’s home, such as when treating a hoarder. Determining the frequency of home visits during the core treatment should be based on whether the patient’s OCD symptoms are readily “transportable” to   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  situations outside the home, or whether they are specific to the home. For patients with prominent washing rituals, with “safe” rooms and areas in their houses, contamination of these areas is imperative and also quite difficult; it is often advisable that the therapist assist directly with these home-based exposures when it is questionable whether the patient can contaminate these “sanctuaries” successfully on his/her own.  Typically, the home visit comprises 4-hour sessions held on each of 2 days at the end of the treatment program. The bulk of the time in these sessions is used to conduct additional exposures to obsessive stimuli in and around the patient’s home or workplace. For example, the therapist might accompany the patient as he/she contaminates objects around the house or at the local grocery store. Similarly, the patient might be asked to turn the stove on and off without checking and leave the house with the therapist. Most patients, particularly those who were able to return home during treatment, will report little or no discomfort when doing these exposures because they represent repetition of homework assignments. In some cases, though, the therapist will discover areas that the patient has not contaminated, or some areas at home that continue to generate distress despite previous exposures. The home visit should focus on exposure to situations or objects that remain problematic.  Maintenance Period  In addition to prescribing continued self-exposure tasks to help the patient maintain therapy gains, the therapist may wish to schedule regular maintenance sessions. These sessions may be used to plan additional exposures, to refine guidelines for normal behavior, and to address issues that arise as the patient adjusts to life without OCD.  There is some evidence that patients benefit from continued contact with the therapist following the intensive therapy sessions. In one study, 12 weekly supportive therapy sessions (no exposure exercises) appeared to reduce the number of relapses in a sample of individuals with OCD treated with 3 weeks of intensive EX/RP (Foa et al., 1992). In another study, following the intensive treatment with 1 week of daily cognitive-behavioral sessions followed by eight brief (10-minute) weekly telephone contacts resulted in better long-term outcome than following intensive treatment with 1 week of treatment with free association (Hiss et al., 1994).  Therapeutic Setting  It is advisable for patients to remain in their normal environments during intensive treatment. This is particularly important for patients whose fears are cued mainly by stimuli in their home environment. The hospital may be an artificially protected setting, particularly for patients with prominent checking rituals, who may not feel responsible for their surroundings and as a result do not experience their usual urges to check. If patients live too far away to commute for daily sessions, we recommend that they rent an apartment or hotel room near the clinic. When this is not possible, hospitalization should be considered. Hospitalization is recommended for patients deemed to be at risk for suicide or psychotic breakdown, and for those who need close supervision but lack a support system sufficient to aid them during treatment.  If a patient is employed and his/her OCD symptoms are work related, he/she should be encouraged to continue working, so that relevant exposures can he included in treatment. However, since treatment requires 5 to 6 hours per day, the patient may opt to work half-days during the intensive treatment.  When the patient’s symptoms are unrelated to work, he/she may decide not to continue working during intensive treatment. Because of the time-consuming nature of the treatment, we often suggest that patients take some time off from work. If it is not possible for the patient to take 3 full weeks off from work, the therapist might suggest that the patient work half-days or take time off from work during the first and second weeks of the treatment program.  Therapist Variables  Intensive treatment with exposure to feared situations and response prevention of ritualistic behavior provoke considerable stress for patients. Their willingness to undergo such “torture” attests to their strong motivation to rid themselves of the OCD symptoms. The intensive treatment regimen requires that the therapist maintain a delicate balance between pressuring the patient to engage in the treatment and empathizing with his/ her distress. Clinical observations and findings from a study by Rabavilas and colleagues (1979) suggest that a respectful, understanding, encouraging, explicit, and challenging therapist is more likely to achieve a successful outcome than a permissive, tolerant therapist. Notably, patients of well-supervised, nonexpert EX/RP   Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder  therapists appear to fare well with EX/RP (Franklin, Abramowitz, Furr, Kalsy, & Riggs, 2003; Valderhaug et al., 2007).  During treatment, patients’ behavior may range from extreme cooperation and willingness to participate in exposures to blatant manipulation and refusal to follow the therapist’s instructions. An individual patient may fluctuate depending on what exposure is conducted during a particular session. To a great extent, the “art” of conducting behavioral therapy for OCD involves knowing when to push, when to confront, and when to be more flexible. Such decisions require that the therapist carefully observe the patient’s reactions and make a judgment based on his/her experience. As much as possible, the therapist should display an attitude that counteracts the harshness of the treatment program, while maintaining the rules for therapy established at the beginning of the program. The therapist should assure the patient that he/she will not use force to implement exposure and that no exposure will be planned without the patient’s consent. If the patient cannot trust that the therapist will adhere to these essential guidelines, the treatment is likely to be compromised. We also assure the patients that family members will be asked not to present unplanned exposures to the patient (e.g., taking out the garbage) without discussing it.  Patient Variables  A primary factor that influences a patient’s potential for benefiting from intensive behavioral treatment is the level of his/her motivation. Because EX/RP causes high distress, patients need to be highly motivated to undertake the treatment. Often the level of motivation is related to the severity of the patient’s symptoms. When symptoms are sufficiently intolerable, patients are more likely to tolerate considerable discomfort for a short period to gain relief from their symptoms in the long run. Tolin and colleagues (2004) have also discussed the importance of motivational readiness in EX/ RP and have suggested specifically how best to prepare patients for the often grueling treatment regimen.  Sometimes individuals are pressured into entering therapy by their families, and they agree to participate in treatment only to appease a spouse or a parent. These patients are unlikely to follow the therapist’s instructions strictly; therefore, they are less likely to make lasting gains in therapy. In light of these observations, we do not recommend that patients enter into EX/RP if they are not committed to follow such instructions;  alternative treatment strategies are typically recommended in such circumstances.  It is important that the therapist clearly explain to the patient that 1 month of therapy, albeit intensive, is unlikely to eliminate all OCD symptoms. Rather, patients should expect that their anxiety and the urges to ritualize will diminish and become more manageable. An expectation of becoming symptom free at the end of treatment may lead to disappointment and can potentiate relapse because maintenance of treatment gains usually requires continued effort over time following the intensive treatment. Thus, in the initial interview, we tell patients that we do not have a “cure” for OCD; rather, we have a treatment that is likely to help them substantially reduce their symptoms in both the short and the long run.  It is also important to explain to patients that EX/ RP treatment is not a panacea for all of their psychological and interpersonal problems. This treatment is aimed specifically at reducing patients’ obsessions and urges to ritualize. Problems that existed prior to treatment (e.g., marital discord or depression) are likely to remain, although they may be somewhat alleviated after treatment.  As mentioned earlier, patients with severe depression and/or an extremely strong belief in the reality of the obsessive fear may not benefit from EX/RP. An additional factor that has been identified as a potential hindrance to the cognitive-behavioral and pharmacological treatment of OCD is concurrent schizotypal personality disorder (Jenike, Baer, Minichiello, Schwartz, & Carey, 1986). Although some questions have been raised about the method used to diagnose schizotypy (see Stanley, Turner, & Borden, 1990), therapists should be alerted to the probability that patients with schizotypal disorder may respond poorly to treatment for OCD.  case stuDy  In this section we demonstrate through verbatim material the process of gathering information relevant to treatment, planning the treatment program, and conducting exposure sessions.  Case Description  “June,” a 26-year-old married woman who had just completed her bachelor’s degree in nursing, sought   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  treatment for a severe washing and cleaning problem. She was extremely agitated in the first interview and described herself as “crying a whole lot” during the previous 6 weeks. She arrived in the company of her husband of 6 months and her sister-in-law, whom she considered a good friend. Previous treatment by systematic desensitization, antidepressants, tranquilizers, and cognitive restructuring had proven ineffective. June had been unable to seek employment as a nurse due to her symptoms.  This information was collected at June’s initial evaluation for participation in EX/RP treatment. After ascertaining the absence of psychosis, drug and alcohol abuse, and organic disorders, June was assigned a therapist.  Information Gathering  Current Symptoms  First, the therapist sought information from June about the obsessional content, including external and internal fear cues; beliefs about consequences; and information about passive avoidance patterns and types of rituals. Because rituals are the most concrete symptom, it is often convenient to begin the inquiry by asking for a description of this behavior.  tHeraPist: I understand from Dr. F that you are having a lot of difficulty with washing and cleaning. Can you tell me more about the problem?  June: I can’t seem to control it at all recently. I wash too much. My showers are taking a long time, and my husband is very upset with me. He and my sister-inlaw are trying to help, but I can’t stop it. I’m upset all the time and I’ve been crying a whole lot lately (on the verge of tears). Nothing seems to help.  tHeraPist: I see. You look upset right now. Please try to explain what your washing has been like in the past few days, so I can understand. How much washing have you been doing?  June: Much too much. My showers use up all the hot water. And I have to wash my hands, it seems like, all the time. I never feel clean enough.  tHeraPist: About how long does a shower take? How many minutes or hours would you say? June: About 45 minutes, I guess. I try to get out sooner. Sometimes I ask Kenny to make me stop.  tHeraPist: And how often do you take one?  June: Usually only twice, once in the morning and once at night before bed, but sometimes, if I’m really upset about something, I could take an extra one.  tHeraPist: And what about washing your hands? How much time does that take? June: You mean how many times do I wash?  tHeraPist: How long does it take each time you wash your hands, and how often do you wash your hands in a day?  June: Umm, maybe 20 times a day. It probably takes me 5 minutes each time, maybe more sometimes. I always have the feeling they’re not really clean, like maybe I touched them to the side of the sink after I rinsed and then I think they’re dirty again.  The therapist now had some basic information about the most prominent rituals. Some further questioning clarified whether other compulsions were also in evidence.   tHeraPist: Do you do anything else to make yourself feel clean? June: Yes, I alcohol things. I wipe with alcohol, like the car seat before I sit down.  tHeraPist: Do you wipe yourself with alcohol?  June: No, only things that I think are dirty.  tHeraPist: Can you tell me how much you do that?  June: I use about a bottle of alcohol a week.  Here the therapist had to choose whether to inquire about what objects June cleans or to ask about possible additional rituals. The therapist chose to continue the inquiry about ritualistic actions, and to turn to the subject of “contaminants” as soon as the inquiry was completed.  tHeraPist: OK, can you think of any other things that you do to clean yourself, or other things around you that you feel are dirty?  June: That’s all I can think of right now.  tHeraPist: What about other kinds of what we call “compulsive” type of activities? Do you have to check or repeat things over and over?  June: No, except when I wash, if I don’t feel it’s enough. Then I wash again.   Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder  tHeraPist: No other repetitive actions besides washing?   Since this patient did not appear to have multiple types of ritualistic behaviors, the therapist turned to the obsessional content. External cues are usually solicited first.  tHeraPist: What are the things that make you feel you want to wash? For instance, why do you wipe the car seat with alcohol?  June: I think that maybe I got dog dirt on it when I got in from before, or Kenny might have. tHeraPist: From your shoes?  June: Yes, I also worry about the hem of my dress touching the seat. I’ve been worrying that my shoe could kick my skirt hem or when I step up a step, like to go in a building, the dress could touch the step.  tHeraPist: A dress like this? June was wearing a dress that came to just below her knee. [The likelihood that it could have touched a curb or sole of her shoe was very slim.]  June: Yes. tHeraPist: Has your skirt ever had dog dirt on it? June: I don’t think so, but in my mind I think that  maybe it could have gotten some on it. I suppose it would be hard for that to happen, wouldn’t it?  Thoughts that highly improbable events might have occurred are common in OCD. Such distortions may be the result of intense anxiety. Doubts about “safety” often lead to requests for reassurance or to rituals. Reassuring June that her dress is unlikely to be soiled would have been countertherapeutic because it perpetuates the neurotic fears. Rather, the therapist inquired further about the obsessional content.  tHeraPist: Is dog “dirt” the most upsetting thing that you worry about? June: Probably. Yes, I think so, but bathroom germs are pretty bad, too. tHeraPist: What sort of germs? June: From toilets. You know, when you go to the bathroom. tHeraPist: Urine and feces?  June: Yes, urine doesn’t bother me as much as the other.  tHeraPist: Why?  June: Because I learned in nursing school that it’s almost sterile. I had a hard time in the course about microbiology because it upset me to try to learn about bacteria and microorganisms. They make it sound like there are all kinds of germs everywhere that are real dangerous. I didn’t learn it very well; I tried to avoid thinking about it.  June’s concerns with both dog dirt and bathroom germs suggested that her fear structure includes apprehension about potential illness. The therapist questioned her to better understand the nature of the feared consequences of contamination.  tHeraPist: Are you afraid of diseases that could come from feces?  June: Yes, I guess so. The thing of it is, though, I know other people don’t worry about it like I do. To them, you know, they just go to the bathroom and wash their hands and don’t even think about it. But I can’t get it out of my head that maybe I didn’t get clean enough.  tHeraPist: If you didn’t wash enough, would you get sick or would you cause someone else to get sick? June: Mostly I worry that I’ll get sick, but sometimes I worry about Kenny, too.  tHeraPist: Do you worry about a particular kind of disease? June: I’m not sure. Some kind of illness.  It is not uncommon for patients who fear harm that may ensue from not ritualizing to be unable to identify a specific feared consequence. Patients with prominent checking rituals often fear they will forget or throw out something important, but they do not always know exactly what this will be. Repeaters may fear that something bad will happen to loved ones but often cannot specify what particular disaster will befall them. However, many individuals with OCD do fear specific consequences (e.g., blindness or leukemia). At this point, the therapist may choose either to complete the inquiry about external threat cues or pursue the investigation about the feared consequences and the belief that such harm is indeed likely to occur. The latter course was selected here.   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  tHeraPist: Let’s say that you did actually touch dog feces or human feces, and you weren’t aware of it, so you didn’t wash to remove it. What is the likelihood that you or Kenny would really get seriously ill?  June: Well, I feel like it really could happen.  tHeraPist: I understand that when it happens and you become very distressed, it feels like you will actually become sick, but if I ask you to judge objectively, right now, how likely is it that you will get sick from touching feces and not washing? For example, if you were to touch feces 10 times, how many times would you get sick?  June: Oh, I know it’s pretty unlikely, but sometimes it seems so real.  tHeraPist: Can you put a number on it? What’s the percent chance that if you touched a small amount of feces and didn’t wash that you’d get sick?  June: I’d say low, less than 25%.  tHeraPist: That means that one time in every four you’d get sick. June: No, that’s not right. I guess it’s really less than 1%.  From this dialogue it is clear that June did not strongly believe that her feared disasters would actually occur, although her initial estimate of the likelihood was high. A person with poor insight regarding the senselessness of his/her OCD symptoms would have assigned higher probabilities (usually over 80%) and would insist on the accuracy of his/her estimate even in the face of persistent questioning. Note also that this exchange is an example of the informal cognitive restructuring accompanying EX/RP that we discussed earlier. The therapist may need to repeat this discussion during subsequent exposure sessions when June, highly anxious about confronting contaminants, readjusts her likelihood estimates when anxious. Strength of belief can change in a given patient but is stronger when the patient perceives threat.  tHeraPist: OK. Now, besides disease, what else could happen if you got feces on you?  June: I suppose I’m also afraid of what other people might think if I got dog feces on my shoe or on my dress. Somebody would see it or smell it and think it was really disgusting, and I was a dirty person. I think I’m afraid they would think I’m not a good person.  The therapist then questioned June further about this feared consequence, inquiring about the possibility of others evaluating her character negatively because she had feces on her dress. The material regarding feared consequences was collected for later inclusion in the imaginal exposure scenes. To conclude the inquiry about the nature of the obsessions, the therapist further elucidated the external feared stimuli.  tHeraPist: Besides dog and human feces and toilets, what else can “contaminate” you? Is it OK if I use the word “contaminated” to describe how you feel if you handle these things?  June: Yes, it’s like I can feel it on my skin, even if I can’t see it. Umm, I also get upset if I see “bird doo” on my car.  tHeraPist: Bird droppings? The whitish spots?  June: Yeah, I have to hold my skirt close to me so that I don’t touch any of these spots with my clothes.  tHeraPist: OK, bird doo, what else?  June: Dead animals, like on the roadside. I feel like the germs, or whatever it is, get on the tires from the pavement and get on the car. Even if I don’t run over it. Like it’s spread around the street near it.  tHeraPist: What do you do if you see a dead animal?  June: I swerve wide around it. Once I parked the car and as I got out, I saw this dead cat right behind the car. I had to wash all my clothes and take a shower right away. It was really a mess that day.  tHeraPist: It sounds like that was very difficult for you. Is there anything else besides dead animals that contaminates you?  June: I can’t think of any. There are lots of places I avoid now, but that’s because of what we just talked about.  The therapist questions June further about other items that are likely to be contaminated because of their potential relationship to the ones she has already noted.  tHeraPist: What about trash or garbage?  June: Yeah, that bothers me. And I also avoid gutters on the street.  tHeraPist: What’s in the gutter that upsets you? June: Dead animals, I guess. And then the rain spreads the germs down the street. Also rotten garbage. It’s   Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder  really dirty. Sometimes the gutters are really disgusting. tHeraPist: Um hmm. Are you afraid you could get sick from dead animals and garbage? June: Yes, it’s like the toilets or dog dirt.  To prepare for an exposure program in which objects are presented hierarchically with respect to their ability to provoke discomfort, June was asked to rank her major contaminants. Here she also provided information about avoidance behaviors associated with her contaminants.  tHeraPist: Now, let’s make a list of the main things that upset you. I’m going to ask you how distressed you would be on a 0- to 100-point scale if you touched the thing I’ll name. Zero indicates no distress at all and 100 means you’d be extremely upset, the most you’ve ever felt.  June: OK. tHeraPist: What if you touched dog dirt? June: And I could wash as much as I wanted? tHeraPist: No, let’s say you couldn’t wash for a while. June: 100. tHeraPist: A dead animal. June: Also 100. tHeraPist: Bird doo on your car. June: That depends on whether it is wet or dry. tHeraPist: Tell me for both. June: 100 wet and 95 dry. tHeraPist: Street gutter. June: 95. tHeraPist: Garbage in your sink at home. June: Not too bad. Only 50. But, the trash can outdoors  would be 90. tHeraPist: Why the difference? June: Because the inside of the trash can is dirty from  lots of old garbage. tHeraPist: I see. What about a public toilet seat? June: That’s bad. 95. tHeraPist: Car tires? June: Usually 90. But if I just passed a dead animal,  they’d be 99.  tHeraPist: What about a doorknob to a public bathroom?   June: The outside knob is low, like 40. But the inside knob is 80 because people touch it right after they’ve used the bathroom, and I’ve seen that some don’t wash their hands.  tHeraPist: I understand. How about grass in a park where dogs are around?  June: If I did walk in the grass, it would be about 80 or 85, but I don’t usually do it. I also have a lot of trouble on sidewalks. You know, the brown spots on the concrete. I guess most of it is just rust or other dirt, but I think maybe it could be dog dirt.  tHeraPist: How much does that bother you? June: To step on a brown spot? About 90. I always walk  around them.  The therapist should continue in this manner until a list of 10–20 items is formed. More items may be necessary for patients with multiple obsessional fears or rituals. The items are ordered from low- to high-level fear in preparation for treatment by exposure. Items equivalent with regard to their level of disturbance are grouped together. Moreover, it is important to probe the rationale for one stimulus differing from another because it provides further information about the patient’s particular “OCD logic.” This information is highly relevant for the construction of the exposure hierarchy and for the informal cognitive discussions about risk assessment, responsibility, and so forth.  Considerable information about avoidance patterns and rituals emerged from the previous interview about external threat cues. More details may be obtained by asking the patient to provide a step-by-step description of a typical day’s activities from the time he/she awakens until he/she goes to sleep. Usually, patients are not entirely accurate when describing their compulsive behaviors during the interview because, as one patient told us, they have not “thought of their OCD in that way before.” Thus, the self-monitoring tasks assist patients in raising their awareness about the OCD patterns and provide the therapist with more accurate data about rituals and avoidant behaviors.  We were particularly concerned by June’s bathroom routines, her shower, use of the toilet, handling of towels and dirty clothes, and dressing and putting on shoes. Additional information about avoidance patterns may be ascertained by inquiring about other routine activi    CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  ties, such as shopping, eating out, housecleaning, preparing meals, working, and so on. The following dialogue exemplifies the degree of detail desired.  tHeraPist: June, for us to plan your treatment carefully, I need to know what you avoid in your daily routine. Why don’t you start by describing what you do first when you wake up.  June: I go to use the bathroom first.  tHeraPist: Nightgown on or off?  June: I take off my nightgown because I don’t want it to touch the toilet. That way it’s clean at night after I shower.  tHeraPist: Go on.  June: I go to the toilet. I suppose I use a lot of toilet paper because I don’t want to get anything on my hand. Then I have to shower after a bowel movement.  tHeraPist: How do you get ready to shower?  June: I have to put a new towel on the rod near the shower. I don’t like it to touch anything before I use it. Oh, and I put my slippers facing the door, near the shower, so I can put them on without stepping on the bathroom floor when I get out of the shower. Then I get into the shower.  tHeraPist: You said you shower for 45 minutes. Why does it take so long?  June: I have to wash myself in a special order and I count how many times I wash each part. Like I wash my arm four times. That’s why it takes so long.  tHeraPist: What is the order you use?  June: First I wash my hands, then my face and hair, and then I go from the top down.  tHeraPist: What about the genital and anal area? [This area should disturb this patient most because she fears contamination from fecal “germs.”]  June: Oh yes, those are last, after my feet.  Such a detailed description helps the therapist to anticipate possible avoidance by the patient during treatment and to plan specific exposure instructions. Supervision of normal washing behavior at the end of treatment will address June’s tendency to count and to order her washing. During the initial session of information gathering, June was instructed to self-monitor the frequency and duration of her compulsions.  tHeraPist: Between now and our next session, I’d like you to record all the washing and cleaning that you do, including wiping things with alcohol. You can use this form (Hands her a self-monitoring of rituals form.) Please write down every time you wash, how long you washed, what made you wash, and how anxious you were before you washed. This kind of record will help us identify any sources of contamination you’ve forgotten to mention, and we can also use it to measure your progress during treatment.  June: Do you want me to write in each space for each half-hour?  tHeraPist: No, only when you wash or use alcohol.  June: OK.  History of Symptoms and Treatment History  After assessing the patient’s current symptoms, the therapist sought information about the onset of the problem, with particular reference to the presence of specific stressors at the time and whether these stressors are still present.  tHeraPist: How long have you been washing like this?  June: It started about 2 years ago in my first year of nursing school. It wasn’t real bad right away. It started with the city. I had to go into the city to classes, and the city seemed real dirty.  tHeraPist: Did nursing have something to do with it?  June: Maybe. I was under a lot of tension. I had to quit working as a secretary, and it was pretty hard without an income and a lot of school bills. My mother and dad weren’t much help. And then we started to learn all the sterilizing techniques, and I already told you about the course in microbiology.  tHeraPist: Did it gradually get worse?  June: Mostly, but I did notice that it was a lot worse after a rotation on surgery, where I was really worried about germs contaminating the instruments. That’s when I started to wash more than usual.  tHeraPist: Did you seek help at that time?  June: I was already seeing Dr. W at the university, and he tried to help.  tHeraPist: You were already in treatment with him? For what reason?   Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder  June: He was helping me with an eating problem. I had anorexia. I’d been seeing him for about a year when the washing started.  tHeraPist: Anorexia? Did treatment help?  June: Yes. I was down to 85 pounds and I’m up around 105 now. He mostly asked me to increase my weight every week and he did “cognitive therapy,” I think it’s called.  tHeraPist: I see. What about the washing problem?  June: He tried the same type of therapy, but it didn’t work for that. That’s why I’m here. My sister-in-law heard about it, and Dr. W said I should come.  tHeraPist: What about drugs? Were you ever given medication for this problem?  June: Yes, I tried Anafranil [clomipramine] for a while and it helped a little, but it made me dizzy and sleepy, so I decided to stop taking it. Also, I heard that you can’t take the medication when you are pregnant, and Kenny and I want to have a baby soon. Before that, I took Xanax [alprazolam]; it calmed me down but didn’t stop the washing.  tHeraPist: Have you tried any other treatments?  June: Only for the anorexia. I went to another counseling center at the university for about a year, but that didn’t really help at all.  June’s history was unusual only in the relatively recent onset of her symptoms. Typically, patients in our clinic present a much longer duration of symptoms, with the mean around 8 years. Other centers in England and Holland report similar figures. June’s treatment history of trying various psychotherapeutic and pharmacological treatments prior to seeking EX/RP was quite typical. Since previous failure with nonbehavioral treatments has not been found to influence outcome with EX/RP, the clinician should not be discouraged by such a history. However, because of a possible skeptical attitude about the value of treatment, the therapist should provide the patient with a clear rationale for EX/ RP treatment along the lines discussed earlier and demonstrated below.  tHeraPist: Before I continue to collect more information about your problem, let me tell you about our treatment.  June: Well, Dr. F told me something about it, but  I’m still not sure what this treatment is going to be like.  tHeraPist: The treatment is called exposure and ritual prevention. I’ll be asking you to confront situations and things that frighten you or make you feel contaminated. We will do this gradually, working up to the hardest things. For example, we may begin with the outside door handles of bathrooms and work our way up to toilet seats and bird doo. We’ll do this together, and I’ll be there to help you. The sessions will last 1½ or 2 hours, and we’ll meet every weekday. In addition, I’ll assign you homework to do similar things between the therapy sessions.  June: You mean I have to touch them, even dog dirt?  tHeraPist: Yes, to get over these kinds of fears, people must learn to confront what they’re afraid of and stay with it until the discomfort decreases.  June: Even if I did, it would probably take me a year to get used to it.  tHeraPist: Remember, you didn’t always feel like this about dog dirt. When you were younger, did you ever step in dog dirt and just wipe it off on the grass and go on playing?  June: Yeah, I forget that. It seems such a long time ago. I used to not think twice about this stuff.  tHeraPist: To get you back to how you used to feel, we need to expose you directly to what you’re afraid of. Now, there’s a second part to treatment. I’m also going to ask you not to wash for 3 days at a stretch. No handwashing or showering for 3 days. Then you can take a shower, but you will have to limit it to 10 minutes. After the shower, you will have to contaminate yourself again, then wait another 3 days for your next shower.  June: I can’t believe it! I’ll never be able to do that. If I could, I wouldn’t be here. How can I not wash? Every day I resolve to stop, but I always give in. You mean I wouldn’t be able to wash after I use the bathroom or before I eat? Other people wash after they use the toilet. Why can’t I just wash less, like normal people do?  tHeraPist: Other people don’t have OCD. Remember, for you, washing makes you feel less “contaminated” and less anxious. Right?  June: Yes.   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  tHeraPist: If you wash, even briefly, whenever you feel “contaminated,” you never get a chance to learn that the feeling of contamination would go away by itself without washing. If you are really very anxious, it might take a while, even several hours, before you feel better, but it will eventually happen. On the other hand, if you wash, even briefly, every few hours, it will reinforce your idea that you have to wash to feel better.  June: But why 3 days? Couldn’t I shower once a day like other people?  tHeraPist: For the same reason. You’d still feel relief, even if you waited 24 hours between washings. And that would strengthen your belief that you need to “decontaminate” by washing yourself. You must learn to use soap and water to feel clean and fresh but not to “decontaminate” yourself.  June: I think I understand. I know I shower now to get the things I’m afraid of off my body. I used to shower just to get sweat and dirt off, and feel nice. I’m still not sure I could stand it though, not washing for that long.  tHeraPist: The treatment is very demanding. Before we start the treatment program you will need to make a commitment to yourself that even though you will feel very uncomfortable and even quite upset at times, you won’t wash. I’ll try to help you as much as I can by planning the treatment so you know what to expect each day and by supporting you whenever you need it. Someone will have to be available to help supervise and support you any time you need it. Between sessions you can always call me here or at home if a problem comes up. I know the treatment won’t be easy for you, but I’m sure you can do it if you make up your mind.  At this point, a firm commitment should not be requested. Rather, the patient should be made aware of what will be required so that he/she can adjust to these expectations and plan activities during the treatment period accordingly. The patient should make the arrangements necessary to attend daily treatment sessions for 3 to 4 weeks. As we discussed earlier, two to three sessions per week may be sufficient for patients with less severe symptoms. It is important that the therapist not minimize the difficulty of the treatment regimen, so that the patient is prepared to struggle and enters treatment with a readiness to mobilize inner resources and emotional support from family and friends.  The history of the patient is usually taken in the first session. Because collecting histories of individuals with OCD does not differ from collecting histories of other psychiatric patients, details are not provided here.  Treatment Planning  The therapist began the second session by briefly reviewing the patient’s self-monitoring of rituals form. The remainder of the session was devoted to developing a treatment plan.  tHeraPist: OK, now I want to discuss our plan for each day during the first week of therapy. We need to expose you both in imagination and in reality to the things that bother you, which we talked about in our first sessions. As I said already, we’ll also limit your washing. The scenes you imagine will focus on the harm that you fear will occur if you do not wash. The actual exposures will focus on confronting the things that contaminate you. Restricting your washing will teach you how to live without rituals. In imaginal exposure, you will picture yourself touching something you’re afraid of, like toilet seats, and not washing and then becoming ill. We can have you imagine going to a doctor who can’t figure out what’s wrong and can’t fix it. That’s the sort of fear you have, right?  June: Yes, that and Kenny getting sick, and it being my fault.  tHeraPist: OK, so in some scenes you’ll be sick, and in others Kenny will get sick. Should I add that other people blame you for not being careful? Is this what you’re afraid of?  June: Yes, especially my mother.  tHeraPist: OK. We’ll have her criticize you for not being careful enough. Can you think of anything else we should add to the image?  June: No, that’s about it.  tHeraPist: We can compose the scenes in detail after we plan the actual exposures. Let’s review the list of things you avoid or are afraid to touch and make sure that we have listed them in the right order. Then we’ll decide what to work on each day. OK?  June: OK.  June reviewed the list, which included items such as trash cans, kitchen floor, bathroom floor, public hall    Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder  way carpet, plant dirt, puddles, car tires, dried dog “dirt,” and bird “doo.” Changes were made as needed.  tHeraPist: Good. Now let’s plan the treatment. On the first day we should start with things that you rated below a 60. That would include touching this carpet, doorknobs that are not inside bathrooms, books on my shelves, light switches, and stair railings. On the second day, we’ll do the 60- to 70-level items, like faucets, bare floors, dirty laundry, and the things on Kenny’s desk. [The therapist continued to detail Sessions 3 to 5, increasing the level of difficulty each day.] In the second week, we will repeat the worse situations like gutters, tires, public toilets, bird doo, and dog dirt, and we’ll also find a dead animal to walk near and touch the street next to it.  On rare occasions, direct confrontation with a feared object (e.g., pesticides or other chemicals) may have some likelihood of producing actual harm. In such cases, the therapist’s judgment should be exercised to find a middle ground between total avoidance and endangerment. With chemicals, for example, patients are exposed to small quantities that are objectively nonharmful. In June’s case the therapist decided that direct contact with a dead animal was not called for, and that stepping on the animal’s fur with her shoe and then touching the shoe sole constituted sufficient exposure. In general, the therapist must weigh the level of obsessional distress that will be evoked by a given exposure with the objective risks entailed in completing that exposure. Patients with OCD have difficulty assessing such risks realistically; thus, it is the responsibility of the therapist to evaluate whether exposure is warranted. For example, patients with fears of contracting HIV would certainly be highly distressed if asked to handle a dirty hypodermic needle found in a city gutter, but because exposure to such stimuli is objectively risky, they should not be included on the treatment hierarchy.  tHeraPist: How does this plan sound?  June: The first week is OK, but I’m really scared about the second week. I’m not sure I’ll be ready to do the bathrooms and dog dirt by then.  tHeraPist: Many people feel this way at the beginning, but by the end of the first week, you won’t be as frightened as you are now about touching tires or public toilets. Remember, I will be here to help you  because it will probably be difficult in the beginning.   June: Yes, I know it. I feel like I don’t really have a choice anyhow. This washing is crazy and I’m disgusted with myself. I suppose I’m as ready as I’ll ever be.  tHeraPist: Good. Now remember, I’ll ask you to keep working on these things for 2 to 3 hours at home after each session, but you will already have done them with me, so I don’t think it will be too hard. I take it that you talked to Kenny about assisting us with supervising, since I saw him out in the waiting room.  June: Yes, he said that’s fine. He wanted to know what he should do.  tHeraPist: Let’s call him in. Did you talk to your sister-in-law about being available when Kenny is at work during the day?  June: Yes, she was really good about it, but she couldn’t come today because of the kids.  tHeraPist: If it’s difficult for her to come, I could talk to her on the phone. Why don’t you go get Kenny now?  Treatment  June was seen for 15 treatment sessions, held every weekday for 3 weeks. During the fourth week the therapist visited her twice at her home for 4 hours each time. During these visits, under the therapist’s supervision, June contaminated her entire house and exposed herself to objects at home and in her neighborhood that provoked distress. Thereafter, once-weekly follow-up sessions were instituted to ensure maintenance of gains and to address any other issues of concern to her.  As discussed earlier, treatment begins with exposure to moderately difficult items on the hierarchy and progresses to the most disturbing ones by the beginning of the second week. The most distressing items are repeated during the remainder of the second and third weeks. The following sequence, which occurred on the sixth day of treatment, exemplifies this process.  tHeraPist: How was your weekend?  June: Not that great. I suppose it was as good as I could expect. I took my shower Sunday night and I was so nervous about finishing in time I don’t even know if I washed right.   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  tHeraPist: Most people feel the same way. Remember though, you aren’t supposed to wash “right,” just to wash. Did Kenny time it?  June: Yes, he called out the minutes like you said, “5, 7, 9,” and then “stop.”  tHeraPist: You stopped when he said to?  June: Yes, but it still wasn’t easy.  tHeraPist: I know. I’m really pleased that you were careful to follow the rules.  June: I have pretty much decided that this is my chance to get better, so I’m trying my best.  tHeraPist: Good. I am glad you feel so positive. How was the homework?  June: I touched the floor and the soles of my shoes and the cement. It is all written on the daily sheet there. On Saturday, I went to my sister’s, so I could play with the kids like we said. They stepped on me when I lay on the floor and I tried to touch their bottoms when I held them. On Sunday, Kenny and I went to the park. I didn’t sit in the grass but I did walk around and touched my shoes afterward.  tHeraPist: The soles?  June: Yeah. We also went downtown and I threw some things in the trash cans and pushed them down, and tried to touch the sides. It’s sort of hard because I felt conspicuous, but I did it anyway.  tHeraPist: That sounds really good. I’m glad to hear it. How about your doormat and going into the garden?   June: I did the doormat and I stood in the garden, but I couldn’t touch the dirt. The neighbor’s dog always runs all over. I know I should have touched it, but I just couldn’t get up the courage.  tHeraPist: Well, you did do many other things. Let’s plan to go outside today and do it together, so it will be easier for you to walk in the garden when you go home.  June: OK.  June was very compliant with the treatment regimen. Some patients occasionally lapse on response prevention, particularly during the first week of the treatment program. The therapist should reinforce the patient for partial compliance but emphasize the need to comply fully with treatment instructions. With regard to expo   sure homework, it is not uncommon for patients to neglect completing some assignments. Again, they should be reinforced for what they have achieved and encouraged to complete all of the assignments.  tHeraPist: How are you and Kenny doing?  June: He got mad on Sunday night after the shower because I started to ask him how he showered and if I was clean enough. I think I nagged him too much, so he lost his temper. We just watched TV, and after a while we talked a bit and he sort of apologized for getting mad. But I understand; I ask too many questions. Otherwise, the rest of the weekend was OK.  tHeraPist: Well, it’s unfortunate that Kenny got mad, but it’s good that he didn’t answer your questions. He’s not supposed to reassure you about cleanliness.  June: I think he has a hard time knowing when to answer me and when not to. I am not real sure either. Could you talk to him before Wednesday when I shower again?  tHeraPist: That’s a good idea. I’ll call him after we’re done with today’s session. Now, today we’ll start with the scene about you driving your car to an appointment with me, and you get a flat tire and have to change it. The cars splash water in the puddle near you, and it lands on the car and on you. Then you notice a dead animal when you walk behind the car, and it’s right behind you. You really feel contaminated. You walk to the gas station nearby to see if they can fix the tire and you have to urinate so badly that you have to use their restroom. They agree to fix the tire if you remove it and bring it to them because otherwise they are too busy. Of course, that means you will have to handle the tire that is contaminated by the dead animal. We’ll add some bird doo on the street and on the sidewalk, too. Then, later you start to feel sick, and you feel like it’s from the dead animal. Sound awful enough?  June: Yeah. Ugh. That one is really bad. Do I have to? Never mind, I know the answer.  tHeraPist: OK. I want you to close your eyes now and imagine that you are driving your car on West Avenue.   Note that the therapist checked the patient’s assign   ment from the previous day to verify that she complet   ed it and did not engage in avoidance and rituals. This   Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder  provided an opportunity to reinforce efforts at selfexposure. It is important to keep track of completion of homework because patients do not always volunteer information about omissions. They will, however, admit failure to comply if directly asked and are likely to carry out the next assignment if reinforced adequately.  With regard to the conflict between June and Kenny, it is our experience that, like Kenny, most family members are quite willing to help. Difficulty may, however, arise when they are unable to help without becoming upset, thereby increasing the patient’s tension. Providing them with an opportunity to ventilate their frustration by contacting the therapist, who also may coach them in alternative reactions, may reduce familial tension.   That same session also included imaginal exposure to do a scenario planned in advance. Since that scenario had already been discussed in detail with the patient, it posed no surprises for her. It is presented for up to 1 hour, or until a substantial decrease in anxiety is evident. Next, the patient is confronted in vivo with situations like those included in the fantasized scene.  tHeraPist: It’s time to do the real thing now. I looked for a dead animal by the side of the road yesterday and I found one about a mile away. I think we should go there.  June: Yuck, that’s terrific. Just for me you had to find it.  tHeraPist: Today’s our lucky day. You knew we were  going to have to find one today anyhow. At least it’s  close.  June: Great.  Humor is encouraged and can be quite helpful if the patient is capable of responding to it. At the same time, it is important that the therapist laugh with rather than at the patient. Patients and therapists often develop a shorthand lexicon for discussing OCD and its treatment that is specific to them and aimed at promoting compliance with treatment. For example, one patient–therapist pair began to discuss exposure homework as “swallowing the frog,” based on a proverb that the patient introduced. When the therapist asked the patient if she had “swallowed the frog” that morning, it conveyed the difficulty of the exposure tasks she needed to do between sessions. It is important for the therapist to observe the patient’s interpersonal style to determine whether such banter is likely to promote the therapeutic goals.  tHeraPist: (outside the office) There it is, behind the car. Let’s go and touch the curb and street next to it. I don’t think that you need to touch it directly because it’s a bit smelly, but I want you to step next to it, then touch the sole of your shoe.  June: Yuck! It’s really dead. It’s gross!  tHeraPist: Yeah, it is a bit gross, but it’s also just a dead cat if you think about it plainly. What harm can it cause?  June: I don’t know. Suppose I get germs on my hand?  tHeraPist: What sort of germs?  June: Dead cat germs.  tHeraPist: What kind are they?  June: I don’t know. Just germs.  tHeraPist: Like the bathroom germs that we’ve already handled?  June: Sort of. People don’t go around touching dead cats.  tHeraPist: They also don’t go running home to shower or alcohol the inside of their car. It’s time to get over this. Now, come on over and I’ll do it first. (June follows.) OK. Touch the curb and the street. Here’s a stone you can carry with you and a piece of paper from under its tail. Go ahead, take it.  June: (looking quite uncomfortable) Ugh!  tHeraPist: We’ll both hold them. Now, touch it to your front and your skirt, and your face and hair. Like this. That’s good. What’s your anxiety level?  June: Ugh! 99. I’d say 100, but it’s just short of panic. If you weren’t here, it’d be 100.  tHeraPist: You know from past experience that this will be much easier in a while. Just stay with it and we’ll wait here. You’re doing fine.  June: (A few minutes pass in which she looks very upset.) Would you do this if it weren’t for me?  tHeraPist: Yes, if this were my car and I dropped my keys here, I’d just pick them up and go on.  June: You wouldn’t have to wash them?  tHeraPist: No. Dead animals aren’t delightful, but they’re part of the world we live in. What are the odds that we’ll get ill from this?  June: Very small, I guess. I feel a little bit better than at first. It’s about 90 now.  tHeraPist: Good! Just stay with it now.   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  The session continued for another 45 minutes, or until anxiety decreased substantially. During this period conversation focused generally on the feared situations and the patient’s reaction to them. The therapist inquired about June’s anxiety level approximately every 10 minutes. It is important to note that June and the therapist have engaged in conversation throughout the exposure task, discussing issues such as habituation, risk, responsibility, and long-term outcomes. At the same time it is imperative to refocus the patient on the exposure task at hand to ensure that he/she remains engaged with it. Thus, asking for SUDS ratings serves two purposes: It provides data about fear reduction, and it refocuses the patient on the exposure. However, if the informal discussion serves as a distractor, helping the patient “not think about” what he/she is doing, the therapist should limit such conversations.  tHeraPist: How do you feel now?  June: Well, it is easier, but I sure don’t feel great.  tHeraPist: Can you put a number on it?  June: About 55 or 60, I’d say.  tHeraPist: You worked hard today. You must be tired. Let’s stop now. I want you to take this stick and pebble with you so that you continue to be contaminated. You can keep them in your pocket and touch them frequently during the day. I want you to contaminate your office at work and your apartment with them. Touch them to everything around, including everything in the kitchen, chairs, your bed, and the clothes in your dresser. Oh, also, I’d like you to drive your car past this spot on your way to and from work. Can you do that?  June: I suppose so. The trouble is going home with all of this dirt.  tHeraPist: Why don’t you call Kenny and plan to get home after he does, so he can be around to help you. Remember, you can always call me if you have trouble.  June: Yeah. That’s a good idea. I’ll just leave work after he does. See you tomorrow.  This scenario illustrates the process of in vivo exposure. The therapist answered clearly the questions raised without detouring from the essential purpose of the session, exposure to the feared contaminant. After the initial increase, the anxiety may begin to drop rela   tively quickly for some patients and may require longer for others. As noted previously, it is advisable to continue the exposure until the patient appears visibly more at ease and reports a substantial decrease in anxiety (40 or 50%).  After 10–15 sessions, the patient’s reported anxiety level is expected to decrease considerably. At the 15th session, June reported a maximum discomfort of 70 SUDs(still somewhat high, although reduced from 99 SUDs), that lasted for a few minutes. Her minimal anxiety was 35 SUDs. Her average anxiety level during this session was 45 SUDs. Ideally, by the end of treatment the highest level should not exceed 50 SUDs and should drop below 20 SUDs at the end of the session. In June’s case, more follow-up sessions were required because her anxiety was still quite high.  To facilitate a transition to normal washing and cleaning behavior, the therapist instituted a normal washing regimen during the third week of treatment. The patient was allowed one 10-minute shower daily and no more than five 30-second handwashes when there was visible dirt on her hands or when they were sticky.  When the therapist arrived for a home treatment session the next week, the following conversation ensued:  tHeraPist: How did it go over the weekend?  June: Not too bad. But I got sort of upset Saturday. We went to a picnic and there were several piles of dog dirt around. I had on my flip-flops and I wanted to play volleyball. You can’t in flip-flops, so I went barefoot.  tHeraPist: That’s great! I’m glad to hear it.  June: Yeah, but then I got really upset about going home and carrying it into the apartment. I did it. I walked all over barefoot and with the flip-flops, but I worried about it for another whole day, until I talked to Kenny about my thoughts on Sunday around noon. I felt better when he said he wouldn’t worry about it. It seems like I feel guilty or something, like the house isn’t clean enough. But lately if he says it is clean, I’ve been able to take his word for it.  tHeraPist: Well, in time you’ll be able to make this kind of judgment yourself. How about your washing and cleaning?  June: It was all right. I washed for half a minute before I ate because I was dusty from playing volleyball. I   Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder  deliberately didn’t wash when I got home because I felt bad and I knew that if I did, it would be to “decontaminate” myself. I showered Saturday night and I did feel relieved, but I knew I should go and walk around barefoot and touch the floors I’d walked on. So I did that.  tHeraPist: That’s great! It sounds like you handled it fine. I’m really pleased. You avoided washing when it would mean reducing feelings of contamination, and you exposed yourself when you felt concerned about germs. That’s excellent. Now, let’s go over the problem situations that still need work here at home. What things still disturb you?  June: The basement. I haven’t done much with the kitty litter box and old shoes that I threw down there a year ago because they got contaminated. The closet still has some contaminated clothes. And I still worry about the backyard some. Also the porch. Pigeons have been perching on the roof and there are droppings on the railing now, so I thought I’d wait until you came to do that.  tHeraPist: OK. Let’s start low and work up. Which is easiest? June: The basement and closets. tHeraPist: Fine, down we go.  Exposure to contaminants during the home visit is conducted in the same manner as that during treatment sessions. Typically, home sessions last longer, from 2 to 4 hours, until all “dirty” items are touched and “clean” places are contaminated. These visits should be repeated if the patient expresses considerable concern about his/her ability to adopt a permanent regimen of nonavoidance.   Follow‑Up Sessions  June was seen weekly for 3 months, until she experienced a setback following the development of a new obsession. She became concerned about hitting a pedestrian while driving. Thoughts that she “might have hit someone” intruded, particularly after turning a corner or glancing in the mirror to change lanes. Once evoked, they persisted for several hours. To overcome this new problem, the therapist directed her to increase her driving and refrain from retracing her path or looking in the mirror to check for casualties. June was told that she  could stop her car only if she knew for certain that she hit someone. Thoughts that it “might” have occurred were to be ignored. To reduce June’s anxiety about having obsessions (e.g., “Oh, my God, here it is again. This is terrible”), she was advised to expect occasional recurrences of obsessive thoughts. The frequency of obsessions about hitting someone decreased from several each day to once weekly after 3 weeks of self-exposure; the associated anxiety diminished from 95 to 50 SUDs or less.  Of June’s germ-related obsessions, only that of dog feces partially recurred. Fears of public bathrooms and dead animals remained low. The therapist felt that June’s fear of dog feces had received insufficient attention during treatment. To address this return of fear, June was seen three times a week for 1-hour exposure sessions, in which she touched brown spots on the sidewalk and walked near, and eventually stepped on, dog feces. Homework included going to parks, walking on sidewalks without looking, stepping on dog feces, and stepping on the grass where she thought dogs had been. This treatment continued for 4 weeks and was reduced to twice a week for an additional 3 weeks. Thereafter, June came once weekly for another 6 weeks, during which the therapist assigned self-exposure and dealt with June’s everyday concerns. News media coverage of herpes led to a brief concern about public toilets, but this dissipated within a few days.  In the dialogue below, the therapist reviewed with June her progress at a 9-month follow-up.  tHeraPist: I’d like to know how you feel compared to when you first came here 9 months ago.  June: I’m definitely a lot better. But, I still have some bad days when I worry a lot about something, and I get down on myself. But when I remember how upset I was last summer and all that washing I did, it’s really a whole lot better. Maybe about 80% better. I’m not ready to be a floor nurse yet, but the job I got after treatment is pretty good for now. Kenny and I are doing fine, except he’s real sensitive if I bring up one of my fears. I wish he’d just listen and say “OK” or something instead of looking worried about me. It’s like he’s afraid I’m going to get upset again. It makes it hard for me to talk freely, but sometimes he does handle it fine. I really can’t complain. He’s been through a lot, too, when I was really a mess last year and before that.   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  tHeraPist: I’m glad to hear you feel so much better. You look a lot more at ease. You laugh more now. I don’t know if you recall, but you never did in the beginning.  June: I remember.  tHeraPist: What’s left now, the other 20%?  June: Obsessions, I guess. I can still work on my fear of driving over someone. Mostly it lasts less than 15 minutes, but now and then it hangs on through an evening.  tHeraPist: How often?  June: Once every week or two, I think. And I still have an urge to avoid walking on the grass in parks. Like I’m hyperalert. I do it pretty often, but I’m selfconscious.   tHeraPist: You mean you have to remind yourself not to avoid dog feces?  June: Yeah. And I tend to see things in black and white, all good or all bad. I catch myself feeling guilty for dumb things like eating dessert after a full meal. I can stop, but it’s like I’m out to punish myself or think badly about what I did. I have to watch out for it. Still, the thoughts are nothing like they used to be. I can have fun now. And work is pretty absorbing, so I can go whole days without getting down on myself for something. Will I always do that?  tHeraPist: Maybe to some extent. We know that you have a tendency to obsess. Most people who have had an obsessive–compulsive problem say that the rituals and urges to do them decrease more quickly than the obsessive ideas. You might have disturbing thoughts for a while, but you can expect them to become less frequent if you’re careful not to attempt to control them through rituals or by avoiding things. Can you handle that?  June: I suppose so. They’re not a lot of fun, but I feel like I’m living a normal life again. I suppose everyone has some problems to deal with.  Rarely do patients report complete remission of all obsessions. It is unrealistic to lead a patient to expect that 4 weeks of treatment will result in a total absence of obsessions and rituals. Patients should expect some continued struggle with obsessions and urges to ritualize. Strategies for coping with such occasional difficulties should be rehearsed.  coMPlicatioNs DuriNG Behavioral treatMeNt  Obviously, difficulties may arise during implementation of EX/RP treatment for OCD. Several of these are described below and possible solutions are discussed.  Noncompliance with Response Prevention  Individuals with OCD often report engaging in rituals despite the response prevention instructions. In most cases these represent brief “slips” that the therapist addresses by reiterating the rationale for the treatment regimen and the need to follow the response prevention instructions strictly. The therapist also may offer ways the ritual might be “undone” (e.g., recontaminating or turning the stove on and off again).  Sometimes the patient’s support person reports violations of response prevention to the therapist. The therapist should discuss the violations with the patient, emphasizing the fact that continued failure to comply with the response prevention instructions may result in treatment failure. The following is an example of how violations of response prevention may be presented to the patient.  “I understand from your father that on three occasions this weekend he saw you checking the front door lock five or six times before you left the house. As we agreed in the first session, he called to inform me about your checking. I am sure you remember that we agreed that you would check the doors only once, and that if you had a problem, you would discuss it with your father or me right away, so we could help you overcome your urge to ritualize. Will you explain to me what happened?”  If the patient acknowledges the slip and responds with a renewed agreement to follow instructions, the therapist need not pursue the issue further. However, if a second significant infraction of the response prevention instructions occurs, the therapist should again remind the patient of the therapy rules and the rationale for these rules, and “troubleshoot” with the patient how successfully to implement ritual prevention. During the course of this discussion, if it becomes evident that the patient is unwilling to consider these recommendations and remains committed to rituals and avoidance as a means to reduce obsessional distress, then the therapist   Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder  may broach the subject of discontinuing treatment unless the patient is ready to comply.  “It seems that right now you aren’t able to stop ritualizing. For treatment to be successful, it is essential that you completely stop your rituals. Every time that you relieve your discomfort by ritualizing, you prevent yourself from learning that anxiety would have declined eventually without rituals, and you don’t permit your obsessional fears to be disconnected from distress and anxiety. Exposing you to feared situations without stopping your rituals won’t be helpful. If you cannot follow the no-rituals rule quite strictly, then we ought to stop treatment now and wait until you are really prepared to follow through with all the requirements. It is very hard for people to resist the urge to ritualize, and it may be that you are just not ready yet and will feel more able to do so in the future. It is much better for us to stop treatment now than to continue under conditions where you are unlikely to benefit from treatment. That would only leave you feeling more hopeless about future prospects for improvement.”  As discussed earlier, patients sometimes replace identified rituals with less obvious avoidance patterns. For example, a patient may use hand lotion to “decontaminate” the hands instead of the excessive washing that was done originally. If this occurs, the therapist should immediately instruct the patient to stop the new ritual. Other examples of replacement washing rituals include brushing off one’s hands or blowing off “germs”; extensive checks are often replaced with quick glances. Direct questioning of the patient to solicit such information should proceed as follows:  “Now that you’ve stopped your washing rituals, do you find yourself doing other things to relieve your anxiety? For example, some people start to wipe their hands with paper towels or tissues as a substitute for washing with soap and water. Are you doing anything like this?”  If the answer is “yes,” the therapist should identify these new behaviors as rituals and instruct the patient to resist engaging in them in the same manner as he/she resists other compulsions.  Continued Passive Avoidance  Patients who continue to avoid situations likely to evoke obsessional distress are also likely to experience attentuated outcome in EX/RP. For example, a patient may put “contaminated” clothing back in the closet as instructed, but in doing so he/she may ensure that the contaminated clothes do not touch clean garments. Such avoidance reflects an ambivalent attitude toward treatment and hinders habituation of anxiety to feared situations. Because such processes may hinder outcome, the presence of continued and frequent avoidance behavior calls for the therapist and patient to reevaluate whether the patient should continue treatment.  tHeraPist: Jim, let’s make sure that you are doing your homework the right way. I know that you had a problem putting your dirty underwear in with your other dirty clothes. How are you doing with it now?  Patient: Well, I was afraid you might ask that. I still haven’t mixed them up. I was too scared to do it.  tHeraPist: We discussed this several days ago and you were instructed to do it that night. It would have been better had you told me the next day that you weren’t able to. What I’d like you to do for tomorrow is to bring in some dirty clothes. Bring in the underwear and the other clothes in separate bags, and we will mix them here in the office. Are there any other things you have been avoiding that you haven’t told me about?  Patient: I don’t think so.  tHeraPist: I want you to pay careful attention to things you are doing, or not doing, and make a list of anything you are avoiding, particularly things that you are supposed to do for therapy. It is very important that you don’t protect yourself by avoiding distressing situations, since if you don’t face these situations, your obsessive–compulsive symptoms won’t get better. Let’s give it another try, but if you can’t bring yourself to confront these problematic situations without these little avoidances, perhaps you would be better off delaying your treatment to a later time when you will be more ready to comply with the treatment program.  Arguments  Some individuals who carry out the required exposure without ritualizing may attempt to engage the therapist   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  in arguments about the assignments. It is quite tempting to get involved in arguments with patients over what they will or will not do during treatment. To avoid this, it is important for the therapist and the patient to agree on some ground rules before the intensive program begins. Patients must agree to follow the treatment plan that they developed in conjunction with the therapist, and to expose themselves to the distressing situations without argument. New, feared situations that are discovered should be discussed, and a new exposure program should be developed and agreed to, before exposures to the new situations are carried out. If a patient balks at or attempts to alter a planned exposure, the therapist should acknowledge and empathize with the patient’s the discomfort, inquire about the reasons for the hesitation, and encourage the patient to proceed in the following manner:  “I’m sorry to see that you are having so much trouble sitting on the floor. I know it’s difficult and that you’re frightened, but it won’t do you any good if we delay the exposure for another day or let you skip it all together. You really need to touch the floor, so let’s go ahead and do it now. We have agreed that today is the ‘floor’ day, and I wouldn’t be doing you a favor if I allowed you to avoid it. Remember, though, I am here to support you as much as I can when you become upset.”  In some instances, difficulties may be overcome by first exposing the patient to similar items that generate a lower level of distress. For example, if a patient refuses to touch a toilet seat, then the therapist may ask him/her first to touch the bathroom floor or the door to the bathroom stall. Thereafter, the patient might touch the walls of the stall and the toilet handle before proceeding to the toilet seat itself.  Emotional Overload  Occasionally during treatment a patient will become overwhelmed by fear or another emotion that is not directly related to his/her OCD symptoms. For example, a patient may be upset by a recent event (e.g., the death of a relative) or by fears of facing future plans (e.g., living on one’s own or getting a job). Implementing exposure exercises is inadvisable when the patient is extremely upset because it is unlikely that the patient will adequately attend to the exposure stimulus; therefore, anxiety is unlikely to habituate. Instead, the therapist  should discuss the distressing situation with the patient and proceed with exposure only when the patient is calmer. On rare occasions, exposure may be postponed altogether until the next day’s session. If this becomes a repetitive pattern, it may be advisable to interrupt treatment until the crisis is over.  Nonanxious Reactions to Exposures  Occasionally patients respond to exposures with emotions other than anxiety or distress, such as anger or depression. Clinical observations suggest that anger often serves as a means for the patient to avoid the distress or anxiety that is the target of exposure. If this happens, the anger should be viewed as an avoidance. The therapist should refocus the patient on the anxiety-evoking aspects of the situation and point out to the patient that the anger only stands in the way of progress.  Sometimes during imaginal exposure, when a patient is exposed to the feared consequences of his/her behaviors, the patient becomes depressed. Such depression and other emotional reactions may reduce the efficacy of treatment, and the therapist needs to help the patient to focus on the anxiety-evoking cues. This may be done by directing the content of the imaginal exposure away from the feared consequences and toward the external threat cues. In some cases, such redirection does not resolve the problem, and the patient continues to display a depressive reaction to the exposure. When this happens, alternative scenarios that do not elicit depression should be developed.  Emergent Fears and Rituals  As mentioned earlier, sometimes patients develop “new” fears or rituals during treatment. Often, the content of these new symptoms is closely related to the original fears and may be treated by extending to these fears the EX/RP instructions given earlier in treatment. For example, following the successful implementation of response prevention for his compulsive handwashing, Mr. F began to rub his hands together to decontaminate them. The therapist identified this as another ritual and instructed Mr. F to resist the urge to rub his hands together. Next, Mr. F began subtly to rub his fingers against the palms of his hands to cleanse his hands and to reduce anxiety. The therapist asked Mr. F to stop this ritual as he had the others and was again successful.  Some emergent fears may not be as clearly connected to the patient’s original fears. For example, the fear   Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder  that June developed of hitting someone while driving was not obviously related to her fears of contamination. Further assessment often results in the discovery of a conceptual link between the two reported fears. In June’s case, her fear of being blamed for causing someone to become ill or die, and her concern about being thought of as a “bad person” because she killed someone, or because she smelled of dog feces, may have been the connection between her two identified fears. In such cases, it is important for the therapist to develop exposures that include cues for this more general fear. June’s therapist might conduct imaginal exposures that include images of people criticizing June or blaming her for causing someone to die.  Negative Family Reactions  Because family members have typically experienced years of frustration with the patient’s symptoms, it is not surprising that some are impatient, expecting treatment to progress smoothly and to result in total symptom remission. It is not uncommon for family members to become disappointed or angry when they perceive that the symptoms are not subsiding quickly enough. In such cases, the therapist should assure family members that occasional strong anxiety reactions are to be expected and do not reflect failure. The family should be encouraged to respond calmly and be supportive should the patient experience a burst of anxiety.  Often, families have developed patterns of behavior designed to reduce the patient’s distress. Some family members may continue these patterns either in an attempt to protect the patient from upsetting situations or because it is difficult to break habits established over years of accommodating the patient’s requests. For example, Mr. P, who was accustomed to entering his home through the basement, immediately removing his clothes, and showering for his wife’s sake, was instructed to enter through the front door and toss his overcoat on the couch. Similarly, family members may find themselves continuing to perform a variety of household activities that they have come to regard as their responsibility because of the patient’s wishes to avoid the distress that the activity caused. For instance, Mr. P was responsible for preparing all the family meals because his wife was distressed by the possibility that she might inadvertently contaminate the food. Because such familiar patterns may hinder progress in treatment, the therapist should ask both the patient and family members about such habits and prescribe appro   priate alternative behaviors that maximize the patient’s exposure and minimize avoidance.  Functioning without Symptoms  At the end of treatment, many individuals with OCD find themselves left with a considerable void in their daily routines. The fact that they no longer need to allocate a large portion of their day to performing rituals leaves them wondering what to do. The therapist should be sensitive to these issues and aid in planning new social or occupational goals to be achieved following therapy. If needed, the therapist should conduct additional sessions or refer the patient to another therapist who will focus on adjustment-related issues. It may also be the case that behavioral treatments such as acceptance and commitment therapy (ACT) are directly applicable to this problem given the explicit focus on functioning; patients with OCD might be especially vulnerable to the belief that they cannot move forward successfully in their lives unless their obsessions are gone, and ACT is particularly well suited to address these kinds of problems. Preliminary evidence from a case series suggested the applicability of ACT to OCD (Twohig, Hayes, & Masuda, 2006), and a randomized controlled trial now provides stronger evidence for the efficacy of ACT (Twhohig et al., 2010).  Because they have spent years performing their rituals, patients may be unsure about what constitutes normal behavior. The therapist should offer guidelines for appropriate washing, checking, repeating, or ordering. If rituals are still present, the therapist needs to instruct patients to continue the response prevention of some behaviors to ensure maintenance of treatment gains. A patient may also develop a fear that the OCD symptoms will return. The therapist should reassure the patient that a single washing of his/her hands does not signal the beginning of a relapse.  coNclusioN  In this chapter we have reviewed the literature on OCD and its treatment, and provided verbatim dialogue from patient–therapist interactions to demonstrate how EX/ RP is implemented. Our review illustrates clearly that much is already known about CBT and pharmacotherapy for OCD. In our clinical practice with adults, we are guided by the empirical research summarized in this chapter, although not all of our clinical decisions are   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  unequivocally supported by empirical studies. For example, no controlled, direct comparison study has indicated that intensive EX/RP yields superior outcome to less intensive treatment, yet we typically provide intensive treatment to our adult patients with at least moderately severe OCD. Although our clinical experience suggests that weekly sessions are probably insufficient to produce meaningful gains in most adult patients with OCD, it has yet to be established whether two or three weekly sessions would yield results comparable to daily sessions both immediately after treatment and at follow-up. Future research should examine this important issue to establish a “dose–response” curve for EX/ RP; in our view clinically the patient’s initial severity, comorbidity, and motivational readiness to engage in the treatment influence our recommendations regarding the EX/RP visit schedule . Another important issue is how to best combine EX/RP with medication. Future research will allow us to identify the optimal treatment course for a particular patient.  Empirical results and clinical observations converge to indicate that psychosocial treatment for OCD must involve both exposure and ritual prevention instructions, and that failure to conduct exposures to the most anxiety-evoking situations is likely to compromise outcome. With respect to the therapist-assisted versus selfexposure issue, we routinely choose therapist-assisted exposure in our clinical practice. At present, eliminating therapist assistance with exposure exercises seems premature because existing studies have methodological problems such as insufficient sample sizes, and a recently completed RCT in pediatric OCD indicated that EX/RP with in-session exposure was superior to a brief form of EX/RP that did not include this procedural element (Franklin et al., 2011). With respect to the role of cognitive interventions in the treatment of OCD, the EX/RP program described in this chapter is a “cognitive-behavioral” treatment in that it targets both cognitions and behaviors; however, we do not typically include formal cognitive restructuring. Future research needs to delineate which cognitive and behavioral procedures are most effective for correcting particular pathological emotions. Cognitive procedures may also be utilized in “readiness programs” designed to help patients who are highly ambivalent about EX/RP realize that the treatment is both tolerable and effective. Empirical research to date suggest that although antidepressant medications for OCD do not interfere with the efficacy of CBT, combination treatment is not necessarily more effective than EX/RP alone. However, the  partial symptom reduction typically found in pharmacotherapy studies for OCD may render some patients more willing to tolerate the distress associated with EX/RP; thus, premedication may be helpful in promoting readiness in such cases.  What factors seem to enhance long-term efficacy of EX/RP for OCD? Studies suggest that patients with OCD who show great improvement immediately after CBT are more likely to retain their gains at follow-up than those who make only moderate posttreatment gains (e.g., Simpson et al., 2004). Thus, emphasis on procedures that are likely to lead to maximal shortterm efficacy also serves to yield superior maintenance of gains. In our clinical experience, understanding of the treatment rationale, active engagement in exposure exercises, strict adherence to ritual prevention instructions, willingness to design and implement exposure exercises between sessions, and willingness to confront even the most difficult tasks on the fear hierarchy are all factors associated with positive treatment outcome. Thus, verbal reinforcement of patients when they accomplish these goals, and reinstruction when they do not, are important in promoting lasting improvement. In addition, relapse prevention techniques designed specifically for OCD have been found effective in promoting maintenance of gains at follow-up (Hiss et al., 1994). In clinical practice we begin discussing relapse prevention procedures long before treatment is completed, and we focus on maintaining gains in the last few active treatment sessions. Some continuing contact with the treating clinician is also thought to be of benefit; thus, brief follow-up sessions are held in the first few months after the active treatment is completed, with contact as needed following the formal followup phase. As part of relapse prevention, we often ask our patients to plan EX/RP exercises for hypothetical obsessions they might encounter in the future (e.g., “If you became obsessed in 6 months that touching tree bark would result in your contracting a terrible illness, what exercises should you do?”) to encourage them to problem-solve around OCD issues for themselves rather than relying on the therapist’s instruction. We also emphasize that the occasional occurrence of obsessions should not be a cause of great alarm, provided that patients implement EX/RP to combat these recurring obsessions and urges to ritualize. The patients who are accepting of this reality are often the ones most able to apply what they have learned in treatment, and this process enables them to keep their OCD symptoms under control long after treatment has terminated.   Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder  referenCes  Abramowitz, J. S. (1996). Variants of exposure and response prevention in the treatment of obsessive compulsive disorder: A meta-analysis. Behavior Therapy, 27, 583– 600.  Abramowitz, J. S., & Foa, E. B. (2000). Does major depressive disorder influence outcome of exposure and response prevention for OCD? Behavior Therapy, 31, 795–800.  Abramowitz, J. S., Foa, E. B., & Franklin, M. E. (2003). Exposure and ritual prevention for obsessive–compulsive disorder: Effects of intensive versus twice-weekly sessions. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 71, 394–398.  Abramowitz, J. S., Franklin, M. E., & Foa, E. B. (2002). Empirical status of cognitive-behavioral therapy for obsessive compulsive disorder: A meta-analytic review. Romanian Journal of Cognitive and Behavior Psychotherapies, 2, 89–104.  Abramowitz, J. S., Franklin, M. E., Street, G. P., Kozak, M. J., & Foa, E. B. (2000). Effects of comorbid depression on response to treatment for obsessive–compulsive disorder. Behavior Therapy, 31, 517–528.  Allen, J. J., & Tune, G. S. (1975). The Lynfield Obsessional/ Compulsive Questionnaire. Scottish Medical Journal, 20, 21–24.  American Psychiatric Association. (1994). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (4th ed.). Washington, DC: Author.  American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.). Arlington, VA: Author.  Angst, J. (1993). Comorbidity of anxiety, phobia, compulsion and depression. International Clinical Psychopharmacology, 8(Suppl. 1), 21–25.  Anderson, R. A., & Rees, C. S. (2007). Group versus individual cognitive-behavioural treatment for obsessive– compulsive disorder: A controlled trial. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 45(1), 123–137.  Antony, M. M., Downie, F., & Swinson, R. P. (1998). Diagnostic issues and epidemiology in obsessive–compulsive disorders. In R. P. Swinson, M. M. Antony, S. Rachman, & M. A. Richter (Eds.), Obsessive–compulsive disorder: Theory, research and treatment (pp. 3–32). New York: Guilford Press.  Asbahr, F. R., Castillo, A. R., Ito, L. M., Latorre, R. D., Moreira, M. N., & Lotufo-Neto, F. (2005). Group cognitive-behavioral therapy versus sertraline for the treatment of children and adolescents with obsessive– compulsive disorder. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 44(11), 1128–1136.  Bachofen, M., Nakagawa, A., Marks, I. M., Park, J., Greist, J. H., Baer, L., et al. (1999). Home self-assessment and selftreatment of obsessive compulsive disorder using a manual and a computer-conducted telephone interview: Replica   tion of a UK–US study. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 60, 545–549.  Barrett, P., Farrell, L., Dadds, M., & Boulter, N. (20050. Cognitive-behavioral family treatment of childhood obsessive–compulsive disorder: Long-term follow-up and predictors of outcome. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 44, 1005–1014.  Barrett, P., Healy-Farrell, L., & March, J. S. (2004). Cognitive-behavioral family treatment of childhood obsessive–compulsive disorder: A controlled trial. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 43, 46–62.  Barsky, A. J., & Ahern, D. (2004). Interventions for hypochondriasis in primary care: In reply. Journal of the American Medical Association, 292(1), 42–43.  Basoglu, M., Lax, T., Kasvikis, Y., & Marks, I. M. (1988). Predictors of improvement in obsessive–compulsive disorder. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 2, 299–317.  Beck, A. T. (1976). Cognitive therapy and the emotional disorders. New York: International Universities Press.  Bellodi, L., Scuito, G., Diaferia, G., Ronchi, P., & Smeraldi,  E. (1992). Psychiatric disorders in the families of patients with obsessive–compulsive disorder. Psychiatry Research, 42(2), 111–120. Bogels, S. M., & Bodden, D. (2005, November). Family versus child CBT for childhood anxiety disorders: Short and long-term results of a multicenter study. In S. M. Bogels (Chair), Family-Based Prevention and Treatment of Childhood Anxiety Disorders Symposium presented at the annual meeting of the Association for Behavioral and Cognitive Therapies, Washington, DC.  Brown, T., Campbell, L., Lehman, C., Grisham, J., & Mancill,  R. (2001). Current and lifetime comorbidity of the DSM- IV anxiety and mood disorders in a large clinical sample. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 110(4), 585–599. Carr, A. T. (1974). Compulsive neurosis: A review of the literature. Psychological Bulletin, 81, 311–318. Comings, D. E. (1990). Tourette syndrome and human behavior. Duarte, CA: Hope Press.  Constans, J. I., Foa, E. B., Franklin, M. E., & Mathews, A. (1995). Memory for actions in obsessive compulsives with checking rituals. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 33, 665–671.  Cottraux, J., Mollard, L., Bouvard, M., Marks, L., Sluys, M., Nury, A. M., et al. (1990). A controlled study of fluvoxamine and exposure in obsessive–compulsive disorder. International Clinical Psychopharmacology, 5, 17–30.  Cottraux, J., Note, I., Yao, S. N., Lafont, S., Note, B., Mollard, E., et al. (2001). A randomized controlled trial of cognitive therapy versus intensive behavior therapy in obsessive compulsive disorder. Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics, 70(6), 288–297.  De Araujo, L. A., Ito, L. M., Marks, I. M., & Deale, A. (1995). Does imaginal exposure to the consequences of not ritualising enhance live exposure for OCD?: A controlled   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  study: I. Main outcome. British Journal of Psychiatry, 167, 65–70.  de Haan, E., Hoogduin, K. A., Buitelaar, J. K., & Keijsers, G.  P. (1998). Behavior thearpy versus clomipramine for the treatment of obsessive–compulsive disorder. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 37, 1022–1029. Denys, D., Tenney, N., van Megen, J. G., de Geus, F., & Westenberg, H. G. (2004). Axis I and II comorbidity in a large sample of patients with obsessive–compulsive disorder. Journal of Affective Disorders, 80, 155–162.  DeVeaugh-Geiss, J., Landau, P., & Katz, R. (1989). Treatment of OCD with clomipramine. Psychiatric Annals, 19, 97–101.  Diniz, J. B., Rosario-Campos, M. C., Shavitt, R. G., Curi, M., Hounie, A. G., Brotto, S. A., et al. (2004). Impact of age at onset and duration of illness on the expression of comorbidities in obsessive–compulsive disorder. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 65, 22–27.  Dollard, J., & Miller, N. L. (1950). Personality and psychotherapy: An analysis in terms of learning, thinking and culture. New York: McGraw-Hill.  Dougherty, D. D., Rauch, S. L., & Jenike, M. A. (2002). Pharmacological treatments for obsessive compulsive disorder. In P. E. Nathan & J. M. Gordon (Eds.), A guide to treatments that work (2nd ed., pp. 387–410). New York: Oxford University Press.  Eisen, J. L., Phillips, K. A., Baer, L., Beer, D. A., Atala, K. D., & Rasmussen, S. A. (1998). The Brown Assessment of Beliefs Scale: Reliability and validity. American Journal of Psychiatry, 155, 102–108.  Ellis, A. (1962). Reason and emotion in psychotherapy. New York: Lyle Stuart.  Emmelkamp, P. M. G., & Beens, H. (1991). Cognitive therapy with obsessive–compulsive disorder: A comparative evaluation. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 29, 293–300.  Emmelkamp, P. M. G., de Haan, E., & Hoogduin, C. A. L. (1990). Marital adjustment and obsessive–compulsive disorder. British Journal of Psychiatry, 156, 55–60.  Emmelkamp, P. M. G., & van Kraanen, J. (1977). Therapistcontrolled exposure in vivo: A comparison with obsessive– compulsive patients. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 15, 491–495.  Emmelkamp, P. M. G., Visser, S., & Hoekstra, R. J. (1988). Cognitive therapy vs. exposure in vivo in the treatment of obsessive–compulsives. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 12, 103–114.  Fals-Stewart, W., Marks, A. P., & Schafer, J. (1993). A comparison of behavioral group therapy and individual behavior therapy in treating obsessive compulsive disorder. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 181, 189–193.  Farrell, L. J., Waters, A., Milliner, E., & Ollendick, T. (2012). Comorbidity and treatment response in pediatric OCD: A pilot study of group cognitive-behavioral treatment. Psychiatry Research, 199, 115–123.  Flament, M., Koby, E., Rapoport, J. L., Berg, C., Zahn, T., Cox, C., et al. (1990). Childhood obsessive compulsive disorder: A prospective follow-up study. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, and Allied Disciplines, 31, 363–380.  Flament, M., Whitaker, A., Rapoport, J. L., Davies, M., Berg, C., Kalikow, K., et al. (1988). Obsessive compulsive disorder in adolescence: An epidemiological study. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 27, 764–771.  Foa, E. B., Abramowitz, J. S., Franklin, M. E., & Kozak, M.  J. (1999). Feared consequences, fixity of belief, and treatment outcome in patients with obsessive compulsive disorder. Behavior Therapy, 30, 717–724. Foa, E. B., Franklin, M. E., & Moser, J. (2002). Context in the clinic: How well do CBT and medications work in combination? Biological Psychiatry, 51, 989–997.  Foa, E. B., Huppert, J. D., & Cahill, S. P. (2006). Emotional processing theory: An update. In B. O. Rothbaum (Ed.), Pathological anxiety: Emotional processing in etiology and treatment (pp. 3–24). New York: Guilford Press.  Foa, E. B., Huppert, J. D., Leiberg, S., Langner, R., Kichic, R., & Hajcak, G., et al. (2002). The Obsessive–Compulsive Inventory: Development and validation of a short version. Psychological Assessment, 14(4), 485–495.  Foa, E. B., & Kozak, M. J. (1985). Treatment of anxiety disorders: Implications for psychopathology. In A. H. Tuma & J. D. Maser (Eds.), Anxiety and the anxiety disorders (pp. 421–452). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.  Foa, E. B., & Kozak, M. J. (1986). Emotional processing of fear: Exposure to corrective information. Psychological Bulletin, 99, 20–35.  Foa, E. B., & Kozak, M. J. (1996). Psychological treatments for obsessive compulsive disorder. In M. R. Mavissakalian & R. P. Prien (Eds.), Long-term treatments of anxiety disorders (pp. 285–309). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press.  Foa, E. B., Kozak, M. J., Goodman, W. K., Hollander, E., Jenike, M. A., & Rasmussen, S. (1995). DSM-IV filed trial: Obsessive compulsive disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 152, 90–96.  Foa, E. B., Kozak, M. J., Steketee, G., & McCarthy, P. R. (1992). Treatment of depressive and obsessive–compulsive symptoms in OCD by imipramine and behavior therapy. British Journal of Clinical Psychology, 31, 279–292.  Foa, E. B., Liebowitz, M. R., Kozak, M. J., Davies, S. O., Campeas, R., Franklin, M. E., et al. (2005). Treatment of obsessive compulsive disorder by exposure and ritual prevention, clomipramine, and their combination: A randomized, placebo-controlled trial. American Journal of Psychiatry, 162, 151–161.  Foa, E. B., Steketee, G., Grayson, J. B., Turner, R. M., & Latimer, P. (1984). Deliberate exposure and blocking of obsessive–compulsive rituals: Immediate and long-term effects. Behavior Therapy, 15, 450–472.   Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder  Foa, E. B., Steketee, G., Turner, R. M., & Fischer, S. C. (1980). Effects of imaginal exposure to feared disasters in obsessive–compulsive checkers. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 18, 449–455.  Franklin, M. E., Abramowitz, J. S., Bux, D. A., Zoellner, L. A., & Feeny, N. C. (2002). Cognitive-behavioral therapy with and without medication in the treatment of obsessive compulsive disorder. Professional Psychology: Research and Practice, 33, 162–168.  Franklin, M. E., Abramowitz, J. S., Furr, J., Kalsy, S., & Riggs, D. S. (2003). A naturalistic examination of therapist experience and outcome of exposure and ritual prevention for OCD. Psychotherapy Research, 13, 153–167.  Franklin, M. E., Abramowitz, J. S., Kozak, M. J., Levitt, J., & Foa, E. B. (2000). Effectiveness of exposure and ritual prevention for obsessive compulsive disorder: Randomized compared with non-randomized samples. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 68, 594–602.  Franklin, M. E., Kozak, M. J., Cashman, L., Coles, M., Rheingold, A., & Foa, E. B. (1998). Cognitive behavioral treatment of pediatric obsessive compulsive disorder: An open clinical trial. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 37, 412–419.  Franklin, M., Sapyta, J., Freeman, J., Khanna, M., Compton, S., Almirall, D., et al. (2011). Cognitive behavior therapy augmentation of pharmacotherapy in pediatric obsessive– compulsive disorder: The Pediatric OCD Treatment Study II (POTS II). Journal of the American Medical Association, 306, 1224–1232.  Freeman, J. B., Choate-Summers, M. L., Moore, P. S., Garcia, A. M., Sapyta, J. J., Leonard, H. L., et al. (2007). Cognitive behavioral treatment of young children with obsessive compulsive disorder. Biological Psychiatry, 61, 337–343.  Freeman, J. B., Garcia, A. M., Fucci, C., Karitani, M., Miller, L., & Leonard, H. L. (2003). Family-based treatment of early-onset obsessive–compulsive disorder [Special issue]. Journal of Child and Adolescent Psychopharmacology, 13(2), 71–80.  Freeston, M. H., Ladouceur, R., Gagnon, F., Thibodeau, N., Rhéaume, J., Letarte, H., et al. (1997). Cognitivebehavioral treatment of obsessive thoughts: A controlled study. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 65, 405–413.  Gershuny, B. S., Baer, L., Jenike, M. A., Minichiello, W. E., & Wilhelm, S. (2002). Comorbid posttraumatic stress disorder: Impact on treatment outcome for obsessive– compulsive disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 159, 852–854.  Goodman, W. K., Price, L. H., Rasmussen, S. A., Mazure, C., Delgado, P., Heninger, G. R., et al. (1989a). The Yale– Brown Obsessive–Compulsive Scale: II. Validity. Archives of General Psychiatry, 46, 1012–1016.  Goodman, W. K., Price, L. H., Rasmussen, S. A., Mazure, C., Fleischmann, R. L., Hill, C. L., et al. (1989b). The Yale–  Brown Obsessive–Compulsive Scale: I. Development, use, and reliability. Archives of General Psychiatry, 46, 1006–1011.  Greist, J. H. (1990). Treatment of obsessive–compulsive disorder: Psychotherapies, drugs, and other somatic treatments. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 51, 44–50.  Greist, J. H. (1992). An integrated approach to treatment of obsessive compulsive disorder. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 53(Suppl.), 38–41.  Greist, J. H., Jefferson, J. W., Kobak, K. A., Katzelnick, D. J., & Serlin, R. C. (1995). Efficacy and tolerability of serotonin reuptake inhibitors in obsessive compulsive disorder: A meta-analysis. Archives of General Psychiatry, 46, 53–60.  Hanna, G. L. (1995). Demographic and clinical features of obsessive compulsive disorder in children and adolescents. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 34, 19–27.  Himle, M. B., Olufs, E., Himle, J., Tucker, B., & Woods, D.  W. (2010). Behavior therapy for tics via Videoconference Delivery: An initial pilot test in children. Cognitive & Behavioral Practice, 17, 329–337. Hiss, H., Foa, E. B., & Kozak, M. J. (1994). A relapse prevention program for treatment of obsessive compulsive disorder. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 62, 801–808.  Hodgson, R. J., Rachman, S., & Marks, L. M. (1972). The treatment of chronic obsessive–compulsive neurosis: Follow-up and further findings. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 10, 181–189.  Hohagen, F., Winkelmann, G., Rasche-Raeuchle, H., Hand, I., Konig, A., Munchau, N., et al. (1998). Combination of behaviour therapy with fluvoxamine in comparison with behaviour therapy and placebo: Results of a multicentre study. British Journal of Psychiatry, 173, 71–78.  Insel, T. R., & Akiskal, H. (1986). Obsessive–compulsive disorder with psychotic features: A phenomenologic analysis. American Journal of Psychiatry, 12, 1527–1533.  Jaycox, L. H., Foa, E. B., & Morral, A. R. (1998). Influence of emotional engagement and habituation on exposure therapy for PTSD. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 66, 185–192.  Jenike, M., Baer, L., Minichiello, W., Schwartz, C., & Carey,  R. (1986). Concomitant obsessive–compulsive disorder and schizotypal personality disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 143, 530–532. Kazarian, S. S., Evans, D. L., & Lefave, K. (1977). Modification and factorial analysis of the Leyton Obsessional Inventory. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 33, 422–425.  Keijsers, G. P., Hoogduin, C. A., & Schaap, C. P. (1994). Predictors of treatment outcome in the behavioural treatment of obsessive–compulsive disorder. British Journal of Psychiatry, 165, 781–786.  Kessler, R. C., Demier, O., Frank, R. G., Olfson, M., Pincus,  H. A., Walters, E. E., et al. (2005). Prevalence and treat  CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  ment of mental disorders, 1990 to 2003. New England Journal of Medicine, 352(24), 2515–2523.  Koran, L. M. (2000). Quality of life in obsessive–compulsive disorder. Psychiatric Clinics of North America, 23, 509– 517.  Kozak, M. J., & Foa, E. B. (1994). Obsessions, overvalued ideas, and delusions in obsessive compulsive disorder. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 32, 343–353.  Kozak, M. J., Foa, E. B., & Steketee, G. (1988). Process and outcome of exposure treatment with obsessive– compulsives: Psychophysiological indicators of emotional processing. Behavior Therapy, 19, 157–169.  Kurlan, R., Como, P. G., Miller, B., Palumbo, D., Deeley, C., Andersen, E. M., et al. (2002). The behavioral spectrum of tic disorders: A community-based study. Neurology, 59, 414–420.  Ladoucer, R., Rhéame, J., Freeston, M. H., Aublet, F., Jean, K., Lachance, S., et al. (1995). Experimental manipulations of responsibility: An analogue test for models of obsessive–compulsive disorder. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 33, 937–946.  Lang, P. J. (1979). A bio-informational theory of emotional imagery. Psychophysiology, 6, 495–511.  Leckman, J. F., & Chittenden, E. H. (1990). Gilles de la Tourette syndrome and some forms of obsessive–compulsive disorder may share a common genetic diathesis. L’Encephale, 16, 321–323.  Leckman, J. F., Denys, D., Simpson, H. B., Mataix-Cols, D., Hollander, E., Saxena, S., et al. (2010). Obsessive compulsive disorder: A review of the diagnostic criteria and possible subtypes and dimensional specifiers for DSM V. Depression and Anxiety, 27, 507–527.  Ledley, D. R., Pai, A., & Franklin, M. E. (2007). Treating comorbid presentations: Obsessive compulsive disorder, anxiety, and depression. In M. M. Antony, C. Purdon, &  L. Summerfeldt (Eds.), Psychological treatment of OCD: Fundamentals and beyond (pp. 281–293). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association Press. Lelliott, P. T., Noshirvani, H. F., Basoglu, M., Marks, I. M., & Monteiro, W. O. (1988). Obsessive–compulsive beliefs and treatment outcome. Psychological Bulletin, 18, 697–702.  Leon, A. C., Portera, L., & Weissman, M. M. (1995). The social costs of anxiety disorders. British Journal of Psychiatry, 166(Suppl.), 19–22.  Lindsay, M., Crino, R., & Andrews, G. (1997). Controlled trial of exposure and response prevention in obsessive compulsive disorder. British Journal of Psychiatry, 171, 135–139.  Lochner, C., & Stein, D. J. (2003). Heterogeneity of obsessive–compulsive disorder: A literature review. Harvard Review of Psychiatry, 11(3), 113–132.  Lovell, K., Cox, D., Haddock, G., Jones, C., Raines, D., Garvey, R., et al. (2006). Telephone administered cognitive behaviour therapy for treatment of obsessive compulsive  disorder: Randomised controlled non-inferiority trial. British Medical Journal, 333, 883.  March, J. S., Franklin, M. E., Leonard, H., Garcia, A., Moore, P., Freeman, J., et al. (2007). Tics moderate the outcome of treatment with medication but not CBT in pediatric OCD. Biological Psychiatry, 61, 344–347.  Marks, I. M., Lelliott, P., Basoglu, M., Noshirvani, H., Monteiro, W., Cohen, D., et al. (1988). Clomipramine selfexposure, and therapist-aided exposure for obsessive– compulsive rituals. British Journal of Psychiatry, 152, 522–534.  Marks, I. M., Stern, R. S., Mawson, D., Cobb, J., & McDonald, R. (1980). Clomipramine and exposure for obsessive– compulsive rituals: I. British Journal of Psychiatry, 136, 1–25.  Masellis, M., Rector, N. A., & Richter, M. A. (2003). Quality of life in OCD: Differential impact of obsessions, compulsions, and depression comorbidity. Canadian Journal of Psychiatry, 48(2), 72–77.  Mataix-Cols, D., Marks, I. M., Greist, J. H., Kobak, K. A., & Baer, L. (2002). Obsessive–compulsive symptoms dimensions as predictors of compliance with and response to behaviour therapy: Results from a controlled trial. Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics, 71, 255–262.  Mathews, A. M., Johnston, D. W., Shaw, P. M., & Gelder, M.  G. (1974). Process variables and the prediction of outcome in behavior therapy. British Journal of Psychiatry, 125, 256–264. Matsunaga, H., Kiriike, N., Matsui, T., Oya, K., Okino, K., & Stein, D. (2005). Impulsive disorders in Japanese adult patients with obsessive–compulsive disorder. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 46, 43–49.  McLean, P. L., Whittal, M. L., Thordarson, D. S., Taylor, S., Sochting, I., Koch, W. J., et al. (2001). Cognitive versus behavior therapy in the group treatment of obsessive– compulsive disorder. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 69, 205–214.  Mehta, M. (1990). A comparative study of family-based and patients-based behavioural management in obsessive– compulsive disorder. British Journal of Psychiatry, 157, 133–135.  Meyer, V. (1966). Modification of expectations in cases with obsessional rituals. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 4, 273–280.  Meyer, V., & Levy, R. (1973). Modification of behavior in obsessive–compulsive disorders. In H. E. Adams & P. Unikel (Eds.), Issues and trends in behavior therapy (pp. 77–136). Springfield, IL: Thomas.  Meyer, V., Levy, R., & Schnurer, A. (1974). A behavioral treatment of obsessive–compulsive disorders. In H. R. Beech (Ed.), Obsessional states. London: Methuen.  Mowrer, O. H. (1939). A stimulus–response analysis of anxiety and its role as a reinforcing agent. Psychological Review, 46, 553–565.   Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder  Mowrer, O. H. (1960). Learning theory and behavior. New York: Wiley.  Neziroglu, F., Stevens, K. P., Yaryura-Tobias, J. A., & McKay,  D. (2000). Predictive validity of the Overvalued Ideas Scale: Outcome in obsessive–compulsive and body dysmorphic disorder. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 39, 745–756. Öst, L. G. (1989). One-session treatment for specific phobias. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 27, 1–7.  O’Sullivan, G., Noshirvani, H., Marks, I., Monteiro, W., & Lelliott, P. (1991). Six-year follow-up after exposure and clomipramine therapy for obsessive–compulsive disorder. Journal of Clinical Archives, 52, 150–155.  Pato, M. T., Zohar-Kadouch, R., Zohar, J., & Murphy, D. L. (1988). Return of symptoms after discontinuation of clomipramine in patients with obsessive–compulsive disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 145, 1521–1525.  Pauls, D. L., Towbin, K. E., Leckman, J. F., Zahner, G. E., & Cohen, D. J. (1986). Gilles de la Tourette syndrome and obsessive–compulsive disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry, 43, 1180–1182.  Pediatric OCD Treatment Study Team. (2004). Cognitivebehavioral therapy, sertraline, and their combination for children and adolescents with obsessive–compulsive disorder: The Pediatric OCD Treatment Study (POTS) randomized controlled trial. Journal of the American Medical Association, 292, 1969–1976.  Peris, T. S., Sugar, C. A., Bergman, L., Chang, S., Langley, A., & Piacentini, J. (2012). Family factors predict treatment outcome for pediatric obsessive-compulsive disorder. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 80, 255–263.  Piacentini, J., Bergman, R. L., Jacobs, C., McCracken, J. T., & Kretchman, J. (2002). Open trial of cognitive behavior therapy for childhood obsessive–compulsive disorder. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 16, 207–219.  Purdon, C., & Clark, D. A. (2002). The need to control thoughts. In R. Frost & G. Steketee (Eds.), Cognitive approaches to obsessions and compulsions: Theory, research, and treatment (pp. 29–43). Oakland, CA: New Harbinger.  Rabavilas, A. D., Boulougouris, J. C., & Perissaki, C. (1979). Therapist qualities related to outcome with exposure in vivo in neurotic patients. Journal of Behavior Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry, 10, 293–299.  Rachman, S. (1998). A cognitive theory of obsessions: Elaborations. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 36, 385–401. Rachman, S., & DeSilva, P. (1978). Abnormal and normal ob   sessions. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 16, 233–248. Rachman, S., Thordarson, D. S., Shafran, R., & Woody, S.  R. (1995). Perceived responsibility: Structure and significance. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 33(7), 779–784. Rapoport, J. L., Swedo, S. E., & Leonard, H. L. (1992). Childhood obsessive compulsive disorder (144th Annual Meet   ing of the American Psychiatric Association: Obsessive Compulsive Disorder: Integrating Theory and Practice [1991, New Orleans, LA]). Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 53(Suppl. 4), 11–16.  Rasmussen, S. A., & Eisen, J. L. (1989). Clinical features and phenomenology of obsessive–compulsive disorder. Psychiatric Annals, 19, 67–73.  Rasmussen, S. A., & Eisen, J. L. (1990). Epidemiology of obsessive–compulsive disorder. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 51, 10–14.  Rasmussen, S. A., & Tsuang, M. T. (1986). Clinical characteristics and family history in DSM III obsessive– compulsive disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 1943, 317–382.  Reed, G. E. (1985). Obsessional experience and compulsive behavior: A cognitive structural approach. Orlando, FL: Academic Press.  Rhéaume, J., Freeston, M. H., Dugas, M. J., Letarte, H., & Ladouceur, R. (1995). Perfectionism, responsibility, and obsessive compulsive symptoms. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 36, 385–402.  Riggs, D. S., Hiss, H., & Foa, E. B. (1992). Marital distress and the treatment of obsessive–compulsive disorder. Behavior Therapy, 23, 585–597.  Rothbaum, B. O., & Shahar, F. (2000). Behavioral treatment of obsessive–compulsive disorder in a naturalistic setting. Cognitive and Behavioral Practice, 7, 262–270.  Rowe, M. K., & Craske, M. G. (1998). Effects of an expanding-space vs. massed exposure schedule on fear reduction and return of fear. Beahviour Research and Therapy, 36, 701–717.  Rubenstein, C. S., Peynircioglu, Z. F., Chambless, D. L., & Pigott, T. A. (1993). Memory in sub-clinical obsessive– compulsive checkers. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 31(8), 759–765.  Salkovskis, P. M. (1985). Obsessional compulsive problems: A cognitive-behavioral analysis. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 23, 571–583.  Sher, K. J., Frost, R. O., & Otto, R. (1983). Cognitive deficits in compulsive checkers: An exploratory study. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 21, 357–364.  Simpson, H. B., Liebowitz, M. R., Foa, E. B., Kozak, M. J., Schmidt, A. B., Rowan, V., et al. (2004). Post-treatment effects of exposure therapy and clomipramine in obsessive– compulsive disorder. Depression and Anxiety, 19, 225– 233.  Simpson, H. B., Zuckoff, A. M., Maher, M. J., Page, J. R., Franklin, M. E., & Foa, E. B. (2010). Challenges using motivational interviewing as an adjunct to exposure therapy for obsessive–compulsive disorder. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 48, 941–948.  Stampfl, T. G., & Levis, D. J. (1967). Essentials of implosive therapy: A learning-based psychodynamic behavioral therapy. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 72, 496–503.   CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers  Stanley, M. A., Turner, S. M., & Borden, J. W. (1990). Schizotypal features in obsessive–compulsive disorder. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 31, 511–518.  Steketee, G., Chambless, D. L., & Tran, G. Q. (2001). Effects of Axis I and II comorbidity on behavior therapy outcome for obsessive–compulsive disorder and agoraphobia. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 42, 76–86.  Steketee, G., Eisen, J., Dyck, I., Warshaw, M., & Rasmussen,  S. (1999). Predictors of course in obsessive-compulsive disorder. Psychiatry Research, 89, 229–238. Steketee, G. S., Foa, E. B., & Grayson, J. B. (1982). Recent advances in the treatment of obsessive–compulsives. Archives of General Psychiatry, 39, 1365–1371.  Stein, D. J., Fineberg, N. A., Bienvenu, O. J., Denys, D., Lochner, C., Nestadt, G., et al. (2010). Should OCD be classified as an anxiety disorder in DSM V? Depression and Anxiety, 27, 495–506.  Storch, E., Geffken, G., Merlo, L., Mann, G., Duke, D., Munson, M., et al. (2007). Family-based cognitive-behavioral therapy for pediatric obsessive–compulsive disorder: Comparison of intensive and weekly approaches. Journal of American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 46, 469–478.  Storch, E. A., Merlo, L. J., Larson, M. J., Geffken, G. R., Lehmkuhl, H. D., Jacob, M. L., et al. (2008). Impact of comorbidity on cognitive-behavioral therapy response in pediatric obsessive–compulsive disorder. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 47, 83–92.  Storch, E. A., Khanna, M., Merlo, L. J., Loew, B. A., Franklin, M., et al. (2009). Children’s Florida Obsessive Compulsive Inventory: Psychometric properties and feasibility of a self-report measure of obsessive–compulsive symptoms in youth. Child Psychiatry and Human Development, 40(3), 467–483.  Swedo, S. E., Leckman, J. F., & Rose, N. R. (2012). From research subgroup to clinical syndrome: Modifying the PANDAS criteria to describe PANS (pediatric acuteonset neuropsychiatric syndrome). Pediatric Therapeutics, 2, 2.  Swedo, S. E., Leonard, H. L., Garvey, M., Mittleman, B., Allen, A. J., Perlmutter, S., et al. (1998). Pediatric autoimmune neuropsychiatric disorders associated with streptococcal infections: Clinical description of the first 50 cases. American Journal of Psychiatry, 155, 264–271.  Swedo, S. E., Rapoport, J. L., Leonard, H. L., Lenane, M., & Cheslow, D. (1989). Obsessive compulsive disorder in children and adolescents: Clinical phenomenology of 70 consecutive cases. Archives of General Psychiatry, 46, 335–341.  Thoren, P., Asberg, M., Chronholm, B., Jornestedt, L., & Traskman, L. (1980). Clomipramine treatment of obsessive–compulsive disorder: I. A controlled clinical trial. Archives of General Psychiatry, 37, 1281–1285.  Tolin, D. F., Maltby, N., Diefenbach, G. J., Hannan, S. E., & Worhunsky, P. (2004). Cognitive-behavioral therapy for medication nonresponders with obsessive–compulsive disorder: A wait-list-controlled open trial. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 65, 922–931.  Tukel, R., Polat, A., Ozdemir, O., Aksut, D., & Turksov, N. (2002). Comorbid conditions in obsessive–compulsive disorder. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 43, 204–209.  Twohig, M. P., Hayes, S. C., & Masuda, A. (2006). Increasing willingness to experience obsessions: Acceptance and commitment therapy as a treatment for obsessive compulsive disorder. Behavior Therapy, 37, 3–13.  Twohig, M., Hayes, S. C., Plumb, J., Pruitt, L. D., Collins, A. B., Hazlett-Stevens, H., et al. (2010). A randomized controlled trial of acceptance and commitment therapy versus progressive relaxation training for obsessive compulsive disorder. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 78, 705–716.  Valderhaug, R., Larsson, B., Gotestam, K. G., & Piacentini,  J. (2007). An open clinical trial of cognitive-behaviour therapy in children and adolescents with obsessive– compulsive disorder administered in regular outpatient clinics. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 45, 577–589. Valleni-Basille, L. A., Garrison, C. Z., Jackson, K. L., Waller,  J. L., McKeown, R. E., Addy, C. L., et al. (1994). Frequency of obsessive–compulsive disorder in a community sample of young adolescents. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 33, 782–791. van Balkom, A. J., de Haan, E., van Oppen, P., Spinhoven, P., Hoogduin, K. A., Vermeulen, A. W. A., et al. (1998). Cognitive and behavioral therapies alone and in combination with fluvoxamine in the treatment of obsessive compulsive disorder. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 186, 492–499.  van Minnen, A., & Hagenaars, M. (2002). Fear activation and habituation patterns as early process predictors of response to prolonged exposure treatment in PTSD. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 15, 359–367.  Verdellen, C. W., Keijsers, G. P., Cath, D. C., & Hoogduin,  C. A. (2004). Exposure with response prevention versus habit reversal in Tourette syndrome: A controlled study. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 42, 501–511. Vogel, P. A., Stiles, T. C., & Götestam, K. G. (20040. Adding cognitive therapy elements to exposure therapy for obsessive–compulsive disorder: A controlled study. Behavioural and Cognitive Psychotherapy, 32, 275–290.  Warren, R., & Thomas, J. C. (2001). Cognitive-behavior therapy of obsessive–compulsive disorder in private practice: An effectiveness study. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 15, 277–285.  Warwick, H. M., Clark, D. M., Cobb, A. M., & Salkovskis,  P. M. (1996). A controlled trial of cognitive-behavioural treatment of hypochondriasis. British Journal of Psychiatry, 169(2), 189–195.  Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder  Watts, F. N. (1973). Desensitization as an habituation phenomenon: II. Studies of interstimulus interval length. Psychological Reports, 33, 715–718.  Weissman, M. M., Bland, R. C., Canino, G. J., Greenwald, S., Hwu, H. G., Lee, C. K., et al. (1994). The cross national epidemiology of obsessive compulsive disorder: The Cross National Collaborative Group. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 55(Suppl.), 5–10.  Whittal, M. L., Thordarson, D. S., & McLean, P. D. (2005). Treatment of obsessive–compulsive disorder: Cognitive behavior therapy vs. exposure and response prevention. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 43, 1559–1576.  Whittal, M. L., Woody, S. R., McLean, P. D., Rachman, S., & Robichaud, M. (2010). Treatment of obsessions: A randomized controlled trial. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 48, 295–303.   CHaPter 5  An Acceptance‑Based Behavioral Therapy for generalized Anxiety Disorder  lizaBeth roeMer susaN M. orsillo   generalized anxiety disorder (gAD) has been called the “basic” anxiety disorder, in the sense that generalized anxiety is, by definition, a component of other anxiety and related disorders. indeed, gAD, although characterized by marked fluctuations, is chronic. some have even considered that generalized anxiety might be better conceptualized as a personality disorder, since many individuals with this problem cannot report a definitive age of onset; rather, they note that it has been with them all their lives. Psychological and drug treatments, although often evaluated, have not produced the robust results evident with some other anxiety disorders. for this reason, further study of new treatment protocols is all the more pressing. The protocol presented in this chapter, recently developed by Drs. roemer and orsillo at our Center, illustrates a cutting‑edge, acceptance‑based approach to gAD that has achieved a high rate of success in initial trials. This protocol also illustrates, more so than any other chapter in this edition, principles associated with the so‑called “third‑wave” cognitive‑behavioral approach to psychological disorders. Clinicians and students interested in how this approach is actually implemented will find the case study of “Hector” particularly fascinating.—D. H. B.  generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) is a chronic anxiety disorder, centrally defined in DSM-IV and DSM-5, where criteria are unchanged, by excessive anxiety and worry more days than not over a period of at least 6 months (American Psychiatric Association, 1994, 2013). Clients who meet criteria for GAD also report difficulty controlling the worry they experience, as well as three or more associated symptoms (muscle tension, irritability, restlessness or feeling keyed up, difficulty concentrating or mind going blank, being easily tired, and difficulty sleeping). Epidemiological  studies reveal a lifetime prevalence of 5.7% for GAD using DSM-IV criteria (Kessler et al., 2005).  GAD is associated with high levels of comorbidity with other psychological disorders. Over 90% of individuals who meet criteria for GAD during their lifetimes also meet criteria for at least one additional disorder (Bruce, Machan, Dyck, & Keller, 2001), and prospective studies indicate that GAD is a specific risk factor for the development of other mental health disorders, particularly major depression (Bruce et al., 2001). GAD is also associated with significantly reduced  206  