
THE GUILFORD PRESS 


CliniCal Handbook 
of PsyCHologiCal disorders 


Also from David H. Barlow 

Anxiety and Its Disorders: 
The Nature and Treatment of Anxiety and Panic, Second Edition 

David H. Barlow 

Chronic Anxiety: 
Generalized Anxiety Disorder and Mixed Anxiety–Depression 

Edited by Ronald M. Rapee and David H. Barlow 

Handbook of Assessment and Treatment Planning 
for Psychological Disorders, Second Edition 

Edited by Martin M. Antony and David H. Barlow 

Psychological Treatment of Panic 

David H. Barlow and Jerome A. Cerny 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of 

PsyCHologiCAl 
DisorDers 

A Step-by-Step Treatment Manual 

fiftH edition 

edited by 

david H. barlow 


THe gUilforD Press 
new york london 


© 2014 The Guilford Press 
A Division of Guilford Publications, Inc. 
72 Spring Street, New York, NY 10012 
www.guilford.com 

All rights reserved 

No part of this book may be reproduced, translated, stored in a retrieval system, 
or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, 
microfilming, recording, or otherwise, without written permission from the publisher. 

Printed in the United States of America 

This book is printed on acid-free paper. 

Last digit is print number: 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 

The authors have checked with sources believed to be reliable in their efforts to 
provide information that is complete and generally in accord with the standards 
of practice that are accepted at the time of publication. However, in view of the 
possibility of human error or changes in behavioral, mental health, or medical 
sciences, neither the authors, nor the editor and publisher, nor any other party who 
has been involved in the preparation or publication of this work warrants that the 
information contained herein is in every respect accurate or complete, and they are 
not responsible for any errors or omissions or the results obtained from the use of such 
information. Readers are encouraged to confirm the information contained in this 
book with other sources. 

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 

Clinical handbook of psychological disorders : a step-by-step treatment manual / 
edited by David H. Barlow.—Fifth edition. 

pages cm 
Includes bibliographical references and index. 
ISBN 978-1-4625-1326-0 (hardcover) 

1. Behavior therapy—Handbooks, manuals, etc. 2. Medical protocols— 
Handbooks, manuals, etc. I. Barlow, David H., editor of compilation. 
RC489.B4C584 2014 
616.89′142—dc23 

2013027134 


To Beverly 
For love, loyalty, and dedication 


About the editor 

David H. Barlow, PhD, ABPP, is Professor of Psychology and Psychiatry and Founder 
and Director Emeritus of the Center for Anxiety and Related Disorders at Boston 
University. He has published over 500 articles and book chapters and over 60 books 
and clinical manuals—some translated into more than 20 languages, including Arabic, 
Chinese, Hindi, and Russian—primarily in the areas of emotional disorders and clinical 
research methodology. Dr. Barlow’s books include Handbook of Assessment and 
Treatment Planning for Psychological Disorders, Second Edition, and Anxiety and 
Its Disorders, Second Edition. He has been the recipient of numerous awards, including, 
most recently, the Career/Lifetime Achievement Award from the Association for 
Behavioral and Cognitive Therapies. He is past president of the Society of Clinical 
Psychology and the Association for Behavioral and Cognitive Therapies and past editor 
of the journals Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice and Behavior Therapy. 
Dr. Barlow’s research has been continually funded by the National Institutes of Health 
for over 40 years. 

vii 


Contributors 

David H. Barlow, PhD, Center for Anxiety and Related Disorders and Department 
of Psychology, Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts 

Aaron T. Beck, MD, Department of Psychiatry, Perelman School of Medicine 
at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; Beck Institute 
for Cognitive Behavior Therapy, Bala Cynwyd, Pennsylvania 

Larry E. Beutler, PhD, ABPP, Department of Clinical Psychology, Palo Alto University, 
Palo Alto, California 

Kathryn L. Bleiberg, PhD, Department of Psychiatry, Weill Cornell Medical College, 
Cornell University, New York, New York 

Andrew Christensen, PhD, Department of Psychology, University of California, 
Los Angeles, California 

Zafra Cooper, DPhil, Department of Psychiatry, University of Oxford, 
Oxford, United Kingdom 

Michelle G. Craske, PhD, Department of Psychology, University of California, 
Los Angeles, California 

Sona Dimidjian, PhD, Department of Psychology and Neuroscience, University of Colorado, 
Boulder, Colorado 

Brian D. Doss, PhD, Department of Psychology, University of Miami, Coral Gables, Florida 

Kristen K. Ellard, PhD, Department of Psychiatry, Massachusetts General Hospital, 
Boston, Massachusetts 

Christopher G. Fairburn, DM, Department of Psychiatry, University of Oxford, 
Oxford, United Kingdom 

viii 


Contributors 

Christopher P. Fairholme, PhD, Center for Anxiety and Related Disorders, 
Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts 

Todd J. Farchione, PhD, Center for Anxiety and Related Disorders and Department 
of Psychology, Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts 

Edna B. Foa, PhD, Department of Psychiatry and Center for the Treatment and Study 
of Anxiety, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 

Martin E. Franklin, PhD, Department of Psychiatry, Perelman School of Medicine 
at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 

Allison G. Harvey, PhD, Department of Psychology, University of California, 
Berkeley, California 

Sarah H. Heil, PhD, Vermont Center on Behavior and Health, Departments of Psychiatry 
and Psychology, University of Vermont, Burlington, Vermont 

Richard G. Heimberg, PhD, Adult Anxiety Clinic and Department of Psychology, 
Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 

Ruth Herman-Dunn, PhD, private practice and Department of Psychology, 
University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 

Stephen T. Higgins, PhD, Vermont Center on Behavior and Health, 
Departments of Psychiatry and Psychology, University of Vermont, Burlington, Vermont 

Samuel Hubley, MA, Department of Psychology and Neuroscience, University of Colorado, 
Boulder, Colorado 

Neil S. Jacobson, PhD (deceased), Department of Psychology, University of Washington, 
Seattle, Washington 

Katherine A. Kaplan, PhD, Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, 
Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California 

Marsha M. Linehan, PhD, Department of Psychology, University of Washington, 
Seattle, Washington 

Leanne Magee, PhD, Division of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Department of Child 
and Adolescent Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, The Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 

John C. Markowitz, MD, Department of Psychiatry, Columbia University College 
of Physicians and Sugeons; Department of Psychiatry, New York State Psychiatric 
Institute; Department of Psychiatry, Weill Medical College, Cornell University, 
New York, New York 

Christopher R. Martell, PhD, Martell Behavioral Activation Research Consulting, 
and Department of Psychology, University of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin 


Contributors 


Barbara S. McCrady, PhD, Center on Alcoholism, Substance Abuse, and Addictions, 

and Department of Psychology, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, New Mexico 
David J. Miklowitz, PhD, Department of Psychiatry, Semel Institute for Neuroscience 
and Human Behavior, David Geffen School of Medicine, Los Angeles, California 

Candice M. Monson, PhD, Department of Psychology, Ryerson University, Toronto, 

Ontario, Canada 
Andrada D. Neacsiu, PhD, Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, 
Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina 

John C. Norcross, PhD, ABPP, private practice and Department of Psychology, 

University of Scranton, Scranton, Pennsylvania 
Susan M. Orsillo, PhD, Department of Psychology, Suffolk University, 
Boston, Massachusetts 

Laura A. Payne, PhD, Department of Pediatrics, David Geffen School of Medicine, 

University of California, Los Angeles, California 
Patricia A. Resick, PhD, Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, 
Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, North Carolina 

Shireen L. Rizvi, PhD, Graduate School of Applied and Professional Psychology, 

Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, Piscataway, New Jersey 
Lizabeth Roemer, PhD, Department of Psychology, University of Massachusetts, 
Boston, Massachusetts 

Jayne L. Rygh, PhD, private practice, New York, New York 

Stacey C. Sigmon, PhD, Vermont Center on Behavior and Health, Departments of Psychiatry 
and Psychology, University of Vermont, Burlington, Vermont 
Nicholas Tarrier, PhD, School of Psychological Sciences, University of Manchester, 

Manchester, United Kingdom 

Rumina Taylor, DClinPsy, Institute of Psychiatry, King’s College London, 
and South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom 
Arthur D. Weinberger, PhD (retired), Cognitive Therapy Center of New York, 

New York, New York 
Jennifer G. Wheeler, PhD, private practice, Seattle, Washington 
Jeffrey E. Young, PhD, Department of Psychiatry, Columbia University, 

and Schema Therapy Institute of New York, New York, New York 


Preface 

evidence-based practice (EBP) is one of those ideas that comes along occasionally and takes 
the world by storm. Although some of the tenets of EBP have been around for decades (as 
has this handbook), it is only in the past 15 years that EBP has been formally identified as a 
systematic method of delivering clinical care (Institute of Medicine, 2001; Sackett, Strauss, 
Richardson, Rosenberg, & Haynes, 2000). 

Since that time, the “tipping point” (Gladwell, 2000) for EBP has clearly occurred, and 
health care policymakers and governments, as well as professional societies around the world, 
have collectively decided that the delivery of health care, including behavioral health care, 
should be based on evidence (APA Task Force on Evidence-Based Practice, 2006). Fulfilling 
this mandate comprises the goals of EBP, and has also been the goal of this book since the first 
edition was published in 1985. 

The fifth edition of this book continues to represent a distinct departure from any number 
of similar books reviewing advances in the treatment of psychological disorders from the 
perspective of EBP. Over the past two decades, we have developed a technology of behavior 
change that necessarily differs from disorder to disorder. 

This technology comprises a variety of techniques or procedures with more or less proven 
effectiveness for a given disorder (and increasingly for classes of disorders). Naturally, we have 
more evidence of the effectiveness of these treatments for some disorders than for others. It also 
has become more apparent since the earlier editions that considerable clinical skill is required 
to apply this technology most effectively. Therefore, this book, in its fifth edition, is not another 
review of therapeutic procedures for a given problem with recommendations for further 
research. Rather, it is a detailed description of actual treatment protocols in which experienced 
clinicians implement the technology of behavior change in the context of the most frequently 
encountered disorders. 

In this edition, the originators of some of the best-known treatment protocols have revised 
and updated the descriptions of their interventions to reflect the latest developments in 
an increasingly powerful array of psychological therapies. Among these revisions to existing 
chapters, several deserve comment. Monson, Resick, and Rizvi (Chapter 2) have updated their 
chapter on posttraumatic stress disorder, describing the tragic case of a soldier fresh from the 
battlefields of Iraq. Their successful treatment of this individual suffering from the unspeak


xi 


xii Preface 

able (and intolerable) trauma of war is one consequence of today’s headline news stories that 
seldom makes it into print. Drug abuse continues as a scourge that ruins individual lives, the 
functioning of families, and the very fabric of society. Higgins, Sigmon, and Heil (Chapter 14) 
present the latest iterations of their approach, which is applicable to all serious drugs of abuse. 
Chapters on schizophrenia and other psychotic disorders, borderline personality disorder, bipolar 
disorder, and a number of anxiety disorders, along with depression, written in almost all 
cases by the originators of these leading protocols, have been updated considerably to reflect 
the latest evidence for the most effective approaches to these common but debilitating problems. 


In addition, three original treatment protocols make their appearance for the first time in 
this edition. Brief psychological treatments for insomnia represent one of the success stories in 
EBP, with marked superiority to popular sleep medications, yet many clinicians who frequently 
confront severe sleep problems and disorders among their patients are unaware of these strategies. 
Because of the success of these treatment approaches, the American Academy of Sleep 
Medicine recommends these protocols as a first-line treatment for people with all forms of insomnia, 
including those currently using hypnotic drugs. The protocol described by Kaplan and 
Harvey (Chapter 16) represents an advanced and successful approach to this problem. 

Roemer and Orsillo (Chapter 5) describe a new acceptance-based treatment for generalized 
anxiety disorder that reflects in a clever and creative way many of the principles espoused 
by the so-called “third-wave” approach to psychological disorders. Initial results from this 
protocol are impressive. 

Norcross and Beutler (Chapter 15), experienced and well-known therapists, present their 
“treatment matching” strategic approach in the context of a young woman suffering from polysubstance 
abuse and depression. While standard cognitive-behavioral and systems approaches 
are recognizable in this treatment description, in an explicit manner the authors highlight 
transdiagnostic but empirically supported therapist and relationship factors that clearly deserve 
description in this book. 

Finally, there is growing consensus that the future of EBP will be to distill principles of 
effective change that cut across diagnostic conditions, making them more generally applicable. 
Two of these “unified” or “transdiagnostic” protocols appear in this fifth edition. In Chapter 6 
(Payne, Ellard, Farchione, Fairholme, and Barlow), we present our own unified transdiagnostic 
approach to emotional disorders, and Fairburn and Cooper (Chapter 17) describe a transdiagnostic 
approach to eating disorders that they originated with their colleagues. 

In all chapters, the nuts and bolts of clinical application are emphasized. 

As with the previous editions, this book was motivated by countless clinical psychology 
graduate students, psychiatric residents, and other mental health professionals, either in 
training or in practice, asking, “But how do I do it?” Realizing that there is no single source 
in which to find step-by-step treatment protocols for use as a guide to practice, this book attempts 
to fill the void. To accomplish this purpose, a number of specific topics are common to 
most chapters. Each chapter begins with a brief review of our knowledge of the specific disorder 
(or class of disorders), followed by a description of the particular model or mini-theory 
that guides the technology utilized with the disorder in question. This model, or mini-theory, 
typically answers the question: What particular facets of the disorder should be assessed and 
treated? While clinical application always dilutes theoretical models, clinicians will recognize 
cognitive-behavioral and systems approaches, with some psychodynamic contributions, as the 
predominant theoretical context. 


Preface xiii 

This model is followed by a description of the typical setting in which the treatment is 
carried out. The setting varies from disorder to disorder, ranging from the more usual office 
setting to the home environment of the patient. Authors provide similar detailed descriptions 
of the social context of treatment (e.g., the importance of the involvement of family or friends) 
as well as therapist and client variables that are important within the context of the particular 
problem. For example, therapist variables that may be important in implementing techniques 
for treatment of agoraphobia or couple distress are described. In addition, authors discuss the 
implications for treatment of client variables, such as dependency and unassertiveness in individuals 
with panic disorder with agoraphobia. 

A detailed description of the actual step-by-step process of assessment and treatment follows, 
liberally sprinkled in many chapters with transcripts of therapy sessions. Important components 
of this process are the specifics of the rationale given to the patient before treatment, 
as well as typical problems that arise during the implementation of the technology. Where data 
exist, authors provide information on clinical predictors of success or failure. 

In accomplishing the rather ambitious goals just described, I was very fortunate in this 
edition of the book, as in previous editions, to have leading clinicians and researchers document 
in some detail how they actually treat their patients. Once again, these authorities reported that 
the number of details they had to include in order to convey how they actually applied their 
treatment programs went far beyond their expectations. My hope is that practicing clinicians 
and clinical students everywhere will benefit from acquaintance with these details. 

In closing, I would like to express my deep appreciation to Amantia Ametaj, my research 
and administrative assistant during the editing of this book. She worked with me and the authors 
every step of the way. I am sure this information will come in handy as she is now pursuing 
her own doctorate in clinical psychology. 

DaviD H. Barlow, PhD 

referenCes 

APA Task Force on Evidence-Based Practice. (2006). Evidence-based practice in psychology. American 

Psychologist, 61, 271–285. 
Gladwell, M. (2000). The tipping point: How little things can make a big difference. Boston: Little, 

Brown. 
Institute of Medicine. (2001). Crossing the quality chasm: A new health system for the 21st century. 

Washington, DC: National Academies Press. 
Sackett, D. L., Strauss, S. E., Richardson, W. S., Rosenberg, W., & Haynes, R. B. (2000). Evidence-based 

medicine: How to practice and teach EBM (2nd ed.). London: Churchill Livingstone. 


Contents 

1. Panic Disorder and Agoraphobia 
Michelle G. craske and DaviD h. Barlow 
1 
2. Posttraumatic stress Disorder 
canDice M. Monson, Patricia a. resick, and shireen l. rizvi 
62 
3. social Anxiety Disorder 
richarD G. heiMBerG and leanne MaGee 
114 
4. obsessive–Compulsive Disorder 
Martin e. Franklin and eDna B. Foa 
155 
5. An Acceptance‑Based Behavioral Therapy 
for generalized Anxiety Disorder 
lizaBeth roeMer and susan M. orsillo 
206 
6. emotional Disorders: A Unified Transdiagnostic Protocol 
laura a. Payne, kristen k. ellarD, toDD J. Farchione, 
christoPher P. FairholMe, and DaviD h. Barlow 
237 
7. Cognitive Therapy for Depression 
JeFFrey e. younG, Jayne l. ryGh, arthur D. weinBerGer, 
and aaron t. Beck 
275 
8. interpersonal Psychotherapy for Depression 
kathryn l. BleiBerG and John c. Markowitz 
332 

xv 


xvi Contents 

9. Behavioral Activation for Depression 
sona DiMiDJian, christoPher r. Martell, ruth herMan‑Dunn, 
and saMuel huBley 
353 
10. Borderline Personality Disorder 
anDraDa D. neacsiu and Marsha M. linehan 
394 
11. Bipolar Disorder 
DaviD J. Miklowitz 
462 
12. schizophrenia and other Psychotic Disorders 
nicholas tarrier and ruMina taylor 
502 
13. Alcohol Use Disorders 
BarBara s. MccraDy 
533 
14. Drug Use Disorders 
stePhen t. hiGGins, stacey c. siGMon, and sarah h. heil 
588 
15. evidence‑Based relationships and responsiveness 
for Depression and substance Abuse 
John c. norcross and larry e. Beutler 
617 
16. Treatment of sleep Disturbance 
katherine a. kaPlan and allison G. harvey 
640 
17. eating Disorders: A Transdiagnostic Protocol 
christoPher G. FairBurn and zaFra cooPer 
670 
18. Couple Distress 
anDrew christensen, JenniFer G. wheeler, Brian D. Doss, 
and neil s. JacoBson 
703 
Author index 733 
subject index 751 


CHaPter 1 

Panic Disorder and Agoraphobia 

Michelle G. craske 
DaviD h. Barlow 

The treatment protocol described in this chapter represents one of the success stories 
in the development of evidence‑based psychological treatments. results from numerous 
studies indicate that this approach provides substantial advantages over placebo medication 
or alternative psychosocial approaches containing “common” factors, such as positive 
expectancies and helpful therapeutic alliances. in addition, this treatment forms an 
important part of every clinical practice guideline in either public health or other sources 
from countries around the world, describing effective treatments for panic disorder and 
agoraphobia. results from numerous studies evaluating this treatment protocol, both individually 
and in combination with leading pharmacological approaches, suggest that 
this appvroach is equally effective as the best pharmacological approaches in the short 
term and more durable over the long term. But this treatment protocol has not stood still. 
for example, we have learned a great deal in recent years about neurobiological mechanisms 
of action in fear reduction, and the best psychological methods for effecting these 
changes and newly developed acceptance‑based procedures have proven efficacious. in 
this chapter we present the latest version of this protocol, incorporating these changes 
and additions in the context of changes to diagnostic criteria in DsM‑5, all as illustrated 
in a comprehensive account of the treatment of “Julie.”—D. H. B. 

Advances continue in the development of biopsychosocial 
models and cognitive-behavioral treatments for 
panic disorder and agoraphobia. The conceptualization 
of panic disorder as an acquired fear of certain bodily 
sensations, and agoraphobia as a behavioral response 
to the anticipation of related bodily sensations or their 
crescendo into a full-blown panic attack, continues to 
be supported by experimental, clinical, and longitudinal 
research. Furthermore, the efficacy of cognitivebehavioral 
treatments that target fear of bodily sensations 
and associated agoraphobic situations is well 
established. In addition to presenting an up-to-date 

review of treatment outcome data, this chapter covers 
recent theoretical and empirical developments in 
reference to etiological factors, the role of comorbid 
diagnoses in treatment, ways of optimizing learning 
during exposure therapy, and the effect of medication 
on cognitive-behavioral treatments. The chapter concludes 
with a detailed, session-by-session outline of 
cognitive-behavioral treatment for panic disorder and 
agoraphobia. This protocol has been developed in our 
clinics; the full protocol is detailed in available treatment 
manuals (Barlow & Craske, 2006; Craske & Barlow, 
2006). 

1 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

Nature of PaNic aND aGoraPhoBia 

Panic Attacks 

“Panic attacks” are discrete episodes of intense fear 
or discomfort, accompanied by physical and cognitive 
symptoms, as listed in the DSM-5 panic attack checklist 
(American Psychiatric Association, 2013). Panic 
attacks are discrete by virtue of their sudden or abrupt 
onset and brief duration, as opposed to gradually building 
anxious arousal. Panic attacks in panic disorder 
often have an unexpected quality, meaning that from 
the patient’s perspective, they appear to happen without 
an obvious trigger or at unexpected times. Indeed, the 
diagnosis of panic disorder is defined by recurrent “unexpected” 
panic attacks, followed by at least 1 month 
of persistent concern about their recurrence and their 
consequences, or by a significant change in behavior 
consequent to the attacks (American Psychiatric Association, 
2013). 

As with all basic emotions (Izard, 1992), panic attacks 
are associated with strong action tendencies: 
Most often, these are urges to escape, and less often, 
urges to fight. These fight and flight tendencies usually 
involve elevated autonomic nervous system arousal 
needed to support such fight–flight reactivity. Furthermore, 
perceptions of imminent threat or danger, such as 
death, loss of control, or social ridicule, often accompany 
such fight–flight reactivity. However, the features of 
urgency to escape, autonomic arousal, and perception 
of threat are not present in every self-reported occurrence 
of panic. For example, despite evidence for elevated 
heart rate or other indices of sympathetic nervous 
system activation during panic attacks on average (e.g., 
Wilkinson et al., 1998), Margraf, Taylor, Ehlers, Roth, 
and Agras (1987) found that 40% of self-reported panic 
attacks were not associated with accelerated heart rate. 
Moreover, in general, patients with panic disorder are 
more likely than nonanxious controls to report arrhythmic 
heart rate in the absence of actual arrhythmias 
(Barsky, Cleary, Sarnie, & Ruskin, 1994). Heightened 
anxiety about signs of autonomic arousal may lead patients 
to perceive cardiac events when none exist (Barlow, 
Brown, & Craske, 1994; Craske & Tsao, 1999). We 
believe that self-reported panic in the absence of heart 
rate acceleration or other indices of autonomic activation 
reflects anticipatory anxiety rather than true panic 
(Barlow et al., 1994), especially because more severe 
panic attacks are more consistently associated with accelerated 
heart rate (Margraf et al., 1987). Sometimes 

individuals report intense abrupt fear in the absence of 
perceptions of threat or danger. This has been termed 
“noncognitive” panic (Rachman, Lopatka, & Levitt, 
1988; see Kircanski, Craske, Epstein, & Wittchen, 
2009). Finally, the urgency to escape is sometimes 
weakened by situational demands for continued approach 
and endurance, such as performance expectations 
or job demands, thus creating discordance between 
behavioral responses on the one hand, and verbal 
or physiological fear responses on the other. 

A subset of individuals with panic disorder experience 
nocturnal panic attacks. “Nocturnal panic” refers 
to waking from sleep in a state of panic with symptoms 
that are very similar to panic attacks during wakeful 
states (Craske & Barlow, 1989; Uhde, 1994). Nocturnal 
panic does not refer to waking from sleep and panicking 
after a lapse of waking time, or nighttime arousals 
induced by nightmares or environmental stimuli 
(e.g., unexpected noises). Instead, nocturnal panic is an 
abrupt waking from sleep in a state of panic, without 
an obvious trigger. Nocturnal panic attacks reportedly 
most often occur between 1 and 3 hours after sleep 
onset, and only occasionally more than once per night 
(Craske & Barlow, 1989). Surveys of select clinical 
groups suggest that nocturnal panic is relatively common 
among individuals with panic disorder: 44–71% 
report having experienced nocturnal panic at least 
once, and 30–45% report repeated nocturnal panics 
(Craske & Barlow, 1989; Krystal, Woods, Hill, & 
Charney, 1991; Mellman & Uhde, 1989; Roy-Byrne, 
Mellman, & Uhde, 1988; Uhde, 1994). Individuals who 
suffer frequent nocturnal panic often become fearful 
of sleep and attempt to delay sleep onset. Avoidance of 
sleep may result in chronic sleep deprivation, which in 
turn precipitates more nocturnal panics (Uhde, 1994). 

“Nonclinical” panic attacks occur occasionally in 
approximately 3–5% of people in the general population 
who do not otherwise meet criteria for panic disorder 
(Norton, Cox, & Malan, 1992). Also, panic attacks 
occur across a variety of anxiety and mood disorders 
(Barlow et al., 1985), as well as substance use, personality 
disorders and psychoses (Craske et al., 2010) 
and are not limited to panic disorder. Indeed, the ubiquity 
of panic attacks has been emphasized in DSM-5 
(American Psychiatric Association, 2013) where panic 
attacks are designated as a potential specifier for any 
DSM disorder. As stated earlier, the defining feature of 
panic disorder is not the presence of panic attacks per 
se, but involves additional anxiety about the recurrence 
of panic or its consequences, or a significant behavioral 


Panic Disorder and Agoraphobia 

change because of the panic attacks. It is the additional 
anxiety about panic combined with catastrophic cognitions 
in the face of panic that differentiate between the 
person with panic disorder and the occasional nonclinical 
panicker (e.g., Telch, Lucas, & Nelson, 1989) or the 
person with other anxiety disorders who also happens 
to panic. The following scenario exemplifies the latter 
point. 

Patient: Sometimes I lay awake at night thinking 
about a million different things. I think about what 
is going to happen to my daughter if I get sick. Who 
will look after her, or what would happen if my husband 
died and we didn’t have enough money to give 
my daughter a good education? Then I think about 
where we would live and how we would cope. Sometimes 
I can work myself up so much that my heart 
starts to race, my hands get sweaty, and I feel dizzy 
and scared. So I have to stop myself from thinking 
about all those things. I usually get out of bed and 
turn on the TV—anything to get my mind off the 
worries. 

tHeraPist: Do you worry about the feelings of a racing 
heart, sweating, and dizziness happening again? 

Patient: No. They’re unpleasant, but they are the least 
of my concerns. I am more worried about my daughter 
and our future. 

This scenario illustrates the experience of panic that 
is not the central focus of the person’s anxiety. More 
likely, this woman has generalized anxiety disorder, 
and her uncontrollable worry leads her to panic on occasion. 
The next example is someone with social anxiety 
disorder, who becomes very concerned about panicking 
in social situations, because the possibility of a 
panic attack increases her concerns about being judged 
negatively by others. 

Patient: I am terrified of having a panic attack in 
meetings at work. I dread the thought of others noticing 
how anxious I am. They must be able to see my 
hands shaking, the sweat on my forehead, and worst 
of all, my face turning red. 

tHeraPist: What worries you most about others noticing 
your physical symptoms? 
Patient: That they will think that I am weird or 
strange. 

tHeraPist: Would you be anxious in the meetings if 
the panic attacks were gone? 

Patient: I would still be worried about doing or saying 

the wrong thing. It is not just the panic attacks that 

worry me. 

tHeraPist: Are you worried about panic attacks in any 

other situations? 
Patient: Formal social events and sometimes when I 

meet someone for the first time. 

In this case, even though the patient experiences 
panic attacks, the real concern is about being judged 
negatively by others consequent to panic attacks, and 
the panic attacks do not occur in situations other than 
social ones. Hence, this presentation is most aptly described 
as social anxiety. 

Agoraphobia 

“Agoraphobia” refers to avoidance or endurance with 
dread of situations from which escape might be difficult 
or help is unavailable in the event of a panic-like 
symptoms (including but not limited to panic attacks) 
or other incapacitating symptoms, such as loss of bowel 
control or vomiting, disorientation (especially in children), 
or sense of falling (especially in older adults) 
(American Psychiatric Association, 2013). Typical agoraphobic 
situations include shopping malls, waiting in 
line, movie theaters, traveling by car or bus, crowded 
restaurants, and being alone. “Mild” agoraphobia is 
exemplified by the person who hesitates about driving 
long distances alone but manages to drive to and from 
work, prefers to sit on the aisle at movie theaters but 
still goes to movies, and avoids crowded places. “Moderate” 
agoraphobia is exemplified by the person whose 
driving is limited to a 10-mile radius from home and 
only if accompanied, who shops at off-peak times and 
avoids large supermarkets, and who avoids flying or 
traveling by train. “Severe” agoraphobia refers to very 
limited mobility, sometimes even to the point of becoming 
housebound. 

Relationship between Panic and Agoraphobia 

The relationship between panic and agoraphobia is 
complex. On the one hand, not all persons who panic 
develop agoraphobia, and the extent of agoraphobia that 
emerges is highly variable (Craske & Barlow, 1988). 
Various factors have been investigated as potential predictors 
of agoraphobia. Although agoraphobia tends 
to increase as history of panic lengthens, a significant 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

proportion of individuals panic for many years without 
developing agoraphobic limitations. Nor is agoraphobia 
related to age of onset or frequency of panic (Cox, 
Endler, & Swinson, 1995; Craske & Barlow, 1988; 
Kikuchi et al., 2005; Rapee & Murrell, 1988). Some 
studies report more intense physical symptoms during 
panic attacks when there is more agoraphobia (e.g., de 
Jong & Bouman, 1995; Goisman et al., 1994; Noyes, 
Clancy, Garvey, & Anderson, 1987; Telch, Brouillard, 
Telch, Agras, & Taylor, 1989). Others fail to find 
such differences (e.g., Cox et al., 1995; Craske, Miller, 
Rotunda, & Barlow, 1990). On the one hand, fears of 
dying, going crazy, or losing control do not relate to 
level of agoraphobia (Cox et al., 1995; Craske, Rapee, 
& Barlow, 1988). On the other hand, concerns about social 
consequences of panicking may be stronger when 
there is more agoraphobia (Amering et al., 1997; de 
Jong & Bouman, 1995; Rapee & Murrell, 1988; Telch, 
Brouilard, et al., 1989). In addition, Kikuchi and colleagues 
(2005) found that individuals who develop agoraphobia 
within 6 months of the onset of panic disorder 
have a higher prevalence of generalized anxiety disorder 
but not major depression. However, whether social 
evaluation concerns or comorbidity are precursors or 
are secondary to agoraphobia remains to be determined. 
Occupational status also predicts agoraphobia, 
accounting for 18% of the variance in one study (de 
Jong & Bouman, 1995). Perhaps the strongest predictor 
of agoraphobia is sex; the ratio of males to females 
shifts dramatically in the direction of female predominance 
as level of agoraphobia worsens (e.g., Thyer, 
Himle, Curtis, Cameron, & Nesse, 1985). 

On the other hand, not everyone with agoraphobia 
has a history of panic attacks or even panic-like symptoms, 
although a history of panic is much more common 
in treatment-seeking samples of individuals with 
agoraphobia than in epidemiological samples (Wittchen, 
Gloster, Beesdo-Baum, Fava, & Craske, 2010). 
Nonetheless, the prevalence of agoraphobia without a 
history of panic disorder, panic attacks, or panic-like 
symptoms was reported to be at least as high as the 
combined rates of panic disorder with and without agoraphobia 
across all epidemiological studies (Wittchen 
et al., 2010). Approximately 50% of individuals from 
community samples who endorse agoraphobia do not 
endorse panic attacks. Furthermore, agoraphobia without 
panic-like features appears to be as impairing as 
panic disorder without agoraphobia, although the 
combination is usually associated with even more impairment. 
In addition, some differences exist between 

them in terms of incidence, comorbidity, and response 
to treatment (Wittchen et al., 2010). For these reasons, 
panic disorder and agoraphobia are now recognized 
as two distinct, albeit highly comorbid, disorders in 
DSM-5 (American Psychiatric Association, 2013). 

PreseNtiNG features 

From the latest epidemiological study, the National 
Comorbidity Survey Replication (NCS-R; Kessler, 
Berglund, Demler, Jin, & Walters, 2005; Kessler, 
Chiu, Demler, & Walters, 2005) 12-month prevalence 
estimates for panic disorder are approximately 2% in 
adults and adolescents. Lower estimates have been reported 
for some Asian, African and Latin American 
countries, ranging from 0.1 to 0.8% (Lewis-Fernandez 
et al., 2010). The 12-month rates for agoraphobia are 
approximately 1.7%, and the lifetime morbid risk is 
3.7% (Kessler et al., 2012). 

The modal age of onset for panic disorder is late 
teenage years and early adulthood (Kessler, Berglund, 
et al., 2005). In fact, although panic disorder is rare 
below the age of 14, a substantial proportion of adolescents 
report panic attacks (e.g., Hayward et al., 1992), 
and panic disorder in children and adolescents tends 
to be chronic and comorbid with other anxiety, mood, 
and disruptive disorders (Biederman, Faraone, Marrs, 
& Moore, 1997). Treatment is usually sought much 
later, around age 34 (e.g., Noyes et al., 1986). Similarly, 
agoraphobia may occur in childhood but the incidence 
peaks in late adolescence and early adulthood (Beesdo, 
Knappe, & Pine, 2007; Bittner et al., 2007); the mean 
age of onset is 17 years (Kessler et al., 2012), and older 
in the absence of history of panic disorder or panic attacks. 
Rates of panic disorder decline in older adults, 
possibly diminishing to subclinical levels (Wolitzky-
Taylor, Castriotti, Lenze, Stanley, & Craske, 2010). 
Similarly, 12-month prevalence rates for agoraphobia 
reduce to 0.4% in individuals over the age of 65 years 
(Kessler et al., 2006). The overall ratio of females to 
males is approximately 2:1 (Kessler et al., 2006) and, as 
mentioned already, the ratio shifts dramatically in the 
direction of female predominance as level of agoraphobia 
worsens (e.g., Thyer et al., 1985). 

Rarely do the diagnoses of panic disorder or agoraphobia 
occur in isolation. Commonly co-occurring 
Axis I conditions include specific phobias, social phobia, 
dysthymia, generalized anxiety disorder, major 
depressive disorder, and substance abuse (e.g., Brown, 


Panic Disorder and Agoraphobia 

Campbell, Lehman, Grishman, & Mancill, 2001; Goisman, 
Goldenberg, Vasile, & Keller, 1995; Kessler, 
Chiu, et al., 2005). Also, 25–60% of persons with 
panic disorder also meet criteria for a personality disorder, 
mostly avoidant and dependent personality disorders 
(e.g., Chambless & Renneberg, 1988). However, 
the nature of the relationship with personality disorders 
remains unclear. For example, comorbidity rates 
are highly dependent on the method used to establish 
Axis II diagnosis, as well as the co-occurrence of depressed 
mood (Alneas & Torgersen, 1990; Chambless 
& Renneberg, 1988). Moreover, the fact that abnormal 
personality traits improve and some “personality disorders” 
even remit after successful treatment of panic 
disorder (Black, Monahan, Wesner, Gabel, & Bowers, 
1996; Mavissakalian & Hamman, 1987; Noyes, Reich, 
Suelzer, & Christiansen, 1991) raises questions about 
the validity of Axis II diagnoses. The issue of comorbidity 
with personality disorders and its effect on treatment 
for panic disorder and agoraphobia is described in 
more detail in a later section. 

Finally, panic disorder and agoraphobia tend to be 
chronic conditions, with severe financial and interpersonal 
costs (Wittchen et al., 2010). Only a minority 
of untreated individuals remit without subsequent 
relapse within a few years if not treated (Emmelkamp 
& Wittchen, 2009; Katschnig & Amering, 1998; Roy-
Byrne & Cowley, 1995). Also, individuals with panic 
disorder overutilize medical resources compared to the 
general public and individuals with other “psychiatric” 
disorders (e.g., Katon et al., 1990; Roy-Byrne et al., 
1999). 

history of PsycholoGical treatMeNt 
for PaNic DisorDer aND aGoraPhoBia 

It was not until the publication of DSM-III (American 
Psychiatric Association, 1980) that panic disorder with 
or without agoraphobia was recognized as a distinct 
anxiety problem. Until that time, panic attacks were 
viewed primarily as a form of free-floating anxiety. 
Consequently, psychological treatment approaches 
were relatively nonspecific. They included relaxation 
and cognitive restructuring for stressful life events in 
general (e.g., Barlow, O’Brien, & Last, 1984). Many 
presumed that pharmacotherapy was necessary for the 
control of panic. In contrast, the treatment of agoraphobia 
was quite specific from the 1970s onward, with 
primarily exposure-based approaches to target fear and 

avoidance of specific situations. However, relatively 
little consideration was given to panic attacks in either 
the conceptualization or treatment of agoraphobia. 
The development of specific panic control treatments 
in the middle to late 1980s shifted interest away from 
agoraphobia. Interest in agoraphobia was subsequently 
renewed, specifically in terms of whether panic control 
treatments are sufficient for the management of agoraphobia, 
and whether their combination with treatments 
that directly target agoraphobia is superior overall. We 
address these questions in more detail after describing 
the conceptualization that underlies cognitivebehavioral 
approaches to the treatment of panic and 
agoraphobia. 

coNcePtualizatioN of etioloGical 
aND MaiNtaiNiNG factors for PaNic 
DisorDer aND aGoraPhoBia 

Several independent lines of research (Barlow, 1988; 
Clark, 1986; Ehlers & Margraf, 1989) converged in 
the 1980s on the same basic conceptualization of panic 
disorder as an acquired fear of bodily sensations, particularly 
sensations associated with autonomic arousal. 
Psychological and biological predispositions are believed 
to enhance the vulnerability to acquire such fear. 
These interacting vulnerabilities have been organized 
into an etiological conception of anxiety disorders in 
general, referred to as “triple vulnerability theory” 
(Barlow, 1988, 2002; Suárez, Bennett, Goldstein, & 
Barlow, 2008). First, genetic contributions to the development 
of anxiety and negative affect constitute a generalized 
(heritable) biological vulnerability. Second, 
evidence supports a generalized psychological vulnerability 
to experience anxiety and related negative affective 
states, characterized by a diminished sense of 
control arising from early developmental experiences. 
Although the unfortunate co-occurrence of generalized 
biological and psychological vulnerabilities may 
be sufficient to produce anxiety and related states, particularly 
generalized anxiety disorder and depression, 
a third vulnerability seems necessary to account for 
the development of at least some specific anxiety disorders, 
including panic disorder; that is, early learning 
experiences in some instances seem to focus anxiety 
on particular areas of concern. In panic disorder, the 
experience of certain somatic sensations becomes associated 
with a heightened sense of threat and danger. 
This specific psychological vulnerability, when coordi



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

nated with the generalized biological and psychological 
vulnerabilities mentioned earlier, seems to contribute 
to the development of panic disorder. Fear conditioning, 
avoidant responding, and information-processing 
biases are believed to perpetuate such fear. It is the 
perpetuating factors that are targeted in the cognitivebehavioral 
treatment approach. What follows is a very 
brief review of some contributory factors with practical 
relevance for panic disorder. 

Vulnerability Factors 

Genetics and Temperament 

The temperament most associated with anxiety disorders, 
including panic disorder, is neuroticism (Eysenck, 
1967; Gray, 1982), or proneness to experience 
negative emotions in response to stressors. A closely 
linked construct, “negative affectivity,” is the tendency 
to experience a variety of negative emotions across a 
variety of situations, even in the absence of objective 
stressors (Watson & Clark, 1984). Structural analyses 
confirm that negative affect is a higher-order factor that 
distinguishes individuals with each anxiety disorder 
(and depression) from controls with no mental disorder: 
Lower-order factors discriminate among anxiety 
disorders, with “fear of fear” being the factor that discriminates 
panic disorder from other anxiety disorders 
(Brown, Chorpita, & Barlow, 1998; Prenoveau et al., 
2010; Zinbarg & Barlow, 1996). The anxiety disorders 
load differentially on negative affectivity, with more 
pervasive anxiety disorders, such as generalized anxiety 
disorder, loading more heavily, panic disorder loading 
at an intermediate level, and social anxiety disorder 
loading the least (Brown et al., 1998).1 However, these 
findings derive from cross-sectional datasets. 

Longitudinal prospective evidence for the role of 
neuroticism in predicting the onset of panic disorder 
is relatively limited. Specifically, neuroticism predicted 
the onset of panic attacks in adolescents (Hayward, 
Killen, Kraemer, & Taylor, 2000; Schmidt, Lerew, & 
Jackson, 1997, 1999), and “emotional reactivity” at age 
3 was a significant variable in the classification of panic 
disorder in 18- to 21-year-old males (Craske, Poulton, 
Tsao, & Plotkin, 2001). Ongoing studies, such as the 
Northwestern/UCLA Youth Emotion Project, are comprehensively 
evaluating the role of neuroticism in the 
prediction of subsequent panic disorder. 

Numerous multivariate genetic analyses of human 
twin samples consistently attribute approximately 30– 
50% of variance in neuroticism to additive genetic fac


tors (Eley, 2001; Lake, Eaves, Maes, Heath, & Martin, 
2000). In addition, anxiety and depression appear to be 
variable expressions of the heritable tendency toward 
neuroticism (Kendler, Heath, Martin, & Eaves, 1987). 
Symptoms of panic (i.e., breathlessness, heart pounding) 
may be additionally explained by a unique source 
of genetic variance that is differentiated from symptoms 
of depression and anxiety (Kendler et al., 1987) 
and neuroticism (Martin, Jardine, Andrews, & Heath, 
1988). 

Analyses of specific genetic markers remain preliminary 
and inconsistent. For example, panic disorder 
has been linked to a locus on chromosome 13 (Hamilton 
et al., 2003; Schumacher et al., 2005) and chromosome 
9 (Thorgeirsson et al., 2003), but the exact genes 
remain unknown. Findings regarding markers for the 
cholecystokinin-B receptor gene have been inconsistent 
(cf. Hamilton et al., 2001; van Megen, Westenberg, 
Den Boer, & Kahn, 1996). Also, association and linkage 
studies implicate the adenosine receptor gene in 
panic disorder (Deckert et al., 1998; Hamilton et al., 
2004). An allele of the neuropeptide S receptor gene 
on chromosome 7 was linked in a male-specific manner 
to panic disorder and not to schizophrenia or attention 
deficit disorder (Okamura et al., 2011), whereas 
the same gene was linked in a female-specific manner 
to panic disorder compared to healthy controls (Domschke 
et al., 2011). Thus, at this stage, the results are 
rather piecemeal and sometimes inconsistent, and there 
is no evidence at this point for a specific link between 
genetic markers and temperament, on the one hand, 
and panic disorder on the other. Rather, neurobiological 
factors seem to comprise a nonspecific biological 
vulnerability. 

Anxiety Sensitivity 

As described earlier, neuroticism is viewed as a higherorder 
factor characteristic of all anxiety disorders, with 
“fear of fear” being more unique to panic disorder. The 
construct “fear of fear” overlaps with the construct 
“anxiety sensitivity,” or the belief that anxiety and its 
associated symptoms may cause deleterious physical, 
social, and psychological consequences that extend 
beyond any immediate physical discomfort during an 
episode of anxiety or panic (Reiss, 1980). Anxiety sensitivity 
is elevated across most anxiety disorders, but it 
is particularly elevated in panic disorder (e.g., Taylor, 
Koch, & McNally, 1992; Zinbarg & Barlow, 1996), especially 
the Physical Concerns subscale of the Anxiety 
Sensitivity Index (Zinbarg & Barlow, 1996; Zinbarg, 


Panic Disorder and Agoraphobia 

Barlow, & Brown, 1997). Therefore, beliefs that physical 
symptoms of anxiety are harmful seem to be particularly 
relevant to panic disorder and may comprise a 
specific psychological vulnerability. 

Anxiety sensitivity is presumed to confer a risk factor 
for panic disorder because it primes fear reactivity 
to bodily sensations. In support, anxiety sensitivity predicts 
subjective distress and reported symptomatology 
in response to procedures that induce strong physical 
sensations, such as CO2 inhalation (Forsyth, Palav, & 
Duff, 1999), balloon inflation (Messenger & Shean, 
1998), and hyperventilation (Sturges, Goetsch, Ridley, 
& Whittal, 1998) in nonclinical samples, even after researchers 
control for the effects of trait anxiety (Rapee 
& Medoro, 1994). In addition, several longitudinal 
studies indicate that high scores on the Anxiety Sensitivity 
Index predict the onset of panic attacks over 
1- to 4-year intervals in adolescents (Hayward et al., 
2000), college students (Maller & Reiss, 1992), and 
community samples with specific phobias or no anxiety 
disorders (Ehlers, 1995). The predictive relationship 
remains after researchers control for prior depression 
(Hayward et al., 2000). In addition, Anxiety Sensitivity 
Index scores predicted spontaneous panic attacks and 
worry about panic (and anxiety more generally), during 
an acute military stressor (i.e., 5 weeks of basic training), 
even after researchers control for history of panic 
attacks and trait anxiety (Schmidt et al., 1997, 1999). 
Finally, panic attacks themselves elevate anxiety sensitivity 
over a 5-week period in adults (Schmidt et al., 
1999), and over a 1-year period in adolescents, albeit 
to a lesser extent (Weems, Hayward, Killen, & Taylor, 
2002). 

However, Bouton, Mineka, and Barlow (2001) have 
noted that the relationship between anxiety sensitivity 
and panic attacks in these studies is relatively small, 
not exclusive to panic, and weaker than the relationship 
between panic and neuroticism. Furthermore, these 
studies have evaluated panic attacks and worry about 
panic but not the prediction of diagnosed panic disorder. 
Thus, the causal significance of anxiety sensitivity 
for panic disorder remains to be fully understood. 

History of Medical Illness and Abuse 

Other studies highlight the role of medical illnesses 
as contributing to a specific psychological vulnerability 
for panic disorder. For example, using the Dunedin 
Multidisciplinary Study database, we found that experience 
with personal respiratory disturbance (and parental 
poor health) as a youth predicted panic disorder 

at age 18 or 21 (Craske et al., 2001). This finding is consistent 
with reports of more respiratory disturbance in 
the history of patients with panic disorder compared to 
other patients with anxiety disorders (Verburg, Griez, 
Meijer, & Pols, 1995). Furthermore, first-degree relatives 
of patients with panic disorder had a significantly 
higher prevalence of chronic obstructive respiratory 
disease, and asthma in particular, than first-degree relatives 
of patients with other anxiety disorders (van Beek, 
Schruers, & Friez, 2005). 

Childhood experiences of sexual and physical abuse 
may also prime panic disorder. Retrospective reports of 
such childhood abuse were associated with panic disorder 
onset at ages 16–21 years in a longitudinal analysis 
of New Zealanders from birth to age 21 (Goodwin, Fergusson, 
& Horwood, 2005). This finding is consistent 
with multiple cross-sectional studies in both clinical 
and community samples (e.g., Bandelow et al., 2002; 
Kendler et al., 2000; Kessler, Davis, & Kendler, 1997; 
Moisan & Engels, 1995; Stein et al., 1996). The association 
with childhood abuse is stronger for panic disorder 
than for other anxiety disorders, such as social 
phobia (Safren, Gershuny, Marzol, Otto, & Pollack, 
2002; Stein et al., 1996) and obsessive–compulsive 
disorder (Stein et al., 1996). In addition, some studies 
report an association between panic disorder and 
exposure to violence between other family members, 
generally interparental violence (e.g., Bandelow et al., 
2002; Moisan & Engels, 1995), whereas another study 
did not (Goodwin et al., 2005). Retrospective reporting 
of childhood abuse and familial violence in all of these 
studies, however, limits the findings. 

Interoceptive Awareness 

Patients with panic disorder, as well as nonclinical 
panickers, appear to have heightened awareness of, 
or ability to detect, bodily sensations of arousal (e.g., 
Ehlers & Breuer, 1992, 1996; Ehlers, Breuer, Dohn, 
& Feigenbaum, 1995; Zoellner & Craske, 1999). Discrepant 
findings (e.g., Antony et al., 1995; Rapee, 
1994) exist but have been attributed to methodological 
artifact (Ehlers & Breuer, 1996). Ability to perceive 
heartbeat, in particular, appears to be a relatively stable 
individual-difference variable given that it does not differ 
between untreated and treated patients with panic 
disorder (Ehlers & Breuer, 1992), or from before to 
after successful treatment (Antony, Meadows, Brown, 
& Barlow, 1994; Ehlers et al., 1995). Thus, interoceptive 
accuracy may be a predisposing trait for panic disorder 
that increases the probability of perceiving sensa



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

tions that in turn may trigger a panic attack. Whether 
interoceptive awareness is learned, and represents another 
specific psychological vulnerability, or is more 
dispositional remains to be determined. 

Separate from interoception is the issue of propensity 
for intense autonomic activation. As noted earlier, some 
evidence points to a unique genetic influence on the reported 
experience of breathlessness, heart pounding, 
and a sense of terror (Kendler et al., 1987). Conceivably, 
cardiovascular reactivity presents a unique physiological 
predisposition for panic disorder. In support of 
this, cardiac symptoms and shortness of breath predict 
later development of panic attacks and panic disorder 
(Keyl & Eaton, 1990). Unfortunately, these data derive 
from report of symptoms, which is not a good index of 
actual autonomic state (Pennebaker & Roberts, 1992) 
and may instead reflect interoception. 

Initial Panic Attacks 

From an evolutionary standpoint, fear is a natural and 
adaptive response to threatening stimuli. However, the 
fear experienced during the first unexpected panic attack 
is often unjustified due to the lack of an identifiable 
trigger or antecedent; hence, it represents a “false 
alarm” (Barlow, 1988, 2002). The large majority of 
initial panic attacks are recalled as occurring outside 
of the home, while driving, walking, at work, or at 
school (Craske et al., 1990), generally in public (Lelliott, 
Marks, McNamee, & Tobena, 1989), and on a bus, 
plane, subway, or in social-evaluative situations (Shulman, 
Cox, Swinson, Kuch, & Reichman, 1994). Barlow 
(1988) and Craske and Rowe (1997b) believe situations 
that set the scene for initial panic attacks are ones in 
which bodily sensations are perceived as posing the 
most threat because of impairment of functioning (e.g., 
driving), entrapment (e.g., air travel, elevators), negative 
social evaluation (e.g., job, formal social events), 
or distance from safety (e.g., unfamiliar locales). Entrapment 
concerns may be particularly salient for the 
subsequent development of agoraphobia (Faravelli, Pallanti, 
Biondi, Paterniti, & Scarpato, 1992). 

Maintenance Factors 

Acute “fear of fear” (or, more accurately, anxiety focused 
on somatic sensations) that develops after initial 
panic attacks in vulnerable individuals refers to 
anxiety about certain bodily sensations associated with 
panic attacks (e.g., racing heart, dizziness, paresthe


sias) (Barlow, 1988; Goldstein & Chambless, 1978), 
and is attributed to two factors. The first is interoceptive 
conditioning, or conditional fear of internal cues, 
such as elevated heart rate, because of their association 
with intense fear, pain, or distress (Razran, 1961). Specifically, 
interoceptive conditioning refers to low-level 
somatic sensations of arousal or anxiety becoming conditional 
stimuli, so that early somatic components of 
the anxiety response come to elicit significant bursts 
of anxiety or panic (Bouton et al., 2001). An extensive 
body of experimental literature attests to the robustness 
of interoceptive conditioning (e.g., Dworkin & Dworkin, 
1999), particularly with regard to early interoceptive 
drug-onset cues becoming conditional stimuli for 
larger drug effects (e.g., Sokolowska, Siegel, & Kim, 
2002). In addition, interoceptive conditional responses 
are not dependent on conscious awareness of triggering 
cues (Razran, 1961); thus, they have been observed 
in patients under anesthesia (e.g., Block, Ghoneim, 
Fowles, Kumar, & Pathak, 1987). Within this model, 
then, slight changes in relevant bodily functions that 
are not consciously recognized may elicit conditional 
anxiety or fear and panic due to previous pairings with 
panic (Barlow, 1988; Bouton et al., 2001); the result 
would be an unexpected panic attack. Further support 
for a conditioning model comes from evidence that individuals 
with panic disorder, as well as other anxiety 
disorders, show elevated fear conditioning and weakened 
fear extinction in laboratory paradigms (Lissek et 
al., 2005), suggesting that they are more prone to developing 
fear through negative associations, and once 
acquired, their fear is less likely to diminish with time. 
This pattern seems to be compounded for individuals 
with panic disorder who additionally show impaired 
safety learning (Lissek et al., 2009) and greater fear 
generalization (Lissek et al., 2010) in laboratory paradigms. 
In other words, once fear of specific bodily 
sensations is acquired, individuals with panic disorder 
may have difficulty perceiving other sensations as 
being harmless and may be more likely to generalize 
their fear to various bodily states. 

The second factor, offered by Clark (1986) to explain 
acute fear of panic-related body sensations, is catastrophic 
misappraisals of bodily sensations (misinterpretation 
of sensations as signs of imminent death, loss 
of control, etc.). We have taken issue with the purely 
cognitive model of panic disorder by stating that it 
cannot account for panic attacks devoid of conscious 
cognitive appraisal without turning to constructs such 
as “automatic appraisals,” which prove to be untestable 


Panic Disorder and Agoraphobia 

(Bouton et al., 2001). Catastrophic misappraisals may 
accompany panic attacks because they are a natural 
part of the constellation of responses that go with panic, 
or because they have been encouraged and reinforced 
much like sick role behaviors during childhood. In addition, 
such thoughts may become conditioned stimuli 
that trigger anxiety and panic, as demonstrated via 
panic induction through presentation of pairs of words 
involving sensations and catastrophic outcomes (Clark 
et al., 1988). In this case, catastrophic cognitions may 
well be sufficient to elicit conditioned panic attacks, but 
not necessary. 

Whether cognitively or noncognitively based, excessive 
anxiety over panic-related bodily sensations in 
panic disorder is well supported. Persons with panic 
disorder endorse strong beliefs that bodily sensations 
associated with panic attacks cause physical or mental 
harm (e.g., Chambless, Caputo, Bright, & Gallagher, 
1984; McNally & Lorenz, 1987). They are more likely 
to interpret bodily sensations in a catastrophic fashion 
(Clark et al., 1988) and to allocate more attentional resources 
to words that represent physical threat, such 
as “disease” and “fatality” (e.g., Ehlers, Margraf, Davies, 
& Roth, 1988; Hope, Rapee, Heimberg, & Dombeck, 
1990); catastrophe words, such as “death” and 
“insane” (e.g., Maidenberg, Chen, Craske, Bohn, & 
Bystritsky, 1996; McNally, Riemann, Louro, Lukach, 
& Kim, 1992); and heartbeat stimuli (Kroeze & van 
den Hout, 2000; however, attentional bias is not always 
found; e.g., DeCort, Hermans, Spruyt, Griez, & Schruers, 
2008). Also, individuals with panic disorder show 
enhanced brain potentials in response to panic-related 
words (Pauli, Amrhein, Muhlberger, Dengler, & Wiedemann, 
2005). In addition, they are more likely to 
become anxious in procedures that elicit bodily sensations 
similar to the ones experienced during panic 
attacks, including benign cardiovascular, respiratory, 
and audiovestibular exercises (Antony, Ledley, Liss, 
& Swinson, 2006; Jacob, Furman, Clark, & Durrant, 
1992), as well as more invasive procedures, such as 
CO2 inhalations, compared to patients with other anxiety 
disorders (e.g., Perna, Bertani, Arancio, Ronchi, & 
Bellodi, 1995; Rapee, 1986; Rapee, Brown, Antony, & 
Barlow, 1992) or healthy controls (e.g., Gorman et al., 
1994). The findings are not fully consistent, however, 
because patients with panic disorder did not differ from 
patients with social phobia in response to an epinephrine 
challenge (Veltman, van Zijderveld, Tilders, & 
van Dyck, 1996). Nonetheless, individuals with panic 
disorder also fear signals that ostensibly reflect height


ened arousal and false physiological feedback (Craske 
& Freed, 1995; Craske, Lang, et al., 2002; Ehlers, Margraf, 
Roth, Taylor, & Birnbaumer, 1988). 

Distress over bodily sensations is likely to generate 
ongoing distress for a number of reasons. First, in the 
immediate sense, autonomic arousal generated by fear 
in turn intensifies the feared sensations, thus creating 
a reciprocating cycle of fear and sensations that is sustained 
until autonomic arousal abates or the individual 
perceives safety. Second, because bodily sensations 
that trigger panic attacks are not always immediately 
obvious, they may generate the perception of unexpected 
or “out of the blue” panic attacks (Barlow, 1988) that 
causes even further distress (Craske, Glover, & DeCola, 
1995). Third, the perceived uncontrollability, or inability 
to escape or terminate bodily sensations, again, 
is likely to generate heightened anxiety (e.g., Maier, 
Laudenslager, & Ryan, 1985; Mineka, Cook, & Miller, 
1984). Unpredictability and uncontrollability, then, 
are seen as enhancing general levels of anxiety about 
“When is it going to happen again?” and “What do I do 
when it happens?”, thereby contributing to high levels 
of chronic anxious apprehension (Barlow, 1988, 2002). 
In turn, anxious apprehension increases the likelihood 
of panic by directly increasing the availability of sensations 
that have become conditioned cues for panic and/ 
or attentional vigilance for these bodily cues. Thus, a 
maintaining cycle of panic and anxious apprehension 
develops. Also, subtle avoidance behaviors are believed 
to maintain negative beliefs about feared bodily sensations 
(Clark & Ehlers, 1993). Examples include holding 
onto objects or persons for fear of fainting, sitting 
and remaining still for fear of a heart attack, and moving 
slowly or searching for an escape route because 
one fears acting foolish (Salkovskis, Clark, & Gelder, 
1996). Such avoidance includes “experiential avoidance,” 
or being unwilling to remain in contact with 
particular private experiences, in this case bodily sensations 
and catastrophic cognitions. Experiential avoidance 
is believed to contribute to overall distress and 
dysfunction in general (Hayes et al., 1996), and appears 
to correlate with panic-related worries and disability in 
individuals with panic disorder (Kampfe et al., 2012). 
Further support for the role of experiential avoidance 
comes from evidence for instructions to accept symptoms 
of panic to result in less fear and avoidance in 
patients with panic disorder (Campbell-Sills, Barlow, 
Brown, & Hofmann, 2006; Eifert & Heffner, 2003), 
including CO2 inhalation challenges (Levitt, Brown, 
Orsillo, & Barlow, 2004). Finally, anxiety may develop 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

over specific contexts in which the occurrence of panic 
would be particularly troubling (i.e., situations associated 
with impairment, entrapment, negative social 
evaluation, and distance from safety). These anxieties 
may contribute to agoraphobia, which in turn maintains 
distress by preventing disconfirmation of catastrophic 
misappraisals and extinction of conditioned responding. 
Clearly, this model targets panic disorder and agoraphobia, 
and is not as relevant to agoraphobia in the 
absence of panic attacks or panic-like symptoms. 

treatMeNt variaBles 

Setting 

There are several different settings for conducting 
cognitive-behavioral therapy for panic disorder and 
agoraphobia. The first, the outpatient clinic–office setting, 
is suited to psychoeducation, cognitive restructuring, 
assignment, and feedback regarding homework assignments 
and role-play rehearsals. In addition, certain 
exposures can be conducted in the office setting, such 
as interoceptive exposure to feared bodily sensations 
we describe later. Outpatient settings have extended 
from mental health settings to primary care suites (e.g., 
Craske, Roy-Byrne, et al., 2002; Craske et al., 2011; 
Roy-Byrne, Craske, et al., 2005; Roy-Byrne et al., 2010; 
Sharp, Power, Simpson, Swanson, & Anstee, 1997). 
This extension is particularly important because of the 
higher prevalence of panic disorder in primary care settings 
(e.g., Shear & Schulberg, 1995; Tiemens, Ormel, 
& Simon, 1996). However, whether a mental health or 
a primary care office is being used, the built-in safety 
signals of such an office may limit the generalizability 
of learning that takes place in that setting. For example, 
learning to be less afraid in the presence of the therapist, 
or in an office located near a medical center, may 
not necessarily generalize to conditions in which the 
therapist is not present, or when the perceived safety of 
a medical center is not close by. For this reason, homework 
assignments to practice cognitive-behavioral 
skills in a variety of different settings are particularly 
important. 

In the second setting, the natural environment, 
cognitive restructuring and other anxiety management 
skills are put into practice as the patient faces 
feared situations. The latter is called in vivo exposure 
and can be conducted with the aid of the therapist or 
alone. Therapist-directed exposure is particularly use


ful for patients who lack a social network to support 
in vivo exposure assignments, and more valuable than 
self-directed exposure for patients with more severe 
agoraphobia (Holden, O’Brien, Barlow, Stetson, & Infantino, 
1983). Therapist-directed exposure is essential 
to “guided mastery exposure,” in which the therapist 
gives corrective feedback about the way the patient 
faces feared situations to minimize unnecessary defensive 
behaviors. For example, patients are taught to 
drive in a relaxed position and to walk across a bridge 
without holding the rail. On the one hand, guided mastery 
exposure has been shown to be more effective than 
“stimulus exposure” when patients attempt simply to 
endure the situation alone until fear subsides, without 
the benefit of ongoing therapist feedback (Williams & 
Zane, 1989). On the other hand, self-directed exposure 
is very valuable also, especially to the degree that it encourages 
independence and generalization of the skills 
learned in treatment to conditions in which the therapist 
is not present. Thus, the most beneficial approach 
in the natural environment is to proceed from therapistdirected 
to self-directed exposure. 

In telephone-guided treatment, an interesting variation 
that combines the office and the natural environment, 
therapists direct patients with agoraphobia by 
phone to conduct in vivo exposure to feared situations 
(NcNamee, O’Sullivan, Lelliot, & Marks, 1989; 
Swinson, Fergus, Cox, & Wickwire, 1995) or provide 
instruction in panic control skills (Cote, Gauthier, Laberge, 
Cormier, & Plamondon, 1994). In addition, one 
small study showed that cognitive-behavioral therapy 
was as effective when delivered by videoconference as 
in person (Bouchard et al., 2004). 

Self-directed treatments, with minimal direct therapist 
contact, take place in the natural environment 
and are beneficial for highly motivated and educated 
patients (e.g., Ghosh & Marks, 1987; Gould & Clum, 
1995; Gould, Clum, & Shapiro, 1993; Lidren et al., 
1994; Schneider, Mataix-Cols, Marks, & Bachofen, 
2005). On the other hand, self-directed treatments 
are less effective for more severely affected patients 
(Holden, O’Brien, Barlow, Stetson, & Infantino, 1983); 
for those with more comorbidity (Hecker, Losee, 
Roberson-Nay, & Maki, 2004), less motivation, and 
less education; or for patients who are referred as opposed 
to recruited through advertisement (Hecker, 
Losee, Fritzler, & Fink, 1996). Self-directed treatments 
have expanded beyond workbooks and manuals 
to computerized and Internet versions (e.g., Carlbring, 
Ekselius, & Andersson, 2003; Richards, Klein, & Aus



Panic Disorder and Agoraphobia 

tin, 2006; Richards, Klein, & Carlbring, 2003). In general, 
these treatments yield very positive results with 
strong effect sizes (Andrews, Cuijpers, Craske, McEvoy, 
& Titov, 2010), and at least two studies indicate 
that they are as effective as therapist-led cognitivebehavioral 
therapy for panic disorder (Carlbring et al., 
2005; Kiropoulos et al., 2008). However, attrition rates 
may be higher with self-directed computer/Internet 
programs in the absence of any therapist contact (e.g., 
Carlbring et al., 2003). 

The third setting, the inpatient facility, is most appropriate 
when conducting very intensive cognitivebehavioral 
therapy (e.g., daily therapist contact) or 
treating severely disabled persons who can no longer 
function at home. In addition, certain medical or drug 
complications may warrant inpatient treatment. The 
greatest drawback to the inpatient setting is poor generalization 
to the home environment. Transition sessions 
and follow-up booster sessions in an outpatient clinic– 
office or in the patient’s own home facilitate generalization. 


Format 

Cognitive-behavioral therapy for panic disorder and 
agoraphobia may be conducted in individual or group 
formats. Several clinical outcome studies have used 
group treatments (e.g., Bohni, Spindler, Arendt, Hougaaard, 
& Rosenberg, 2009; Craske, DeCola, Sachs, 
& Pontillo, 2003; Craske et al., 2007; Evans, Holt, & 
Oei, 1991; Feigenbaum, 1988; Hoffart, 1995; Telch et 
al., 1993). The fact that their outcomes are generally 
consistent with the summary statistics obtained from 
individually formatted treatment suggests that group 
treatment is as effective as individual therapy. In direct 
comparisons, albeit few in number, a slight advantage 
is shown for individual formats. Specifically, Neron, 
Lacroix, and Chaput (1995) compared 12–14 weekly 
sessions of individual or group cognitive-behavioral 
therapy (N = 20), although the group condition received 
two additional 1-hour individual sessions. The two conditions 
were equally effective for measures of panic and 
agoraphobia at posttreatment and 6-month follow-up. 
However, the individual format was more successful in 
terms of generalized anxiety and depressive symptoms 
by the follow-up point. In addition, individual treatments 
resulted in more clinically significant outcomes 
than group formats in primary care (Sharp, Power, & 
Swanson, 2004). Furthermore, 95% of individuals assigned 
to the waiting-list condition in the latter study 

stated a clear preference for individual treatment when 
given the choice at the end of the waiting list. 

Most studies of cognitive-behavioral therapy for 
panic and agoraphobia involve 10–20 weekly treatment 
sessions. Several studies show that briefer treatments 
may be effective as well. Evans and colleagues 
(1991) compared a 2-day group cognitive-behavioral 
treatment to a waiting-list condition, although without 
random assignment. The 2-day program comprised 
lectures (3 hours); teaching skills, such as breathing, 
relaxation, and cognitive challenge (3 hours); in vivo 
exposure (9 hours); and group discussion plus a 2-hour 
support group for significant others. Eighty-five percent 
of treated patients were reported to be either symptomfree 
or symptomatically improved, and these results 
were maintained 1 year later. In contrast, the waitinglist 
group did not demonstrate significant changes. A 
pilot study similarly indicated effectiveness with intensive 
cognitive-behavioral therapy over 2 days (Deacon 
& Abramowitz, 2006). Other studies have evaluated the 
effectiveness of cognitive-behavioral therapy when delivered 
over fewer sessions. In a randomized study, patients 
with panic disorder with agoraphobia who awaited 
pharmacotherapy treatment were assigned to four 
weekly sessions of either cognitive-behavioral therapy 
or supportive nondirective therapy (Craske, Maidenberg, 
& Bystritsky, 1995). Cognitive-behavioral therapy 
was more effective than supportive therapy, particularly 
with less severely affected patients, although the 
results were not as positive as those typically seen with 
more sessions. Also, we found that up to six sessions 
(average of three sessions) of cognitive-behavioral 
therapy combined with medication recommendations 
yielded significantly greater improvements on an array 
of measures, including quality of life, compared to 
treatment as usual for individuals with panic disorder 
in primary care settings (Roy-Byrne, Craske, et al., 
2005). Notably, however, the treatment effects substantially 
increased as the number of cognitive-behavioral 
therapy sessions (up to six) and follow-up booster phone 
call sessions (up to six) increased (Craske et al., 2006). 
In our subsequent primary care study, an average of 
seven sessions of cognitive-behavioral therapy and/ 
or medication recommendations was superior to usual 
care, and in this case, usual care often involved several 
active treatment elements (Craske et al., 2011). Finally, 
in a direct comparison, results were equally effective 
whether cognitive-behavioral therapy was delivered 
across the standard 12 sessions or across approximately 
six sessions (Clark et al., 1999). 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

Interpersonal Context 

Interpersonal context variables have been researched in 
terms of the development, maintenance, and treatment 
of agoraphobia. The reason for this research interest is 
apparent from the following vignettes: 

“My husband really doesn’t understand. He thinks it’s 
all in my head. He gets angry at me for not being 
able to cope. He says I’m weak and irresponsible. He 
resents having to drive me around, and doing things 
for the kids that I used to do. We argue a lot because 
he comes home tired and frustrated from work only 
to be frustrated more by the problems I’m having. 
But I can’t do anything without him. I’m so afraid 
that I’ll collapse into a helpless wreck without him, 
or that I’ll be alone for the rest of my life. As cruel as 
he can be, I feel safe around him because he always 
has everything under control. He always knows what 
to do.” 

This vignette illustrates dependency on the significant 
other for a sense of safety despite a nonsympathetic 
response that may only serve to increase background 
stress for the patient. The second vignette illustrates inadvertent 
reinforcement of fear and avoidance through 
attention from the significant other: 

“My boyfriend really tries hard to help me. He’s always 
cautious of my feelings and doesn’t push me to 
do things that I can’t do. He phones me from work to 
check on me. He stays with me and holds my hand 
when I feel really scared. He never hesitates to leave 
work to help me if I’m having a bad time. Only last 
week we visited some of his friends, and we had to 
leave. I feel guilty because we don’t do the things we 
used to enjoy doing together. We don’t go to the movies 
anymore. We used to love going to ball games, 
but now it’s too much for me. I am so thankful for 
him. I don’t know what I would do without him.” 

Perhaps some forms of agoraphobia represent a conflict 
between desire for autonomy and dependency in 
interpersonal relationships (Fry, 1962; Goldstein & 
Chambless, 1978). In other words, the “preagoraphobic” 
is trapped in a domineering relationship without 
the skills needed to activate change. However, the 
concept of a distinct marital system that predisposes 
toward agoraphobia lacks empirical evidence. That is 
not to say that marital or interpersonal systems are un


important to agoraphobia. For example, interpersonal 
discord/dissatisfaction may represent one of several 
possible stressors that precipitate panic attacks. Also, 
interpersonal relations may be negatively impacted by 
the development of agoraphobia (Buglass, Clarke, Henderson, 
& Presley, 1977) and in turn contribute to its 
maintenance. Not unlike one of the earlier vignettes, 
consider the woman who has developed agoraphobia 
and now relies on her husband to do the shopping and 
other errands. These new demands upon the husband 
lead to resentment and marital discord. The marital distress 
adds to background stress, making progress and 
recovery even more difficult for the patient. 

Aside from whether interpersonal dysregulation 
contributes to the onset or maintenance of panic disorder 
or agoraphobia, some studies suggest that poor 
marital relations adversely impact exposure-based 
treatments (Bland & Hallam, 1981; Dewey & Hunsley, 
1989; Milton & Hafner, 1979). However, other studies 
show no relationship between marital distress and 
outcome from cognitive-behavioral therapy (Arrindell 
& Emmelkamp, 1987; Emmelkamp, 1980; Himadi, 
Cerny, Barlow, Cohen, & O’Brien, 1986). Another line 
of research suggests that involving significant others in 
every aspect of treatment may override potential negative 
impacts of poor marital relations on phobic improvement 
(Barlow et al., 1984; Cerny, Barlow, Craske, 
& Himadi, 1987). Furthermore, involvement of significant 
others resulted in better long-term outcomes from 
cognitive-behavioral therapy for agoraphobia (Cerny et 
al., 1987). Similarly, communications training with significant 
others, compared to relaxation training, after 
4 weeks of in vivo exposure therapy, resulted in significantly 
greater reductions on measures of agoraphobia 
by posttreatment (Arnow, Taylor, Agras, & Telch, 
1985), an effect that was maintained over an 8-month 
follow-up. Together, these studies suggest the value of 
including significant others in the treatment for agoraphobia. 
On the other hand, treatment focused specifically 
on interpersonal relationships, via interpersonal 
therapy, was not as effective as cognitive-behavioral 
therapy for panic disorder and agoraphobia (Vos, 
Huibers, Diels, & Arntz, 2012). 

Yet another question is the degree to which treatment 
for panic disorder and agoraphobia influences marital/ 
interpersonal relations. Some have noted that successful 
treatment can have deleterious effects (Hafner, 
1984; Hand & Lamontagne, 1976). Others note that it 
has no effect or a positive effect on marital functioning 
(Barlow, O’Brien, & Last, 1984; Himadi et al., 1986) 


Panic Disorder and Agoraphobia 

and interpersonal functioning in general (Hoffart, 
1997). We (Barlow et al., 1983) suggested that when 
negative effects do occur, it may be because exposure 
therapy is conducted intensively, without the significant 
other’s involvement, which causes major role changes 
that the significant other perceives as being beyond his 
or her control. This again speaks to the value of involving 
significant others in the treatment process. 

Therapist Variables 

Only a few studies have evaluated therapist variables 
in relation to cognitive-behavioral treatments for anxiety 
disorders, let alone panic disorder or agoraphobia. 
Williams and Chambless (1990) found that patients 
with agoraphobia who rated their therapists as caring/ 
involved, and as modeling self-confidence, achieved 
better outcomes on behavioral approach tests. However, 
an important confound in this study was that patient 
ratings of therapist qualities may have depended 
on patient responses to treatment. Keijsers, Schaap, 
Hoogduin, and Lammers (1995) reviewed findings on 
therapist relationship factors and behavioral outcome. 
They concluded that empathy, warmth, positive regard, 
and genuineness assessed early in treatment predict 
positive outcome; patients who view their therapists 
as understanding and respectful improve the most; 
and patient perceptions of therapist expertness, selfconfidence, 
and directiveness relate positively to outcome, 
although not consistently. In their own study of 
junior therapists who provided cognitive-behavioral 
treatment for panic disorder with or without agoraphobia, 
Keijsers and colleagues found that more empathic 
statements and questioning occurred in Session 1 than 
in later sessions. In Session 3, therapists became more 
active and offered more instructions and explanations. 
In Session 10, therapists employed more interpretations 
and confrontations than previously. Most importantly, 
directive statements and explanations in Session 1 predicted 
poorer outcome. Empathic listening in Session 1 
related to better behavioral outcome, whereas empathic 
listening in Session 3 related to poorer behavioral outcome. 
Thus, they demonstrated the advantages of different 
interactional styles at different points in therapy. 

Most clinicians assume that therapist training and 
experience improve the chances of successful outcome. 
Some believe this to be the case particularly with respect 
to the cognitive aspects of cognitive-behavioral 
therapy (e.g., Michelson et al., 1990), and some indirect 
evidence for this supposition exists. Specifically, 

cognitive-behavioral therapy conducted by “novice” 
therapists in a medical setting (Welkowitz et al., 1991) 
was somewhat less effective in comparison to the same 
therapy conducted by inexperienced but highly trained 
therapists in a psychological setting (Barlow, Craske, 
Czerny, & Klosko, 1989), or by experienced and highly 
trained therapists in a community mental health setting 
(Wade, Treat, & Stuart, 1998). Huppert and colleagues 
(2001), who directly evaluated the role of therapist experience, 
found that, in general, therapist experience 
positively related to outcome, seemingly because these 
therapists were more flexible in administering the treatment 
and better able to adapt it to the individual being 
treated. Obviously, there is a need for more evaluation 
of the role of therapist experience and training in 
cognitive-behavioral therapy. 

In our primary care work, we developed a computer 
guide to assist novice clinicians in implementing a 
cognitive-behavioral program for panic disorder (plus 
other anxiety disorders and depression) (Craske et al, 
2009), called Calm Tools for Living. The clinician and 
patient sit side by side as both view the program onscreen. 
Throughout, the program prompts clinicians to 
engage in specific tasks, such as helping patients to establish 
a fear hierarchy, demonstrating breathing skills, 
practicing cognitive skills, conducting interoceptive 
exposure, or designing in vivo exposure assignments. 
The program also provides learning tools for patients, 
such as didactic information, interactive exercises, 
video vignettes, and quizzes. The goal of the computerized 
program is to enhance the integrity of cognitivebehavioral 
therapy in the hands of novice and relatively 
untrained clinicians. 

Patient Variables 

There has been interest in the effect of comorbidity 
upon the outcomes of cognitive-behavioral therapy 
for panic disorder and agoraphobia. Brown, Antony, 
and Barlow (1995) found that comorbidity with other 
anxiety disorders did not predict response to cognitivebehavioral 
therapy overall, although social phobia 
was unexpectedly associated with superior outcome 
for panic disorder and agoraphobia. In contrast, Tsao, 
Lewin, and Craske (1998) found a trend for comorbidity 
that comprised mostly other anxiety disorders to be 
associated with slightly lower rates of overall success. 
In a subsequent study, however, we replicated the finding 
by Brown and colleagues of no relationship between 
baseline comorbidity comprising mostly other anxiety 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

disorders, and either immediate or 6-month outcome 
for panic disorder and agoraphobia (Tsao, Mystkowski, 
Zucker, & Craske, 2002). 

Research on how comorbid depression affects the 
course and outcome of panic disorder treatment has 
yielded mixed results. Studies focused on cognitivebehavioral 
therapy for all anxiety disorders and treatment 
participation have found that comorbidity with 
depression is associated with increased rates of refusal 
to enter treatment (Issakidis & Andrews, 2004); however, 
once patients have entered treatment, the comorbidity 
has no effect on rates of attrition (Allen et al., 
2010; Brown et al., 1995). Preliminary research investigating 
the effects of comorbidity on engagement with 
treatment has revealed that comorbid depression has no 
effect on compliance with cognitive-behavioral therapy 
homework (McLean, Woody, Taylor, & Koch, 1998) 
or compliance with cognitive-behavioral treatment as 
a whole (Murphy, Michelson, Marchione, Marchione, 
& Testa, 1998), though it does increase levels of distress 
associated with treatment (Murphy et al., 1998). 
Interestingly, comorbid depression has no effect on the 
response to cognitive-behavioral therapy for panic disorder 
at posttreatment or follow-up and in both referred 
and primary care settings (Allen et al., 2010; McLean 
et al., 1998; Roy-Byrne, Craske, et al., 2005). It seems 
contradictory that comorbid depression would have 
significant impact on the severity and persistence of 
panic disorder (Baldwin, 1998) but would not affect the 
outcomes of panic disorder treatment. This may be a 
product of limitations to the current treatment literature. 
For example, studies have recruited patients for 
the treatment of panic disorder and have often excluded 
patients who are very extremely depressed or suicidal. 
Thus, the majority of patients are mildly to moderately 
depressed. Many of these studies also exclude patients 
with bipolar disorder, and therefore exclude an entire 
group of individuals who experience major depressive 
episodes. However, it may also be that the effects of 
cognitive-behavioral therapy for panic disorder are sufficiently 
potent to impact depressive symptoms either 
directly or indirectly. 

A relatively high co-occurrence exists between panic 
disorder and agoraphobia, and avoidant, dependent, and 
histrionic personality disorders (e.g., Reich et al., 1994). 
Questions of diagnostic reliability and validity aside, comorbid 
personality disorders are sometimes associated 
with poorer response than usual to cognitive-behavioral 
therapy for panic disorder or agoraphobia (e.g., Hoffart 
& Hedley, 1997; Marchand, Goyer, Dupuis, & Main


guy, 1998). However, closer examination reveals that 
although individuals with comorbid personality disorders 
have greater severity of panic or agoraphobia pre- 
and post–cognitive-behavioral therapy, the rate of decrease 
in panic or agoraphobia symptoms usually is not 
affected by the comorbid personality disorder. Thus, 
Dreessen, Arntz, Luttels, and Sallaerts (1994) and van 
den Hout, Brouwers, and Oomen (2006) found that comorbid 
personality disorders did not affect response to 
cognitive-behavioral therapy for panic or agoraphobia. 
Moreover, Hofmann and colleagues (1988) found that 
scores on questionnaire subscales reflecting Axis II personality 
disorders did not predict panic disorder treatment 
response to either cognitive-behavioral therapy 
or to medication. In fact, some personality traits may 
associate positively with outcome, as was reported by 
Rathus, Sanderson, Miller, and Wetzler (1995) with respect 
to compulsive personality features. 

Substance-related disorders also commonly co-occur 
with panic disorder and agoraphobia, but very few 
treatment studies have addressed this important comorbidity. 
In a series of single cases (N = 3), Lehman, 
Brown, and Barlow (1998) demonstrated successful 
control of panic attacks in individuals who were abusing 
alcohol. Also, the addition of anxiety treatment to 
a relapse prevention program for abstinent individuals 
with a primary diagnosis of alcohol dependence and a 
comorbid diagnosis of panic disorder or social phobia 
decreased anxiety symptoms relative to a relapse prevention 
program alone (Schade et al., 2005). However, 
adding the anxiety treatment did not affect rates of alcohol 
relapse in that study. 

Another source of comorbidity is medical conditions, 
such as cardiac arrhythmias or asthma, that may slow 
improvement rates given the additional complications 
involved in discriminating between anxiety and disease 
symptomatology, increases in actual medical risk, 
and the stress of physical diseases. We found that medically 
ill patients with panic disorder, although more severely 
affected than their nonmedically ill counterparts 
at baseline, responded just as favorably to cognitivebehavioral 
therapy with psychotropic medication recommendations 
(Roy-Byrne, Stein, et al., 2005). Also, 
cognitive-behavioral therapy for panic disorder has 
been shown to alleviate self-reported physical health 
symptoms (Schmidt et al., 2003). Similarly, we found 
that cognitive-behavioral therapy and/or psychotropic 
medication recommendations for anxiety disorders (including 
panic disorder) significantly improve physical 
health functioning (Niles et al., 2013). 


Panic Disorder and Agoraphobia 

Other patient variables include socioeconomic status 
and general living conditions. We evaluated perceived 
barriers to receiving mental health treatment in our primary 
care study of panic disorder (Craske, Golinelli, 
et al., 2005). Commonly reported barriers included inability 
to find out where to go for help (43%), worry 
about cost (40%), lack of coverage by one’s health 
plan (35%), and inability to get an appointment soon 
enough (35%). Also, in our multicenter trial, attrition 
from cognitive-behavioral and/or medication treatment 
for panic disorder with minimal agoraphobia was predicted 
by lower education, which in turn was dependent 
on lower income (Grilo et al., 1998). Similarly, levels 
of education and motivation were associated with dropout 
rates in another sample, although the effects were 
small (Keijsers, Kampman, & Hoogduin, 2001). Low 
education–income may reflect less discretionary time 
to engage in activities such as weekly treatment. Consider 
a woman who is the mother of two, a full-time 
clerk, whose husband is on disability due to a back injury, 
or the full-time student who works an extra 25 hours 
a week to pay his way through school. Under these 
conditions, treatment assignments of daily in vivo exposure 
exercises are much less likely to be completed. 
Frustration with lack of treatment progress is likely to 
result. Therapeutic success requires either a change in 
lifestyle that allows the cognitive-behavioral treatment 
to become a priority or termination of therapy until a 
later time, when life circumstances are less demanding. 
In fact, these kinds of life circumstance issues 
may explain the trend for African Americans to show 
less treatment benefit, in terms of mobility, anxiety, 
and panic attacks, than European Americans (Friedman 
& Paradis, 1991; Williams & Chambless, 1994). 
Although, in contrast to these two studies, Friedman, 
Paradis, and Hatch (1994) found equivalent outcomes 
across the two racial groups, and the results from another 
study yielded outcomes from a female African 
American sample that were judged to be comparable to 
those of European Americans (Carter, Sbrocco, Gore, 
Marin, & Lewis, 2003). The influence of ethnic and 
cultural differences on treatment outcome and delivery 
clearly needs more evaluation. 

Finally, patients’ understanding of the nature of their 
problem may be important to the success of cognitivebehavioral 
treatments. Given the somatic nature of 
panic disorder, many patients seek medical help first. 
Beyond that, however, differences in the way the problem 
is conceptualized could lead to the perception that 
pharmacological or analytical treatment approaches 

are more credible than cognitive-behavioral treatment 
approaches. For example, individuals who strongly believe 
their condition is due to “a neurochemical imbalance” 
may be more likely to seek medication and to 
refute psychological treatments. Similarly, individuals 
who attribute their condition to “something about my 
past—it must be unconscious influences” may resist 
cognitive-behavioral interpretations. Also, Grilo and 
colleagues (1998) found that patients with panic disorder 
or agoraphobia who attributed their disorder to 
specific stressors in their lives were more likely to drop 
out of cognitive-behavioral or medication treatment, 
perhaps because they saw the offered treatment as irrelevant. 


Concurrent Pharmacological Treatment 

Many more patients receive medications than cognitivebehavioral 
therapy for panic disorder and agoraphobia, 
partly because primary care physicians are usually 
the first line of treatment. Thus, one-half or more of 
patients with panic disorder who attend psychology 
research clinics already are taking anxiolytic medications. 
The obvious questions, therefore, are the extent 
to which cognitive-behavioral therapy and medications 
have a synergistic effect, and how medications impact 
cognitive-behavioral therapy. 

Results from large clinical trials, including our own 
multisite trial (Barlow, Gorman, Shear, & Woods, 
2000), suggest no advantage during or immediately 
after treatment of combining cognitive-behavioral and 
pharmacological approaches. Specifically, both individual 
cognitive-behavioral and drug treatment, and 
a combination treatment were immediately effective 
following treatment. Furthermore, following medication 
discontinuation, the combination of medication 
and cognitive-behavioral therapy fared worse than 
cognitive-behavioral therapy alone, suggesting the possibility 
that state- (or context-) dependent learning in 
the presence of medication may have attenuated the 
new learning that occurs during cognitive-behavioral 
therapy. In contrast, in the primary care setting, we 
found that the addition of even just one component of 
cognitive-behavioral therapy to medications for panic 
disorder resulted in statistically and clinically significant 
improvements at posttreatment and 12 months 
later (Craske, Golinelli, et al., 2005). 

More recently, our multisite collaborative team has 
been investigating long-term strategies in the treatment 
of panic disorder. We examined sequential combination 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

strategies to determine whether this approach is more 
advantageous than simultaneously combining treatments. 
In the initial phase, 256 patients with panic disorder 
and all levels of agoraphobia completed 3 months 
of initial treatment with cognitive-behavioral therapy 
(Aaronson et al., 2008; White et al., 2010). Patients were 
then triaged into two clinical trials. Responders were 
randomized to 9 months of monthly booster sessions 
(N = 79) or no booster sessions (N = 78), then followed 
for an additional 12 months without treatment (White 
et al., 2013). Booster sessions produced significantly 
lower relapse rates (5.2%) and reduced work and social 
impairment compared to the assessment-only condition 
without booster sessions (18.4%) at 21-month follow-up. 
Multivariate Cox proportional hazards models showed 
that residual symptoms of agoraphobia at the end of 
acute-phase treatment were independently predictive 
of time to relapse during 21-month follow-up (hazard 
rate = 1.15, p < .01). Thus, booster sessions aimed at 
reinforcing acute treatment gains to prevent relapse and 
offset disorder recurrence improved long-term outcome 
for panic disorder with and without agoraphobia. Fiftyeight 
of the original patients did not reach an optimal 
level of functioning (high end-state functioning) and 
entered a trial in which they received either continued 
cognitive-behavioral therapy for 3 months or paroxetine 
for 3 months. Patients doing well with one treatment or 
the other continued with the respective treatment for an 
additional 9 months (Payne et al., 2012). Results indicated 
significantly lower panic disorder symptoms for 
individuals in the paroxetine condition compared to 
those in continued cognitive-behavioral therapy at 3 
months. However, group differences had disappeared 9 
months later. Results were maintained when excluding 
individuals with comorbid major depression. These data 
suggest a more rapid treatment response when switching 
to paroxetine after not responding optimally to 
cognitive-behavioral therapy; however, both treatments 
ultimately achieved similar outcomes. 

In another study with similar results, patients who 
did not respond to cognitive-behavioral therapy also 
benefited more from the addition of a serotonergic drug 
(paroxetine) to continued cognitive-behavioral therapy 
than from the addition of a drug placebo, with substantially 
different effect sizes (Kampman, Keijsers, Hoogduin, 
& Hendriks, 2002). Conversely, individuals who 
are resistant to pharmacotherapy may respond positively 
to cognitive-behavioral therapy, although these findings 
were part of an open trial without randomization 
(Heldt et al., 2006). 

Findings from the combination of fast-acting anxiolytics, 
specifically, the high-potency benzodiazepines, 
and behavioral treatments for agoraphobia are contradictory 
(e.g., Marks et al., 1993; Wardle et al., 1994). 
Nevertheless, several studies have reliably demonstrated 
the detrimental effects of chronic use of highpotency 
benzodiazepines on short-term and long-term 
outcome in cognitive-behavioral treatments for panic or 
agoraphobia (e.g., Otto, Pollack, & Sabatino, 1996; van 
Balkom, de Beurs, Koele, Lange, & van Dyck, 1996; 
Wardle et al., 1994). Specifically, there is evidence for 
more attrition, poorer outcome, and more relapse with 
chronic use of high-potency benzodiazepines. In addition, 
use of benzodiazepines as needed was associated 
with poorer outcome than regular use or no use in one 
small naturalistic study (Westra, Stewart, & Conrad, 
2002). 

Finally, the cost-effectiveness of cognitivebehavioral 
and medication treatments alone rather than 
in combination requires further evaluation; currently, 
cognitive-behavioral therapy is considered to be more 
cost-effective (e.g., disability costs, work days missed, 
health care use) than pharmacotherapy (Heuzenroeder 
et al., 2004). 

Understanding the ways in which psychotropic 
medications influence cognitive-behavioral therapy 
may prove useful for developing methods that optimize 
the combination of these two approaches to treatment. 
First, medications, particularly fast-acting, potent 
medications that cause a noticeable shift in state 
and are used on an as-needed basis (e.g., benzodiazepines, 
beta-blockers), may contribute to relapse because 
therapeutic success is attributed to them rather 
than to cognitive-behavioral therapy. Patients’ resultant 
lack of perceived self-control may increase relapse 
potential when medication is withdrawn or contribute 
to maintenance of a medication regimen under the assumption 
that it is necessary to functioning. In support, 
attribution of therapeutic gains to alprazolam, and 
lack of confidence in coping without alprazolam, even 
when given in conjunction with behavioral therapy, 
predicted relapse (Basoglu, Marks, Kilic, Brewin, & 
Swinson, 1994). Second, medications may assume the 
role of safety signals, or objects to which persons erroneously 
attribute their safety from painful, aversive 
outcomes. Safety signals may contribute to maintenance 
of fear and avoidance in the long term (Hermans, 
Craske, Mineka, & Lovibond, 2006) and may interfere 
with corrections of misappraisals of bodily symptoms 
(see below for further discussion of this issue). Third, 


Panic Disorder and Agoraphobia 

medications may reduce the motivation to engage in 
practices of cognitive-behavioral skills, yet completion 
of between-session assignments is a positive predictor 
of outcome from cognitive-behavioral therapy (e.g., 
Glenn et al., in press). Finally, learning that takes place 
under the influence of medications may not necessarily 
generalize to the time when medications are removed, 
thus contributing to relapse (Bouton & Swartzentruber, 
1991). Some of these points are illustrated in the following 
vignettes: 

“I had been through a program of cognitive-behavioral 
therapy, but it was really the Paxil that helped. Because 
I was feeling so much better, I considered tapering 
off the medication. At first I was very concerned 
about the idea. I had heard horror stories 
about what people go through when withdrawing. 
However, I thought it would be OK as long as I tapered 
slowly. So, I gradually weaned myself off. It 
really wasn’t that bad. Well, I had been completely 
off the medication for about a month when the problem 
started all over again. I remember sitting in a 
restaurant, feeling really good because I was thinking 
about how much of a problem restaurants used to 
be for me before, and how easy it seemed now. Then, 
whammo. I became very dizzy and I immediately 
thought, ‘Oh no, here it comes.’ I had a really bad 
panic attack. All I could think of was why didn’t I 
stay on the medication?” 

“I started to lower my dose of Xanax. I was OK for 
the first couple of days. . . . I felt really good. Then, 
when I woke up on Friday morning, I felt strange. 
My head felt really tight and I worried about having 
the same old feelings all over again. The last thing I 
want to do is to go through that again. So I took my 
usual dose of Xanax and, within a few minutes, I 
felt pretty good again. I need the medication. I can’t 
manage without it right now.” 

In what ways might such negative effects of medications 
be offset? One possibility is that continuation 
of exposure after medication is withdrawn may offset 
relapse because it enhances attributions of personal 
mastery and reduces the safety signal function of medications. 
In addition, opportunities to practice exposure 
and cognitive and behavioral strategies without the aid 
of medication overcome state dependency and enhance 
generalization of therapeutic gains once treatment is 
over. 

case stuDy 

Julie, a 33-year-old European American mother of two, 
lives with Larry, her husband of 8 years. For the past 
3 years she has been chronically anxious and panic 
stricken. She describes her panic attacks as unbearable 
and increasing in frequency. The first time she felt panicky 
was just over 3 years ago, when she was rushing 
to be by her grandmother’s side in the last moments 
before she died. Julie was driving alone on the freeway. 
She remembers feeling as if everything were moving 
in slow motion, as if the cars were standing still, and 
things around her seemed unreal. She recalled feeling 
short of breath and detached. However, it was so important 
to reach her destination that she did not dwell 
on how she felt until later. After the day was over, she 
reflected on how lucky she was not to have had an accident. 
A few weeks later, she experienced the same 
feeling again when driving on the freeway. This time 
it occurred without the pressure of getting to her dying 
grandmother. It scared Julie because she was unable to 
explain the feelings. She pulled to the side of the road 
and called her husband, who came to meet her. She followed 
him home, feeling anxious the entire way. 

Now, Julie has these feelings in many situations. 
She describes her panic attacks as feelings of unreality, 
detachment, shortness of breath, a racing heart, and 
a general fear of the unknown. It is the unreality that 
scares her the most. Consequently, Julie is sensitive to 
anything that produces “unreal” types of feelings, such 
as the semiconsciousness that occurs just before falling 
asleep, the period when daylight changes to night, 
bright lights, concentrating on the same thing for long 
periods of time, alcohol or drugs, and being anxious in 
general. Even though she has a prescription for Klonopin 
(a high-potency benzodiazepine), she rarely, if 
ever, uses it because of her general fear of being under 
the influence of a drug, or of feeling an altered state 
of consciousness. She wants to be as alert as possible 
at all times, but she keeps the Klonopin with her in 
the event that she has no other way of managing her 
panic. She does not leave home without the Klonopin. 
Julie is very sensitive to her body in general; she becomes 
scared of anything that feels a little different 
than usual. Even coffee, which she used to enjoy, is 
distressing to her now because of its agitating and racy 
effects. She was never a big exerciser, but to think of 
exerting herself now is also scary. Julie reports that 
she is constantly waiting for the next panic attack to 
occur. She avoids freeways, driving on familiar surface 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

streets only. She limits herself to a 10-mile radius from 
home. She avoids crowds and large groups as well, 
partly because of the feeling of too much stimulation 
and partly because she is afraid to panic in front of 
others. In general, she prefers to be with her husband 
or her mother. However, she can do most things as long 
as she is within her “safety” region. 

Julie describes how she differs from the way she 
used to be: how weak and scared she is now. The only 
other incident that is similar to her current panic attacks 
occurred in her early 20s, when she had a negative 
reaction to smoking marijuana. Julie became very 
scared of the feeling of losing control and feared that 
she would never return to reality. She has not taken 
drugs since then. Otherwise, there is no history of serious 
medical conditions or any previous psychological 
treatment. Julie had some separation anxiety and was 
shy as a young child and throughout her teens. However, 
her social anxiety improved throughout her 20s 
to the point that until the onset of her panic attacks, she 
was mostly very comfortable around people. Since the 
onset of her panic attacks, Julie has become concerned 
that others will notice that she appears anxious. However, 
her social anxiety is limited to panic attacks and 
does not reflect a broader social phobia. 

In general, Julie’s appetite is good, but her sleep is 
restless. At least once a week she wakes abruptly in 
the middle of the night, feeling short of breath and 
scared, and she has great difficulty going to sleep when 
her husband travels. In addition to worrying about her 
panic attacks, Julie worries about her husband and her 
children, although these latter worries are secondary to 
her worry about panicking and not excessive. She has 
some difficulty concentrating but is generally able to 
function at home and at work because of the familiarity 
of her environment and the safety she feels in the 
presence of her husband. Julie works part time as the 
manager of a business that she and her husband own. 
She sometimes becomes depressed about her panic and 
the limitations on how far she can travel. Occasionally 
she feels hopeless about the future, doubting whether 
she will ever be able to escape the anxiety. Although 
the feelings of hopelessness and the teariness never last 
than more than a few days, Julie has generally had a 
low-grade depressed mood since her life became restricted 
by the panic attacks. 

Julie’s mother and her uncle both had panic attacks 
when they were younger. Julie is now worried that her 
oldest child is showing signs of being overly anxious 
because he is hesitant about trying new things or spending 
time away from home. 

assessMeNt 

A functional behavioral analysis depends on several 
different modes of assessment, which we describe next. 

Interviews 

An in-depth interview is the first step in establishing 
diagnostic features and the profile of symptomatic and 
behavioral responses. Several semistructured and fully 
structured interviews exist. The Anxiety Disorders Interview 
Schedule for DSM-IV (ADIS-IV; Di Nardo, 
Brown, & Barlow, 1994) and for DSM-5 (ADIS-5; 
Brown & Barlow, in press) primarily assesses anxiety 
disorders, as well as mood and somatoform disorders. 
Psychotic and drug conditions are screened by this instrument 
also. The ADIS facilitates gathering the necessary 
information to make a differential diagnosis 
among anxiety disorders and offers a means to distinguish 
between clinical and subclinical presentations of 
a disorder. Data on the frequency, intensity, and duration 
of panic attacks, as well as details on avoidance behavior, 
are embedded within the ADIS; this information 
is necessary for tailoring treatment to each individual’s 
presentation. The value of structured interviews is their 
contribution to a differential diagnosis and interrater 
reliability. Interrater agreement ranges from satisfactory 
to excellent for the various anxiety disorders using 
the ADIS-IV (Brown, Di Nardo, Lehman, & Campbell, 
2001). Similar analysis for the ADIS-5 are under way. 

Similarly, the Schizophrenia and Affective Disorders 
Schedule—Lifetime Version (modified for the study of 
anxiety) produces reliable diagnoses for most of the anxiety 
disorders (generalized anxiety disorder and simple 
phobia are the exceptions) (Manuzza, Fyer, Liebowitz, 
& Klein, 1990), as does the Structured Clinical Interview 
for DSM (SCID), which covers all of the mental 
disorders (First, Spitzer, Gibbon, & Williams, 1994), 
and will be updated for DSM-5 diagnostic criteria. 

Differential diagnosis is sometimes difficult because, 
as described earlier, panic is a ubiquitous phenomenon 
(Barlow, 1988) that occurs across a wide 
variety of emotional disorders. It is not uncommon for 
persons with specific phobias, social phobia, generalized 
anxiety disorder, obsessive–compulsive disorder, 
and posttraumatic stress disorder to report panic 
attacks. For Julie, there was a differential diagnostic 
question regarding social anxiety disorder, and panic 
disorder and agoraphobia. Shown in Figure 1.1 are the 
ADIS-IV questions that address this differentiation (Julie’s 
answers are in italics). 


Panic Disorder and Agoraphobia 

Parts 
of 
ADIS-IV 
Panic 
Disorder 
Section 


Do 
you 
currently 
have 
times 
when 
you 
feel 
a 
sudden 
rush 
of 
intense 
fear 
or 
discomfort? 
Yes. 


In 
what 
kinds 
of 
situations 
do 
you 
have 
those 
feelings? 
Driving, especially on freeways . . . 
alone at home . . . at parties or in crowds of people. 

Did 
you 
ever 
have 
those 
feelings 
come 
“from 
out 
of 
the 
blue,” 
for 
no 
apparent 
reason, 
or 
in 
situations 
where 
you 
did 
not 
expect 
them 
to 
occur? 
Yes. 


How 
long 
does 
it 
usually 
take 
for 
the 
rush 
of 
fear/discomfort 
to 
reach 
its 
peak 
level? 
It 
varies, 


sometimes a couple of seconds and at other times it seems to build more slowly. 

How 
long 
does 
the 
fear/discomfort 
usually 
last 
at 
its 
peak 
level? 
Depends on where I am at the 
time. If it happens when I’m alone, sometimes it is over within a few minutes or even seconds. 

.

If I’m in a crowd, then it seems to last until I leave 

In 
the 
last 
month, 
how 
much 
have 
you 
been 
worried 
about, 
or 
how 
fearful 
have 
you 
been 
about 
having 
another 
panic 
attack? 


012345678 


No 
worry 
Rarely 
worried/mild 
Occasionally 
Frequently 
worried/ 
Constantly 
worried/ 
no 
fear 
fear 
worried/moderate 
severe 
fear 
extreme 
fear 
fear 


Parts 
of 
ADIS-IV 
Social 
Phobia 
Section 


In 
social 
situations, 
where 
you 
might 
be 
observed 
or 
evaluated 
by 
others, 
or 
when 
meeting 
new 
people, 
do 
you 
feel 
fearful, 
anxious, 
or 
nervous? 
Yes. 


Are 
you 
overly 
concerned 
that 
you 
might 
do 
and/or 
say 
something 
that 
might 
embarrass 
or 
humiliate 
yourself 
in 
front 
of 
others, 
or 
that 
others 
may 
think 
badly 
of 
you? 
Yes. 


What 
are 
you 
concerned 
will 
happen 
in 
these 
situations? 
That others will notice that I am 
anxious. My face turns white and my eyes look strange when I panic. I am worried that 
I’ll flip out in front of them, and they won’t know what to do. 

Are 
you 
anxious 
about 
these 
situations 
because 
you 
are 
afraid 
that 
you 
will 
have 
an 
unexpected 
panic 
attack? 
Yes (either a panic or that I’ll feel unreal). 

Other 
than 
when 
you 
are 
exposed 
to 
these 
situations, 
have 
you 
experienced 
an 
unexpected 
rush 
of 
fear/anxiety? 
Yes. 


figUre 1.1. Julie’s responses to ADIS-IV questions. 

As demonstrated in Figure 1.1, Julie experiences disorder (i.e., unexpected /nonsocial panic attacks and 
panic attacks in social situations and is concerned about pervasive apprehension about future panic attacks), the 
being negatively evaluated by others if her anxiety be-social distress is best subsumed under the domain of 
comes visibly apparent. However, despite her history panic disorder and agoraphobia. If Julie reported that 
of shyness, Julie’s current social discomfort is based she experiences panic attacks in social situations only, 
primarily on the possibility of panicking. Because of or that she worries about panic attacks in social situathis, 
and because she meets the other criteria for panic tions only, then a diagnosis of social anxiety disorder 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

would be more probable. A report of unexpected panic 
attacks, as well as self-consciousness about things that 
she might do or say in social situations regardless of the 
occurrence of panic, would be consistent with a dual 
diagnosis of panic disorder–agoraphobia and social 
anxiety disorder. In general, an individual with panic 
disorder may continue to feel anxious even when playing 
a passive role in a social setting, whereas a patient 
with social phobia is more likely to feel relaxed when 
he or she is not the center of attention and does not anticipate 
being evaluated or judged (Dattilio & Salas-
Auvert, 2000). 

The same types of diagnostic questioning are useful 
for distinguishing between panic disorder–agoraphobia 
and claustrophobia. Other differential diagnostic issues 
can arise with respect to somatoform disorders, real 
medical conditions, and avoidant or dependent personality 
disorders. 

Following completion of a diagnostic assessment, 
a dimensional assessment specifically designed for 
panic disorder, such as the Panic Disorder Severity 
Scale (PDSS; Shear et al., 1997), may be helpful. This 
clinician-completed scale rates seven areas of responding 
using a 0- to 4-point severity rating scale: panic 
attack frequency; distress; anticipatory anxiety; agoraphobic 
and interoceptive-related fears; avoidant behavior; 
and work and social impairment. A cutoff score of 
8 on the PDSS identifies patients with panic disorder 
with high sensitivity and acceptable specificity (Shear 
et al., 2001). 

Medical Evaluation 

A medical evaluation is generally recommended because 
several medical conditions should be ruled out 
before assigning the diagnosis of panic disorder. These 
include thyroid conditions, caffeine or amphetamine 
intoxication, drug withdrawal, or pheochromocytoma 
(a rare adrenal gland tumor). Furthermore, certain 
medical conditions can exacerbate panic disorder, although 
panic disorder is likely to continue even when 
the symptoms are under medical control. Mitral valve 
prolapse, asthma, allergies, and hypoglycemia fall into 
this latter category. According to the model described 
earlier, these medical conditions exacerbate panic disorder 
to the extent that they elicit the feared physical 
sensations. For example, mitral valve prolapse sometimes 
produces the sensation of a heart flutter, asthma 
produces shortness of breath, and hypoglycemia produces 
dizziness and weakness, all of which overlap 

with symptoms of panic and may therefore become 
conditional cues for panic. 

Self‑Monitoring 

Self-monitoring is a very important part of assessment 
and treatment for panic disorder and agoraphobia. Retrospective 
recall of past episodes of panic and anxiety, 
especially when made under anxious conditions, 
may inflate estimates of panic frequency and intensity 
(Margraf et al., 1987; Rapee, Craske, & Barlow, 
1990). Moreover, such inflation may contribute to apprehension 
about future panic. In contrast, ongoing 
self-monitoring generally yields more accurate, less 
inflated estimates (for a comprehensive review of selfmonitoring 
for panic and anxiety, see Craske & Tsao, 
1999). Also, ongoing self-monitoring is believed to 
contribute to an objective self-awareness. Objective 
self-monitoring replaces negative, affect-laden selfstatements 
such as “I feel horrible. This is the worst it 
has ever been—my whole body is out of control” with 
“My anxiety level is 6. My symptoms include tremulousness, 
dizziness, unreal feelings, and shortness of 
breath—and this episode lasted 10 minutes.” Objective 
self-awareness usually reduces negative affect. Finally, 
self-monitoring provides feedback for judging progress 
and useful material for in-session discussions. 

Panic attacks are recorded in the Panic Attack Record, 
a version of which is shown in Figure 1.2. This 
record, which is to be completed as soon as possible 
after a panic attack occurs, is therefore carried onperson 
(wallet size). Daily levels of anxiety, depression, 
and worry about panic are monitored with the 
Daily Mood Record shown in Figure 1.3. This record 
is completed at the end of each day. Finally, activities 
may be recorded by logging daily excursions in a diary, 
or by checking off activities completed from an agoraphobia 
checklist. 

A common problem with self-monitoring is noncompliance. 
Sometimes noncompliance is due to misunderstanding 
or lack of perceived credibility in selfmonitoring. 
Most often, however, noncompliance is due 
to anticipation of more anxiety as a result of monitoring. 
This is particularly true for individuals whose preferred 
style of coping is to distract themselves as much 
as possible because thoughts of panic might otherwise 
become overwhelming: “Why should I make myself 
worse by asking myself how bad I feel?” In Julie’s case, 
the self-monitoring task was particularly difficult because 
explicit reminders of her anxiety elicited strong 


Panic Disorder and Agoraphobia 

Date 
2/16/06 
Time 
began 
5:20 
P.M. 
Triggers 
Home 
alone 
and 
shortness 
of 
breath 
Expected 
x 
Unexpected 


Maximum 
Fear 
0——1——2——3——4——5——6——7——8——9——10 
None 
Mild 
Moderate 
Strong 
Extreme 


Check 
all 
symptoms 
present 
to 
at 
leasta 
mild 
degree: 
Chest 
pain 
or 
discomfort 
Sweating 
x 
Heart 
racing/palpitations/pounding 
x 
Nausea/upset 
stomach 


Short 
of 
breath 
Shaking/trembling 
Numbness/tingling 
Feelings 
of 
choking 


x 
Dizzy/unsteady/lightheaded/faint 


x 
Chills/hot 
flushes 
Feelings 
of 
unreality 
x 
Fear 
of 
dying 


Fear 
of 
losing 
control/going 
crazy 
x 


Thoughts: 
I 
am 
going 
crazy,I 
will 
lose 
control 
Behaviors: 
Called 
my 
mother 


figUre 1.2. Julie’s Panic Attack Record. 

0——1——2——3——4——5——6——7——8——9——10 
None 
Mild 
Moderate 
Strong 
Extreme 


Average 
Average 
Average 
worry 
Date 
anxiety 
depression 
about 
panic 


2/16 
757 
2/17 
545 
2/18 
445 
2/19 
434 
2/20 
445 
2/21 
21 
1 
2/22 
222 


figUre 1.3. Julie’s Daily Mood Record. 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

concerns about losing touch with reality. Prompting, 
reassurance that anxiety would subside with perseverance 
at self-monitoring, and emphasis on objective versus 
subjective self-monitoring were helpful for Julie. 
In addition, therapist attention to the self-monitored 
information and corrective feedback about the method 
of self-monitoring at the start of each treatment session 
reinforced Julie’s self-monitoring. 

Standardized Inventories 

Several standardized self-report inventories provide 
useful information for treatment planning and are 
sensitive markers of therapeutic change. The Anxiety 
Sensitivity Index (Reiss, Peterson, Gursky, & McNally, 
1986) and the multidimensional Anxiety Sensitivity 
Index–3 (Taylor et al., 2007) have received wide acceptance 
as a trait measure of threatening beliefs about 
bodily sensations. Both display good psychometric 
properties and tend to discriminate panic disorder and 
agoraphobia from other anxiety disorders (e.g., Taylor 
et al., 1992; Telch, Sherman, & Lucas, 1989), especially 
the Physical Concerns subscale (Zinbarg et al., 
1997). More specific information about which particular 
bodily sensations are feared most and what specific 
misappraisals occur most often may be obtained from 
the Body Sensations Questionnaire and the Agoraphobia 
Cognitions Questionnaire, respectively (Chambless, 
Caputo, Bright, & Gallagher, 1984). Both scales 
have strong to excellent psychometric properties and 
are sensitive to change following treatment (see Keller 
& Craske, 2008). The Mobility Inventory (Chambless, 
Caputo, Gracely, Jasin, & Williams, 1985) lists agoraphobic 
situations, which are rated in terms of degree 
of avoidance when alone and when accompanied. This 
instrument is very useful for establishing in vivo exposure 
hierarchies and, again, is well supported psychometrically. 


In addition, we have developed two standardized 
self-report inventories that are useful for panic disorder 
and agoraphobia. The first, the Albany Panic and Phobia 
Questionnaire (Rapee, Craske, & Barlow, 1995), 
assesses fear and avoidance of activities that produce 
feared bodily sensations (e.g., exercise, caffeine), as 
well as more typical agoraphobia and social situations. 
Factor analyses confirmed three distinct factors labeled 
Agoraphobia, Social Phobia, and Interoceptive Fears. 
The questionnaire has adequate psychometric properties 
and is useful in profiling agoraphobic versus interoceptive 
avoidance. The second, the Anxiety Control 

Questionnaire, assesses perceived lack of control over 
anxiety-related events and occurrences, such as internal 
emotional reactions or externally threatening cues 
(Rapee, Craske, Brown, & Barlow, 1996). This scale is 
designed to assess locus of control, but in a more specific 
and targeted manner relevant to anxiety and anxiety 
disorders compared to more general locus-of-control 
scales. A revised 15-item version yields three factors— 
Emotion Control, Threat Control, and Stress Control— 
with a higher-order dimension of perceived control 
(Brown, White, Forsyth, & Barlow, 2004). Changes in 
this scale from pre to posttreatment predicted reductions 
in comorbidity at follow-up in one study (Craske 
et al., 2007). A more detailed review of each questionnaire 
listed herein and the complete assessment for 
panic disorder and agoraphobia is provided by Keller 
and Craske (2008). 

Behavioral Tests 

The behavioral test is a useful measure of degree of 
avoidance of specific interoceptive cues and external 
situations. Behavioral approach tests can be standardized 
or individually tailored. The standardized behavioral 
test for agoraphobic avoidance usually involves 
walking or driving a particular route, such as a 1-mile 
loop around the clinic setting. Standardized behavioral 
tests for anxiety about physical sensations involve exercises 
that induce panic-like symptoms, such as spinning 
in a circle, running in place, hyperventilating, and 
breathing through a straw (Barlow & Craske, 2006). 
Anxiety levels are rated at regular intervals throughout 
the behavioral tests, and actual distance or length 
of time is measured. The disadvantage of standardized 
behavioral tests is that the specific task may not be relevant 
to all patients (e.g., a 1-mile walk or running in 
place may be only mildly anxiety provoking to some 
but highly distressing to others); hence, the value of individually 
tailored tasks. In the case of agoraphobia, 
this usually entails attempts at three to five individualized 
situations that the patient has identified as ranging 
from Somewhat difficult to Extremely difficult, such as 
driving two exits on freeway, waiting in a bank line, 
or shopping in a local supermarket for 15 minutes. For 
anxiety about physical sensations, individually tailored 
behavioral tests entail exercises designed specifically 
to induce the sensations feared most by a given patient 
(e.g., nose plugs to induce sensations of difficulty 
breathing). As with standardized tests, ongoing levels 
of anxiety and degree of approach behavior are mea



Panic Disorder and Agoraphobia 

sured in relation to individually tailored behavioral 
tests. 

Individually tailored behavioral tests are more informative 
for clinical practice, although they confound 
between-subject comparisons for research purposes. 
Behavioral tests are an important supplement to selfreport 
of agoraphobic avoidance because patients 
tend to underestimate what they can actually achieve 
(Craske et al., 1988). In addition, behavioral tests often 
reveal important information for treatment planning of 
which the individual is not yet fully aware. For example, 
the tendency to remain close to supports, such as railings 
or walls, may not be apparent until one observes 
the patient walking through a shopping mall. In Julie’s 
case, the importance of change from daylight to night 
was not apparent until she was asked to drive on a section 
of road as a behavioral test. Her response was that 
it was too late in the day to drive because dusk made 
her feel as if things were unreal. Similarly, it was not 
until Julie completed a behavioral test that we recognized 
the importance of air-conditioning when she was 
driving. Julie believed that the cool air blowing on her 
face helped her to remain “in touch with reality.” Finally, 
we noticed that her physical posture while driving 
was a factor that contributed to anxiety: Julie’s shoulders 
were hunched, and she leaned toward the steering 
wheel and held it very tightly. All of these were targeted 
in the treatment: Driving at dusk was included in her 
hierarchy; air-conditioning was regarded as a safety signal 
from which she should be weaned; and driving in 
a more relaxed position was part of mastery exposure. 

Psychophysiology 

Ongoing physiological measures are not very practical 
tools for clinicians, but they can provide important 
information. In particular, the discrepancy described 
earlier between reports of symptoms and actual physiological 
arousal (i.e., report of heart rate acceleration in 
absence of actual heart rate acceleration) may serve as 
a therapeutic demonstration of the role of attention and 
cognition in symptom production. Similarly, actual recordings 
provide data to disconfirm misappraisals such 
as “My heart feels like it’s going so fast that it will explode” 
or “I’m sure my blood pressure is so high that I 
could have a stroke at any minute.” Finally, resting levels 
of physiological functioning, which are sometimes 
dysregulated in anxious individuals, may be sensitive 
measures of treatment outcome (e.g., Craske, Lang, et 
al., 2005). 

Functional Analysis 

The various methods of assessment provide the material 
for a full functional analysis for Julie. Specifically, 
the topography of her panic attack is as follows: The 
most common symptoms include a feeling of unreality, 
shortness of breath, and racing heart; average frequency 
of panic attacks is three per week; each panic 
attack on average lasts from a few seconds to 5 minutes, 
if Julie is not in a crowd, where the panicky feelings 
last until she exits the crowd; in terms of apprehension, 
Julie worries about panic 75% of the day; and most of 
her panic attacks are expected, but she has some unexpected 
ones as well. Julie has both situational and 
internal antecedents to her panic attacks. The situational 
antecedents include driving on freeways; crowds of 
people; being alone, especially at night; restaurants; 
dusk; reading and concentrating for long periods of 
time; and aerobic activity. The internal antecedents include 
heart rate fluctuations, lightheaded feelings, hunger 
feelings, weakness due to lack of food, thoughts of 
the “big one” happening, thoughts of not being able to 
cope with this for much longer, and anger. Her misappraisals 
about panic attack symptoms include beliefs 
that she will never return to normality, that she will 
go crazy or lose control, and that others will think she 
is weird. Her behavioral reactions to panic attacks include 
escape behaviors such as pulling off to the side 
of the road, leaving restaurants and other crowded 
places, calling her husband or mother, and checking 
for her Klonopin. Her behavioral reactions to the anticipation 
of panic attacks include avoidance of driving 
long distances alone, driving on unfamiliar roads 
and freeways or at dusk, crowded areas, exercise, quiet 
time with nothing to do, and doing one thing for a long 
period of time. In addition, she tries not to think about 
anxiety or feelings of unreality. Her safety signals and 
safety-seeking behaviors include having her Klonopin 
on hand at all times, always knowing the location of 
her husband, and having the air-conditioning on. The 
consequences of her panic disorder with agoraphobia 
affect her family: Julie’s husband is concerned and supportive, 
but her mother thinks she should pull herself 
together because “it’s all in her head.” In addition, Julie 
works but has cut back the number of hours, and she 
travels and socializes much less. Her general mood includes 
some difficulty concentrating and sleeping, restlessness, 
headaches, and muscular pains and aches. In 
addition, she is occasionally tearful, sad, and hopeless, 
and generally feels down. 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

coMPoNeNts of 
coGNitive‑Behavioral theraPy 

The components of the cognitive-behavioral treatment 
described in this section are integrated into a sessionby-
session treatment program in the next section. 

Education 

The treatment begins with education about the nature 
of panic disorder, the causes of panic and anxiety, and 
the ways panic and anxiety are perpetuated by feedback 
loops among physical, cognitive, and behavioral 
response systems. In addition, specific descriptions of 
the psychophysiology of the fight–flight response are 
provided, as well as an explanation of the adaptive 
value of the various physiological changes that occur 
during panic and anxiety. The purpose of this education 
is to correct the common myths and misconceptions 
about panic symptoms (i.e., beliefs about going 
crazy, dying, or losing control) that contribute to panic 
and anxiety. The survival value of alarm reactions (i.e., 
panic attacks) is emphasized throughout. 

Education also distinguishes between the state of 
anxiety and the emotion of fear/panic, both conceptually 
and in terms of its three response modes (subjective, 
physiological, and behavioral). This distinction is 
central to the model of panic disorder and to the remainder 
of the treatment. Anxiety is viewed as a state 
of preparation for future threat, whereas panic is the 
fight–flight emotion elicited by imminent threat. Panic/ 
fear is characterized by perceptions of imminent threat, 
sudden autonomic discharge, and fight–flight behavior. 
In contrast, anxiety is characterized by perceptions of 
future threat and chronic tension, cautiousness, avoidance, 
and disruption of performance. 

Self‑Monitoring 

Self-monitoring is essential to the personal scientist 
model of cognitive-behavioral therapy. Self-monitoring 
is introduced as a way to enhance objective selfawareness 
and increase accuracy in self-observation. 
As noted earlier, patients are asked to keep at least two 
types of records. The first, the Panic Attack Record, is 
completed as soon after each panic attack as possible; 
this record provides a description of cues, maximal distress, 
symptoms, thoughts, and behaviors. The second, 
the Daily Mood Record, is completed at the end of each 
day to record overall or average levels of anxiety, de


pression, and whatever else is considered important to 
record. Additionally, patients may keep a daily record 
of activities or situations completed or avoided. 

Breathing Retraining and 
Capnometry‑Assisted Respiratory Training 

Breathing retraining is a central component early on 
in the development of panic control treatments because 
many panic patients describe symptoms of hyperventilation 
as being very similar to their panic attack symptoms. 
It is noteworthy, however, that a hyperventilation 
symptom report does not always accurately represent 
hyperventilation physiology: Only 50% or fewer patients 
show actual reductions in end-tidal CO2 values 
during panic attacks (Hibbert & Pilsbury, 1989; Holt 
& Andrews, 1989; Hornsveld, Garssen, Fiedelij Dop, & 
van Spiegel, 1990). 

In early conceptualizations, panic attacks were related 
to stress-induced respiratory changes that provoke 
fear either because they are perceived as threatening 
or they augment fear already elicited by other phobic 
stimuli (Clark, Salkovskis, & Chalkley, 1985). Several 
studies illustrated a positive effect of breathing retraining, 
involving slow abdominal breathing exercises (e.g., 
Kraft & Hoogduin, 1984). The value of breathing retraining 
was subsequently questioned. For example, 
several studies suggested that the addition of breathing 
retraining alone did not improve on in vivo exposure 
(e.g., de Beurs, van Balkom, Lange, Koele, & van Dyck, 
1995). We found breathing retraining to be slightly less 
effective than interoceptive exposure when each was 
added to cognitive restructuring and in vivo exposure 
(Craske, Rowe, Lewin, & Noriega-Dimitri, 1997), and 
in another study, the inclusion of breathing retraining 
resulted in poorer outcomes than cognitive-behavioral 
therapy without breathing retraining, although the findings 
were not robust (Schmidt et al., 2000). From their 
review of efficacy and mechanisms of action, Garssen, 
de Ruiter, and van Dyck (1992) concluded that breathing 
retraining probably effects change not through 
breathing per se but through distraction and/or a sense 
of control. Thus, breathing retraining is no longer considered 
a central component of cognitive-behavioral 
therapy for panic disorder. Furthermore, to the extent 
that it might become misused as a means for avoiding 
physical symptoms, it may even be countertherapeutic. 
That being said, there may be occasions when breathing 
retraining is a useful tool, such as for the individual 
showing obvious signs of irregular breathing (e.g., 


Panic Disorder and Agoraphobia 

rapid, shallow breathing, frequent deep breaths), as 
long as breathing retraining does not become a method 
of avoidance or safety seeking. 

In contrast to traditional breathing retraining, 
capnometry-assisted respiratory training (CART) targets 
respiratory dysregulation, in particular hypocapnia 
(Meuret, Rosenfield, Seidel, Bhaskara, & Hofmann, 
2010; Meuret, Wilhelm, Ritz, & Roth, 2008). CART 
is a brief, 4-week training that uses immediate feedback 
of end-tidal partial pressure CO2 (pCO2) to teach 
patients how to raise their subnormal levels of pCO2 
(hyperventilation) and thereby gain control over dysfunctional 
respiratory patterns and associated panic 
symptoms (e.g., shortness of breath, dizziness). The 
device, a portable capnometer, offers breath-by-breath 
feedback of expired CO2 and rate of breathing (both 
measured via a nasal canula). Due to the novelty of 
CART, randomized controlled trials are limited but 
promising. In a first randomized-controlled study, 
Meuret and colleagues (2008) tested the efficacy of 4 
weeks of CART (N = 20) compared to a delayed waitlist 
control group (WL, N = 17). CART, but not WL, led 
to sustained increases in pCO2 levels and reduced panic 
severity and frequency. Reductions in panic symptom 
severity (PDSS; Shear et al., 1997) were comparable 
to standard cognitive-behavioral therapy, and improvements 
were maintained at 12-month follow-up. In a second 
study, patients with panic disorder were randomly 
assigned to receive either 4 weeks of CART (N = 21) 
or cognitive therapy (N = 20). An initial 4 weeks of 
skills training was followed by three sessions of in vivo 
exposure and a fourth session at a 2-months follow-up. 
Respective skills acquisition trainings led to significant 
and comparable reductions in panic symptom severity 
and panic-related cognitions, irrespective of modality. 
However, only CART, not cognitive therapy, led to a 
correction of hypocapnic levels of pCO2 (Meuret et 
al., 2010; Seidel, Rosenfield, Bhaskara, Hofmann, & 
Meuret, 2009). However, an evaluation of the degree 
to which CART augments exposure therapy (relative to 
exposure therapy alone) awaits testing. 

Applied Relaxation 

A form of relaxation known as applied relaxation has 
shown good results as a treatment for panic attacks. Two 
studies by Öst (Öst & Westling, 1995; Öst, Westling, & 
Hellström, 1993) indicate that applied relaxation is as 
effective as in vivo exposure and cognitive therapy. In 
contrast, Barlow and colleagues (1989) found that ap


plied progressive muscle relaxation (PMR) is relatively 
ineffective for panic attacks, although we excluded all 
forms of interoceptive exposure from the hierarchy of 
tasks to which PMR was applied, which was not necessarily 
the case in the studies by Öst. Clark and colleagues 
(1994) found cognitive therapy to be superior 
to applied PMR when conducted with equal amounts 
of in vivo exposure, whereas Beck, Stanley, Baldwin, 
Deagle, and Averill (1994) found very few differences 
between cognitive therapy and PMR when each was 
administered without exposure procedures. 

Cognitive Restructuring 

Cognitive restructuring is a skills set in which patients 
learn to recognize cognitive errors and generate alternative, 
noncatastrophic explanations for the sensations 
that are feared during panic attacks. Cognitive therapy 
begins with a treatment rationale and discussion 
of the role of thoughts in generating emotions. Next, 
thoughts are recognized as hypotheses rather than as 
fact, and are therefore open to being questioned and 
challenged. Detailed self-monitoring of emotions and 
associated cognitions is instituted to identify specific 
beliefs, appraisals, and assumptions. Once identified, 
relevant cognitions are categorized into types of typical 
errors that occur during heightened emotion, such 
as overestimations of risk of negative events or catastrophization 
of meaning of events. The process of categorization, 
or labeling of thoughts, is consistent with 
a personal scientist model and facilitates an objective 
perspective by which the validity of the thoughts can 
be evaluated. Thus, in labeling the type of cognitive 
distortion, the patient is encouraged to use an empirical 
approach to examine the validity of his or her thoughts 
by considering all of the available evidence. Therapists 
use Socratic questioning to help patients make guided 
discoveries and question their anxious thoughts. Next, 
more evidence-based alternative hypotheses are generated. 
In addition to surface-level appraisals (e.g., “That 
person is frowning at me because I look foolish”), corelevel 
beliefs or schemas (e.g., “I am not strong enough 
to withstand further distress” or “I am unlikable”) are 
questioned in the same way. Importantly, cognitive restructuring 
is not intended as a direct means of minimizing 
fear, anxiety, or unpleasant symptoms. Instead, 
cognitive restructuring is intended to correct distorted 
thinking; eventually fear and anxiety are expected to 
subside, but their diminution is not the first goal of cognitive 
therapy. 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

Cognitive therapy is often intermingled with behavioral 
techniques (e.g., “behavioral experiments,” “hypothesis 
testing,” “instructions” involving exposure) 
that complicate direct testing of the efficacy of cognitive 
therapy in its “pure” form (e.g., Hoffart, Sexton, 
Hedley, & Martinsen, 2008; Hofmann et al., 2007; Öst 
et al., 1993; Teachman, Marker, & Smith-Janik, 2008). 
Nonetheless, there is some evidence that training in 
cognitive procedures in full isolation from exposure and 
behavioral procedures is efficacious in reducing aspects 
of panic (Beck et al., 1994; Meuret et al., 2010; Salkovskis, 
Clark, & Hackmann, 1991; van den Hout, Arntz, 
& Hoekstra, 1994). Similarly, in a study by Bouchard 
and colleagues (1996), cognitive restructuring was as 
effective as exposure therapy in reducing panic symptoms. 
However, the effects of cognitive therapy alone on 
agoraphobia are unclear. One study found that cognitive 
therapy was less effective than exposure therapy for 
agoraphobia (Williams & Falbo, 1996). Another study 
(Hoffart, 1995) found that cognitive therapy was as effective 
as guided mastery exposure delivered intensively 
over 6 weeks for individuals with moderate to severe 
agoraphobia, although some elements of exposure (e.g., 
hyperventilation tests to elicit sensations) were included 
in the cognitive therapy condition. 

A few studies have evaluated the effects of cognitive 
therapy combined with exposure in comparison 
to exposure alone or in combination with other coping 
skills. Most often, cognitive therapy combined with exposure 
does not yield an additional benefit over in vivo 
exposure alone (Öst, Thulin, & Ramnero, 2004; van 
den Hout et al., 1994; see Murphy et al., 1998, for an 
exception). 

Exposure 

Exposure is a critical phase of treatment and, once 
begun, is a major focus of treatment sessions as well 
as between-treatment session homework, since limited 
exposure practice is of small benefit and may even be 
detrimental. The exposure is designed to disconfirm 
misappraisals and extinguish conditional emotional responses 
to external situations and contexts, through in 
vivo exposure, as well as to bodily sensations, through 
interoceptive exposure. Growing evidence suggests that 
exposure represents the most powerful component of 
cognitive-behavioral therapy for panic disorder and 
agoraphobia, including meta-analyses that fail to show 
any additional benefit of either cognitive restructuring 
or somatic coping skills beyond exposure therapy alone 

(Norton & Price, 2007). A large trial reported a dose– 
response relationship between exposure and improvement 
in agoraphobia (Gloster et al., 2011). 

in Vivo Exposure 

In vivo exposure refers to repeated and systematic, reallife 
exposure, in this case, to agoraphobic situations. A 
long history of research has established the efficacy of 
in vivo exposure for agoraphobia. 

Most often, in vivo exposure is conducted in a graduated 
manner, proceeding from the least to the most 
anxiety-provoking situations on an avoidance hierarchy. 
However, there is some evidence to suggest that 
intensive or ungraduated exposure may be effective. 
In a study by Feigenbaum (1988), treatment sessions 
were conducted in a massed format over the course of 
6–10 consecutive days. One group received ungraded 
exposure (N = 25), beginning with the most feared 
items from avoidance hierarchies. Another group received 
graded exposure (N = 23), beginning with the 
least feared hierarchy items. Approximately one-third 
of this severely agoraphobic sample was housebound at 
initial assessment. At posttreatment and 8 months later, 
the conditions proved to be equally effective (although, 
intriguingly, the graded group reported the treatment 
to be more distressing). However, ungraded exposure 
was clearly superior at the 5-year follow-up assessment: 
76% of the intensive group versus 35% of the graded 
group reported themselves to be completely free of 
symptoms. When 104 subjects were added to the intensive 
exposure format, the same results were obtained. 
Of 129 subjects, 78% were reportedly completely 
symptom-free 5 years later. This dramatic set of results 
suggests that an intensive approach, which is likely to 
produce higher levels of arousal than a graduated approach, 
can be very beneficial (at least when conducted 
in a massed format). Unfortunately, the validity of the 
outcome measures in this study is somewhat questionable, 
and replication by independent investigators has 
yet to be reported. 

The amount of time devoted to in vivo exposure is 
very dependent on the patient’s agoraphobia profile. 
Obviously, more time is needed for patients with more 
severe agoraphobia. 

Interoceptive Exposure 

In interoceptive exposure, the goal is deliberately to induce 
feared physical sensations a sufficient number of 


Panic Disorder and Agoraphobia 

times, and long enough each time, so that misappraisals 
about the sensations are disconfirmed and conditional 
anxiety responses are extinguished. A standard 
list of exercises, such as hyperventilating and spinning, 
is used to establish a hierarchy of interoceptive exposures. 
With a graduated approach, exposure begins 
with the less distressing physical exercises and continues 
with the more distressing exercises. It is essential 
that the patient endure the sensations beyond the point 
at which they are first noticed, for at least 30 seconds 
to 1 minute, because early termination of the task may 
eliminate the opportunity to learn that the sensations 
are not harmful and that the anxiety can be tolerated. 
The exercise is followed by a discussion of what the 
patient learned about the physical sensations. These interoceptive 
exercises are practiced daily outside of the 
therapy session to consolidate the process of learning. 
Interoceptive exposure extends to naturalistic activities 
that induce somatic sensations (e.g., caffeine consumption, 
exercise). 

A series of studies reported on the effects of interoceptive 
exposure independent of other therapeutic 
strategies. Early on, Bonn, Harrison, and Rees (1971) 
and Haslam (1974) observed successful reduction in 
reactivity with repeated infusions of sodium lactate 
(a drug that produces panic-type bodily sensations). 
However, panic was not monitored in these investigations. 
Griez and van den Hout (1986) compared six 
sessions of graduated CO2 inhalations to a treatment 
regimen of propranolol (a beta-blocker chosen because 
it suppresses symptoms induced by CO2 inhalations), 
both conducted over the course of 2 weeks. CO2 inhalation 
treatment resulted in a mean reduction from 12 
to four panic attacks, which was superior to the results 
from propranolol. In addition, inhalation treatment resulted 
in significantly greater reductions in reported 
fear of sensations. A 6-month follow-up assessment 
suggested maintenance of treatment gains, although 
panic frequency was not reported. Beck and Shipherd 
(1997) similarly found a positive effect from repeated 
CO2 inhalations, although it had little effect on agoraphobia 
(Beck, Shipherd, & Zebb, 1997). Broocks and 
colleagues (1998) tested the effects of exercise (with 
once-weekly supportive contact from a therapist) in 
comparison to clomipramine or drug placebo over 10 
weeks. The exercise group was trained to run 4 miles, 
three times per week. Despite high attrition from exercise 
(31%), exercise was more effective than the drug 
placebo condition. However, clomipramine was superior 
to exercise. 

In the first comparison to other cognitive and behavioral 
treatments, Barlow and colleagues (1989) 
compared applied PMR, interoceptive exposure plus 
breathing retraining and cognitive restructuring, their 
combination with applied PMR, and a waiting-list control, 
in a sample with panic disorder with limited agoraphobia. 
The two conditions involving interoceptive 
exposure, breathing retraining and cognitive restructuring, 
were significantly superior to applied PMR and 
wait-list conditions. The results were maintained 24 
months following treatment completion for the group 
receiving interoceptive exposure, breathing retraining, 
and cognitive restructuring without PMR, whereas the 
combined group tended to deteriorate over follow-up 
(Craske, Brown, & Barlow, 1991). As already mentioned, 
we compared interoceptive exposure, cognitive 
therapy, and in vivo exposure to breathing retraining, 
cognitive therapy, and in vivo exposure for individuals 
with varying levels of agoraphobia. The condition that 
included interoceptive exposure was slightly superior 
to breathing retraining at posttreatment and 6 months 
later (Craske et al., 1997). Similarly, Ito, Noshirvani, 
Basoglu, and Marks (1996) found a trend for those who 
added interoceptive exposure to their self-directed in 
vivo exposure and breathing retraining to be more likely 
to achieve at least a 50% improvement in phobic fear 
and avoidance. However, the combination of breathing 
education, breathing retraining, and repeated interoceptive 
exposure to hyperventilation did not increase 
the effectiveness of in vivo exposure for agoraphobia 
(de Beurs, Lang, van Dyck, & Koele, 1995). 

Interoceptive exposure is now a standard component 
of cognitive-behavioral therapy for panic disorder (e.g., 
Barlow et al., 2000; Craske, Lang, Aikins, & Mystkowski, 
2005), although different groups give different 
emphases to interoceptive exposure, with some emphasizing 
it as a means for extinguishing fear responses 
(Barlow & Craske, 2006) and others, as a vehicle for 
disconfirming misappraisals (Clark, 1996). 

Optimizing Learning during Exposure 

Our understanding of the mechanisms of exposure 
therapy has evolved over time. One of the most influential 
theories is emotional processing theory, which 
emphasized habituation of fear responding within an 
exposure trial as a necessary precursor to habituation 
across treatment sessions, that in turn leads to longterm 
corrective learning (Foa & Kozak, 1986; Foa & 
McNally, 1996). Most recently, we have emphasized 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

optimizing inhibitory learning and its retrieval in ways 
that are not necessarily dependent on reductions in fear 
throughout trials of exposure (Craske et al., 2008); we 
discuss this approach below. 

Emotional processing theory emphasizes mechanisms 
of habituation as precursors to cognitive correction. 
Specifically, emotional processing theory purports 
that the effects of exposure therapy derive from activation 
of a “fear structure” and integration of information 
that is incompatible with it, resulting in the development 
of a non-fear structure that replaces or competes with 
the original one. Incompatible information derives first 
from within-session habituation, or reduction in fear responding 
with prolonged exposure to the fear stimulus. 
Within-session habituation is seen as a prerequisite for 
the second piece of incompatible information, which 
derives from between-session habituation over repeated 
occasions of exposure. Between-session habituation is 
purported to form the basis for long-term learning and 
to be mediated by changes in “meaning,” or lowered 
probability of harm (i.e., risk) and lessened negativity 
(i.e., valence) of the stimulus. Emotional processing 
theory guides clinicians to focus on the initial elevation 
of fear followed by within- and between-session reductions 
in fear as signs of treatment success. Although 
enticing in its face validity, support for the theory has 
been inconsistent at best (Craske et al., 2008; Craske, 
Liao, Brown, & Vervliet, 2012). Rather, the evidence 
suggests that the amount by which fear habituates from 
the beginning to the end of an exposure practice is not 
a good predictor of overall outcomes, and that evidence 
for between-session habituation is mixed (Craske et al., 
2008, 2012). 

A return to the science of fear learning and extinction 
may help to explain the effects of exposure therapy and 
thereby optimize its implementation. It is now thought 
that inhibitory learning is central to extinction (Bouton, 
1993). Inhibitory pathways are also recognized in 
the neurobiology of fear extinction (see Sotres-Bayon, 
Cain, & LeDoux, 2006). Within a Pavlovian conditioning 
approach, inhibitory learning means that the 
original conditioned stimulus–unconditioned stimulus 
(CS-US) association learned during fear conditioning 
is not erased during extinction, but rather is left intact 
as a new, secondary learning about the CS-US develops 
(Bouton, 1993). The degree to which inhibitory associations 
shape fear responding at retest (the index of 
strength and stability of new “learning”) is independent 
of fear levels expressed throughout extinction and instead 
is dependent on factors such as context and time. 

Based on the inhibitory retrieval model of extinction, 
outcomes may be enhanced by strategies that do 
not rely on fear reduction within a trial of exposure 
(Craske et al., 2008, 2012). Indeed, fear reduction may 
become a safety behavior for persons with panic disorder 
(since fear reduction eradicates the very thing that 
is feared), such that a more appropriate goal may be 
to maintain high levels of fear and anxiety in order to 
disconfirm the expectancy of negative consequences. 
One translational possibility is “deepened extinction” 
(Rescorla, 2006), in which multiple fear conditional 
stimuli are first extinguished separately before being 
combined during extinction, and in animal studies, decrease 
spontaneous recovery and reinstatement of fear. 
Indeed, this is what is essentially done when interoceptive 
exposure is conducted in feared agoraphobic situations 
(Barlow & Craske, 1994) and recent experimental 
data supports the beneficial effects of deepened extinction 
in human conditioning studies (Culver, Vervliet, & 
Craske, in press). 

In addition, the effects of exposure therapy may be 
enhanced by the prevention or removal of “safety signals” 
or “safety behaviors.” Common safety signals and 
behaviors for clients with panic disorder are the presence 
of another person, therapists, medications, or food 
or drink. In the experimental literature, safety signals 
alleviate distress in the short term, but when they are 
no longer present, the fear returns (Lovibond, Davis, 
& O’Flaherty, 2000), an effect that may derive in part 
from interference with the development of inhibitory 
associations. In phobic samples, the availability and 
use of safety signals and behaviors has been shown 
to be detrimental to exposure therapy (Sloan & Telch, 
2002), whereas instructions to refrain from using safety 
behaviors improved outcomes (Salkovskis, 1991). 
Similarly, the use of safety signals was associated with 
poorer outcomes for panic (Helbig-Lang & Petermann, 
2010). However, recent data have presented contradictory 
findings (Rachman, Shafran, Radomsky, & Zysk, 
2011). 

Further options include stimulus variability throughout 
exposure, since variability has been shown to 
enhance the storage capacity of newly learned information. 
Two studies with clinical analogues have 
demonstrated positive benefits in terms of spontaneous 
recovery (Lang & Craske, 2000; Rowe & Craske, 
1998), while a third showed trends only (Kircanski et 
al., 2011). In the treatment for panic disorder with agoraphobia, 
this implies conducting exposure for varying 
durations, at varying levels of intensity, rather than 


Panic Disorder and Agoraphobia 

continuing exposure in one situation until fear declines 
before moving to the next situation. Notably, such variability 
typically elicits higher levels of anxiety during 
exposure, but without detrimental effects and sometimes 
with beneficial effects in the long term. 

Based on evidence for fear extinction to be weakened 
by antagonists of the glutamate receptors in the 
amygdala, Walker and Davis (2002) tested and demonstrated 
that drug agonists of the same receptors, 
and in particular, D-cycloserine, enhance extinction 
in animal studies. In a meta-analysis of the efficacy of 
D-cycloserine for anxiety disorders, Norberg, Krystal, 
and Tolin (2008) reported effect sizes of d = 0.60 at 
posttreatment and 0.47 at follow-up in clinical anxiety 
samples. D-Cycloserine in combination with interoceptive 
exposure for panic clients has resulted in a greater 
reduction in symptom severity, and a greater likelihood 
of achieving a change in clinical status at posttreatment 
and 1-month follow-up compared to exposure plus placebo 
(Otto et al., 2010). Notably, D-cycloserine has 
been shown to have positive effects without influencing 
the level of fear during exposure per se. 

A number of options for enhancing retrieval of the 
extinction memory have been tested. One option during 
extinction training is to include retrieval cues to be used 
in other contexts once extinction is over. This has been 
shown to be effective in animal studies and human conditioning 
studies (see Craske et al., 2012, for a review). 
In clinical analogue samples, the effects of a retrieval 
cue upon context renewal were very weak in one study 
(Culver et al., 2012), although instructions to reinstate 
what was learned mentally during exposure had more 
robust effects in reducing context renewal in another 
study (Mystkowski, Craske, Echiverri, & Labus, 2006). 
In the treatment of panic disorder, this approach simply 
suggests that clients carry with them cues (e.g., wristband) 
to remind them what they learned during exposure 
therapy (as long as the cues do not become safety 
signals), or are prompted to remind themselves of what 
they learned in exposure therapy each time they experience 
previously feared sensations or situations. 

Another option is to provide multiple contexts in 
which extinction takes place. This approach has been 
shown to offset context renewal in rodent samples, 
and in a clinical analogue study of exposure therapy 
(Vansteenwegen et al., 2007) although the results are 
not always consistent (Neumann, Lipp & Cory, 2007). 
In the treatment of panic disorder and agoraphobia, this 
would mean asking clients to conduct their interoceptive 
and in vivo exposures in multiple different contexts, 

such as when alone, in unfamiliar places, or at varying 
times of day or varying days of the week. 

A recent (re-)discovery is that retrieving already 
stored memories induces a process of reconsolidation 
(Nader, Schafe, & Le Doux, 2000), since the memory 
is written into long-term memory again, requiring de 
novo neurochemical processes. Thus, it may be possible 
to change memories during the reconsolidation time 
frame upon retrieval. Propranolol, a beta-blocker, has 
been shown to block the reconsolidation of memories, 
and Debiec and Le Doux (2004) found that infusions 
of propranaolol blocked the reconsolidation of a previously 
formed CS-US memory, and led to erasure of the 
fear response and resistance to reinstatement effects. 
This suggests that propranolol upon retrieval may be a 
useful clinical tool, and indeed, two fear conditioning 
studies in healthy humans (Kindt, Soeter, & Vervliet, 
2009; Soeter & Kindt, 2010) have replicated the effects. 
However, the effects have not been tested in the 
context of exposure therapy for panic disorder. 

Role of Acceptance during Exposure 

Cognitive and somatic coping skills are central to 
cognitive-behavioral therapy and are taught to facilitate 
and improve exposure therapy. Newer approaches 
that explore acceptance and cognitive defusion (e.g., 
acceptance and commitment therapy; Hayes, Strosahl, 
& Wilson, 1999) have been gaining interest, especially 
given evidence that experiential avoidance is a correlate 
of anxious psychopathology and acceptance increases 
willingness to experience and lessens emotional distress 
over induced anxiety symptoms in individuals with 
panic disorder (e.g., Campbell-Sills et al., 2006; Eifert 
& Heffner, 2003), including CO2 inhalation challenges 
(Levitt et al., 2004). Interestingly, the acceptance approach 
is entirely consistent with our formulation of interoceptive 
exposure, in which patients are encouraged 
to experience the feared physical sensations without 
any attempt to lessen them or to think differently about 
them in the moment of exposure. We recently extended 
this model of acceptance during interoceptive exposure 
to acceptance during in vivo exposure in an open trial 
of 11 patients with panic disorder (Meuret, Twohig, 
Rosenfield, Hayes, & Craske, 2012). In general, the 
exposures were an opportunity for patients to behave 
with their panic-related thoughts, feelings, and bodily 
sensations; in other words, patients were encouraged to 
realize that they can drive for and reach life goals, even 
in the presence of unpleasant inner experiences. To that 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

end, it was explicitly stated that the level of anxiety or 
fear was not the determining factor. Rather, it was explained 
that “willingness can do surprising things to 
one’s inner experiences. If one is willing to experience 
anxiety it may or may not show up. Thus, we are not 
going to judge the success of these exposures on how 
high the anxiety gets, but instead in how open you are 
to what might show up.” To plan effectively for interoceptive 
(i.e., eliciting panic sensations such as a racing 
heart or shortness of breath) and in vivo exposures (i.e., 
seeking places and situations that one previously avoided 
because of the fear of panic sensations), a hierarchy 
of least to most anxiety-provoking items was created. 
Movement up the hierarchy was not based on reductions 
in anxiety at the preceding step but high willingness 
to experience panic-related inner experiences. 
During the exposures, patients were encouraged to 
maintain an open, nonjudgmental stance toward whatever 
thoughts, feelings, and bodily sensations arose in 
a given moment, experiencing them for what they were, 
and moving toward them while anxious. Treatment was 
associated with clinically significant improvements in 
panic symptom severity, willingness to allow inner experiences 
to occur, and reductions in avoidant behavior. 
In another study of a mixed anxiety disorder sample, 
we found very few differences in outcome between acceptance 
and commitment therapy (Hayes et al., 1999) 
and cognitive-behavioral therapy, although the treatments 
were matched on amount of time spent on exposure 
therapy, albeit framed differently within for each 
condition (Arch et al., 2012). Thus, the data to date suggest 
that both a cognitive therapy coping approach and 
an acceptance-based exposure approach are effective. 

overall efficacy 
of coGNitive‑Behavioral theraPy 

An extensive body of research has evaluated the efficacy 
of cognitive-behavioral therapy for panic disorder 
and agoraphobia. Cognitive-behavioral therapy, involving 
most or all of the components just listed, yields 
panic-free rates in the range of 70–80% and high endstate 
rates (i.e., within normative ranges of functioning) 
in the range of 50–70% for panic disorder with minimal 
agoraphobia (e.g., Barlow et al., 1989; Clark et al., 
1994). Although agoraphobic avoidance is sometimes 
associated with less positive response (e.g., Dow et al., 
2007), the overall within-group effect size for change 
in panic disorder and agoraphobia from pre- to post


treatment is very large (e.g., effect size = 1.53; Norton 
& Price, 2007). Moreover, the between-group effect 
size is substantial in comparison to wait-list conditions 
(e.g., effect size = 0.64; Haby, Donnelly, Corry, & Vos, 
2006). However, more research is needed comparing 
cognitive-behavioral therapy to alternative active treatment 
conditions. 

The effectiveness extends to clients who experience 
nocturnal panic attacks (Craske, Lang, et al., 2005). 
Furthermore, cognitive-behavioral therapy results in 
improvements in rates of comorbid anxiety and mood 
disorders (e.g., Craske et al., 2007; Tsao, Mystkowksi, 
Zucker, & Craske, 2005), although one study suggested 
that the benefits for comorbid conditions may lessen 
over time, when assessed 2 years later (Brown et al., 
1995). Finally, applications of cognitive-behavioral 
therapy lower relapse rates upon discontinuation of 
high-potency benzodiazepines (e.g., Spiegel, Bruce, 
Gregg, & Nuzzarello, 1994). The effects of cognitivebehavioral 
therapy are sustained over time, as metaanalyses 
show little change (i.e., maintenance of treatment 
effects) from posttreatment to follow-up (effect 
size = 0.12; Norton & Price, 2007). From their review 
of meta-analyses for cognitive behavioral therapy 
across all disorders, Butler, Chapman, Forman, and 
Beck (2006) concluded that evidence for maintenance 
of treatment gains was particularly strong for panic 
disorder, where the rate of relapse was almost half the 
rate of relapse following pharmacotherapy. Continuing 
improvement after acute treatment is facilitated by involvement 
of significant others in every aspect of treatment 
for agoraphobia (e.g., Cerny et al., 1987). Also, 
booster sessions enhance long-term outcomes (Craske 
et al., 2006). 

Efficacy data from research settings are now being 
complemented by effectiveness data from real-world, 
primary care settings. In a randomized controlled 
trial in primary care settings with novice therapists, 
cognitive-behavioral therapy combined with expert 
recommendations for medication regimens was more 
effective than treatment as usual (Roy-Byrne, Craske, 
et al., 2005). The effects appeared primarily to be due 
to cognitive-behavioral therapy rather than mediation 
(Craske, Golinelli, et al., 2005). In the more recent 
CALM study (Craske et al., 2011), the effectiveness of 
cognitive-behavioral therapy for panic disorder in primary 
care settings was demonstrated in the hands of 
nonexperienced therapists with the aid of a computerized 
guide, combined with expert recommendations for 
medication, relative to treatment as usual. 

###CUT###
Panic Disorder and Agoraphobia 

Even though cognitive-behavioral therapy for panic 
disorder and agoraphobia is efficacious and effective, 
there is room for improvement. One study estimated 
that 30% of clients continue to function poorly at 
follow-up and only 48% reached high end-state status 
(Brown & Barlow, 1995). In a landmark study (Barlow 
et al., 2000), only 32% of clients with panic disorder 
assigned to cognitive-behavioral therapy alone demonstrated 
strong treatment response 12 months after acute 
treatment. Finally, of those who do start treatment, 
the mean dropout rate is 19%, with a range of 0–54% 
(Haby et al., 2006). 

treatMeNt DescriPtioN: Protocol 

What follows is a description of a 12-session cognitivebehavioral 
therapy for panic disorder and agoraphobia 
tailored to Julie’s presentation. Of course, the degree to 
which the various components of treatment are emphasized 
vary by the functional assessment conducted for 
each patient. 

Overview 

The basic aim of the treatment protocol is to influence 
directly the catastrophic misappraisals and avoidance 
of bodily sensations and agoraphobic situations. This is 
done first through the provision of accurate information 
as to the nature of the fight–flight response. By provision 
of such information, patients are taught that they experience 
sensations that are normal and harmless. Second, 
treatment aims to teach a set of skills for developing 
evidence-based appraisals regarding bodily sensations 
and agoraphobic situations. At the same time, specific 
information concerning the effects of hyperventilation 
and its role in panic attacks is provided, with practice 
of breathing retraining if deemed appropriate. Then, 
the crux of the treatment involves repeated exposure to 
feared internal cues and agoraphobic situations. 

Session 1 

The goals of Session 1 are to describe fear and anxiety; 
to help patients understand the cyclical influences 
among behavioral, physiological, and cognitive 
responses; to understand that panic attack symptoms 
are not harmful; and to begin self-monitoring, if it was 
not already begun with the initial assessment. Therapy 
begins with identifying anxiety patterns and the situa


tions in which anxiety and panic attacks are likely to 
occur. Many patients have difficulty identifying specific 
antecedents, reporting that panic can occur at almost 
any time. Therapists help patients to identify internal 
triggers, specifically, negative verbal cognitions, catastrophic 
imagery, and physical sensations. The following 
interchange took place for Julie: 

tHeraPist: In what situations are you most likely to 
panic? 

Julie: Crowded restaurants and when I’m driving on 
the freeway. But sometimes I am driving along, feeling 
OK, when all of a sudden it hits. And other times 
I can be sitting at home feeling quite relaxed and it 
just hits. That’s when I really get scared because I 
can’t explain it. 

tHeraPist: So, when you are driving on the freeway, 
what is the very first thing you notice that tells you 
you’re about to panic? 

Julie: Well, the other cars on the road look as if they 
are moving really slowly . . . it’s as if I am in a dream. 
tHeraPist: And what is the first thing you notice when 
you’re at home? 
Julie: An unreal feeling, like I’m floating. 

tHeraPist: So, what does that tell you? What is the 
common factor that started these two panic attacks? 

Julie: The feeling as if things are unreal? Wow, I always 
thought the physical feelings were the panic attack, 
but maybe they start the panic attack. 

Next, the three-response system model for describing 
and understanding anxiety and panic is introduced. 
This model contributes to an objective selfawareness—
to becoming a personal scientist—and 
provides the groundwork for an alternative conceptual 
framework for explaining panic and anxiety that replaces 
the patient’s own misassumptions. Patients are 
asked to describe cognitive, physiological, and behavioral 
aspects to their responding: to identify the things 
that they feel, think, and do when they are anxious and 
panicky. As described earlier, differences between the 
response profiles of anxiety and panic are highlighted. 
After grasping the notion of three responses that are 
partially independent, interactions among the response 
systems are described. The patient is asked to describe 
the three-response system components in a recent panic 
attack and to identify ways in which they interacted to 
produce heightened distress. For example, 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

tHeraPist: How would you describe the three parts to 
the panic attack you had at home last week? 

Julie: Well, physically, my head felt really light, and 
my hands were clammy. I thought that I would either 
pass out or that I would somehow dissolve into nothingness. 
My behavior was to lie down and phone my 
husband. 

tHeraPist: Ok that’s a great description of your 
thoughts, physical feelings, and behaviors. Now let’s 
look at the sequence of events. What was the very 
first thing you noticed? 

Julie: When I stood up, my head started to feel really 
weird, as if it was spinning inside. 

tHeraPist: What was your very next reaction to that 
feeling? 

Julie: I held onto the chair. I thought something was 
wrong. I thought it could get worse and that I’d collapse. 


tHeraPist: So it began with a physical sensation, and 
then you had some very specific thoughts about 
those sensations. What happened next? 

Julie: I felt very anxious. 

tHeraPist: And what happened next? 

Julie: Well, the dizziness seemed to be getting worse 
and worse. I became really concerned that it was different 
from any other experience I had ever had. I 
was convinced that this was “it.” 

tHeraPist: So, as you became more anxious, the 
physical feelings and the thoughts that something 
bad was going to happen intensified. What did you 
do next? 

Julie: I called my husband and lay on the bed until he 
came home. It was horrible. 

tHeraPist: Can you see how one thing fed off another, 
creating a cycle? That it began with a sensation, then 
some anxious thoughts, then feeling anxious, then 
more sensations and more thoughts, and more fear, 
and so on? 

Next, the reasons why panic attacks first began are 
addressed briefly. Patients are informed that it is not 
necessary to understand the reasons why they began 
to panic to benefit from the treatment because factors 
involved in onset are not necessarily the same as the 
factors involved in the maintenance of a problem. Nev


ertheless, the initial panic attack is described as a manifestation 
of anxiety/stress. The stressors surrounding 
the time of the first panic attack are explored with the 
patient, particularly in terms of how stressors may have 
increased levels of physical arousal and primed certain 
danger-laden cognitive schemas. 

Also, the therapist briefly describes the physiology 
underlying anxiety and panic, and the myths about 
what the physical sensations might mean. The main 
concepts covered in this educational phase are (1) the 
survival value or protective function of anxiety and 
panic; (2) the physiological basis to the various sensations 
experienced during panic and anxiety, and the 
survival function of the underlying physiology; and (3) 
the role of specific learned and cognitively mediated 
fears of certain bodily sensations. The model of panic 
we described earlier in this chapter is explained. In particular, 
the concepts of misappraisals and interoceptive 
conditioning are explained as accounting for panic attacks 
that seem to occur from out of the blue—that are 
triggered by very subtle internal cues or physical sensations 
that may occur at any time. Not only does this 
information reduce anxiety by decreasing uncertainty 
about panic attacks but it also enhances the credibility 
of the subsequent treatment procedures. This information 
is detailed in a handout given to the patient to 
read over the next week (for the handout, see Barlow & 
Craske, 2006). 

This information was very important for Julie because 
the inability to explain her panic attacks was a 
major source of distress. Here are some of the questions 
she asked in her attempt to understand more fully: 

Julie: So, if I understand you correctly, you’re saying 
that my panic attacks are the same as the fear I experienced 
the time we found a burglar in our house. It 
doesn’t feel the same at all. 

tHeraPist: Yes, those two emotional states—an unexpected 
panic attack and fear when confronted with a 
burglar—are essentially the same. However, in the 
case of the burglar, where were you focusing your 
attention—on the burglar or on the way you were 
feeling? 

Julie: The burglar, of course, although I did notice my 
heart was going a mile a minute. 

tHeraPist: And when you have a panic attack, where 

are you focusing your attention—on the people 

around you or on the way you are feeling? 


Panic Disorder and Agoraphobia 

Julie: Well, mostly on the way I’m feeling, although it 
depends on where I am at the time. 

tHeraPist: Being most concerned about what’s going 
on inside can lead to a very different type of experience 
than being concerned about the burglar, even 
though basically the same physiological response is 
occurring. For example, remember our description 
of the way fear of sensations can intensify the sensations. 


Julie: I get that. But what about the feelings of unreality? 
How can they be protective or how can feeling 
unreal help me deal with a dangerous situation? 

tHeraPist: OK, remember that it’s the physiological 
events that are protective—not the sensations. The 
sensations are just the end result of those events. 
Now, feelings of unreality can be caused by changes 
in your blood flow to your brain (although not dangerously 
so), or from overbreathing, or from concentrating 
too intensely on what’s going on inside you. 
So the unreality sensation may not be protective, but 
the changes in blood flow and overbreathing are. 

Julie: I understand how I can create a panic attack by 
being afraid of my physical feelings, like my heart 
racing or feeling unreal. But sometimes it happens 
so quickly that I don’t have time to think. 

tHeraPist: Yes, these reactions can occur very 
quickly, at times automatically. But remember, we 
are tuned to react instantaneously to things that we 
believe to be dangerous. Imagine yourself walking 
through a dark alley, and you have reason to believe 
that somewhere in the darkness lurks a killer. Under 
those conditions, you would be extremely attentive 
to any sign, any sound, or any sight of another person. 
If you were walking through the same alley and 
were sure there were no killers, you might not hear 
or detect the same signals you picked up on in the 
first case. Now let’s translate this to panic; the killer 
in the dark alley is the panic attack, and the signs, 
sounds, and smells are the physical sensations you 
think signal the possibility of a panic attack. Given 
the acute degree of sensitivity to physical symptoms 
that signal a panic attack, it is likely that you are noticing 
normal “noises” in your body that you would 
otherwise not notice, and on occasion, immediately 
become fearful because of those “noises.” In other 
words, the sensations are often noticeable because 
you attend to them. 

Next, the method of self-monitoring was described 
and demonstrated with in-session practice of completing 
a Panic Attack Record. Julie was concerned that 
self-monitoring would only elevate her distress, by 
reminding of the very thing she was afraid of (panic 
and unreality). The therapist clarified the difference between 
objective and subjective self-monitoring, and explained 
that distress would subside as Julie persevered 
with self-monitoring. 

The homework for this session was to self-monitor 
panic attacks, daily anxiety, and mood, and to read the 
handout. In fact, we encourage patients to reread the 
handout several times, and to actively engage in the 
material by circling or marking the most personally 
relevant sections or areas in need of clarification, because 
effort enhances long-term retention of the material 
learned. Of course, for some patients, reading the 
material draws their attention to things they fear (just 
as with self-monitoring). In this case, therapists can 
discuss the role of avoidance, and how, with repeated 
readings, distress levels will most likely subside. 

At the end of the session, Julie suddenly became 
highly anxious. She felt unable to tolerate either the 
treatment procedures or her anticipation of them. She 
became very agitated in the office and reported feelings 
of unreality. She opened the office door to find her 
husband, who was waiting outside. The therapist helped 
Julie understand how the cycle of panic had emerged 
just at that moment: (1) The trigger was the treatment 
description—having to face eventually feared sensations 
and situations; (2) this was anxiety producing 
because Julie believed that she could not cope with 
the treatment demands, that the treatment would cause 
her so much anxiety that she would “flip out” and lose 
touch with reality permanently, or that she would never 
improve because she could not tolerate the treatment; 

(3) the current anxiety in the office elicited sensations 
of unreality and a racing heart; (4) Julie began to worry 
that she might panic and lose touch with reality permanently 
within the next few minutes; (5) the more anxious 
Julie felt, and the stronger her attempts to escape 
and find safety, the stronger the physical sensations 
became; and (6) she felt some relief upon finding her 
husband because his presence reassured her that she 
would be safe. Julie was reassured that treatment would 
progress at a pace with which she was comfortable, but 
at the same time she was helped to understand that her 
acute distress about the feeling of unreality would be 
the precise target of this type of treatment, therefore 

CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

attesting to the relevance of this treatment for her. She 
was also calmed by preliminary cognitive restructuring 
of the probability of permanently losing touch with 
reality. After a lengthy discussion, Julie became more 
receptive to treatment. A team approach to treatment 
planning and progress was agreed upon, so that Julie 
did not feel that she would be forced to do things she 
did not think she could do. 

Session 2 

The goals of this session are to begin the development 
of a hierarchy of agoraphobic situations and coping 
skills of breathing retraining and cognitive restructuring. 
The individualized hierarchy comprises situations 
that range from mild to moderate anxiety, all the way 
up to extreme anxiety. These situations become the 
basis of graduated in vivo exposure. Although in vivo 
exposure exercises are not scheduled to take place until 
Session 4, the hierarchy is introduced now, so that cognitive 
restructuring skills can be practiced in relation to 
each situation on the hierarchy before in vivo exposure 
begins. Moreover, the hierarchy will be refined as a result 
of the cognitive restructuring practice because the 
latter highlights specific features of agoraphobic situations 
that are most anxiety provoking. 

Julie was asked to develop a hierarchy over the following 
week. She expressed some doubt that she would 
ever be able to accomplish any, let alone all, of the 
items on her hierarchy. The therapist helped Julie by 
asking her to think of any situation in her lifetime that 
used to be difficult but became easier with practice. 
Julie remembered how anxious she used to be when she 
first started working with customers at her husband’s 
office—and how that discomfort subsided over time. 
This was used to help Julie realize that the same might 
happen with the situations listed on her hierarchy. Julie’s 
final hierarchy comprised the following situations: 
driving home from work alone; sitting in a crowded 
movie theater; spending 2 hours alone at home during 
the day; being alone at home as day turned to night; 
driving on surface streets to her brother’s house (10 
miles) alone; driving two exits on Freeway 444, with 
her husband following in the car behind; driving two 
exits on Freeway 444, alone; driving four exits on Freeway 
444; and driving on the freeway to her brother’s 
house alone. Then, Julie was to repeat all of these tasks 
without taking Klonopin, and without knowing the location 
of her husband. 

Breathing retraining also is begun in this session. 
Patients are asked to hyperventilate voluntarily by 
standing and breathing fast and deep, as if blowing up 
a balloon, for 1½ minutes. With prompting and encouragement 
from the therapist, patients can often complete 
the full 1½ minutes, after which time they are asked 
to sit, close their eyes, and breathe very slowly, pausing 
at the end of each breath, until the symptoms have 
abated. The experience is then discussed in terms of the 
degree to which it produced symptoms similar to those 
that occur naturally during anxiety or panic. Approximately 
50–60% of patients report that the symptoms of 
hyperventilation are very similar to their panic attack 
symptoms. Often, however, similarity of the symptoms 
is confused with similarity of the anxiety. Because the 
exercise is conducted in a safe environment and the 
symptoms have an obvious cause, most patients rate 
the experience as less anxiety provoking than if the 
same symptoms had occurred naturally. This distinction 
is important to make because it demonstrates the 
significance of perceived safety for the degree of anxiety 
experienced. Julie rated the hyperventilation exercise 
as very anxiety provoking (8 on a 0- to 10-point 
scale), and rated the symptoms as being quite similar to 
her panic symptoms (6 on a 0- to 10-point scale). She 
terminated the task after approximately 40 seconds, 
in anticipation of experiencing a full-blown panic attack. 
The therapist and Julie discussed this experience 
in terms of the three response systems, and the role of 
misappraisals and interoceptive conditioning described 
during the previous session. 

Then, Julie was briefly educated about the physiological 
basis to hyperventilation (see Barlow & Craske, 
2006). As before, the goal of the didactic presentation 
was to allay misinterpretations of the dangers of overbreathing, 
and to provide a factual information base on 
which to draw when actively challenging misinterpretations. 
The educational content is tailored to the patient’s 
own educational level and covered only to the 
degree that it is relevant to the patient. 

In the next step, the therapist teaches breathing retraining, 
which begins by teaching patients to rely more 
on the diaphragm (abdomen) than on chest muscles. In 
addition, patients are instructed to concentrate on their 
breathing by counting on their inhalations and thinking 
the word “relax” on exhalations. (Slow breathing 
is introduced in Session 3.) Therapists model the suggested 
breathing patterns, then provide corrective feedback 
to patients while they practice in the office setting. 


Panic Disorder and Agoraphobia 

(Note that CART uses a different method of breathing 
retraining that is based on raising levels of CO2 in the 
blood through biofeedback.) 

Initial reactions to the breathing exercise may be 
negative for patients who are afraid of respiratory sensations 
because the exercise directs their attention to 
breathing. It also can be difficult for patients who are 
chronic overbreathers, and patients for whom any interruption 
of habitual breathing patterns initially increases 
respiratory symptomatology. In both cases, continued 
practice is advisable, with reassurance that sensations 
such as shortness of breath are not harmful. The goal is 
to use breathing skills training to encourage continued 
approach toward anxiety and anxiety-producing situations. 
On occasion, patients mistakenly view breathing 
retraining as a way of relieving themselves of terrifying 
symptoms, thus falling into the trap of fearing dire consequences 
should they not succeed in correcting their 
breathing. This is what happened for Julie: 

Julie: So, all I have to do is to slow down my breathing, 
then everything will be OK? 

tHeraPist: Certainly, slowing down your breathing 
will help to decrease the physical symptoms that you 
feel, but I am not sure what you mean when you ask 
whether everything will be OK. 

Julie: That proper breathing will prevent me from losing 
touch with reality—that I won’t disappear. 

tHeraPist: Breathing retraining will help you to regulate 
your breathing, which may lessen your physical 
symptoms, including the sense of unreality. Your 
question, though, is the reason for our next treatment 
skill of changing your thinking, so you can learn that 
the sense of unreality is not a sign of actual loss of 
touch with reality and disappearance. 

The homework is to practice diaphragmatic breathing 
for at least 10 minutes, two times a day in relaxing 
environments. 

Therapists introduce in this session cognitive restructuring, 
by explaining that everyone has errors in 
thinking when anxious, thus helping the patient to expect 
his or her thinking to be distorted. Patients are informed 
that these distortions have an adaptive function: 
Chances of survival are greater if we perceive danger 
as probable and worthy of attention rather than minimize 
it. Therefore, anxiety leads us to judge threatening 
events as being more likely and more threatening 

than they really are. However, the cognitive distortions 
are unnecessary because there is no real threat in the 
case of panic disorder. 

Then, patients are taught to treat their thoughts as 
hypotheses or guesses rather than as facts. The notions 
of automatic thinking and discrete predictions are also 
explained, to emphasize the need to become an astute 
observer of one’s own habitual self-statements in each 
situation. This leads to a “downward arrow technique” 
to identify specific predictions made at any given moment, 
as shown with Julie. 

tHeraPist: What is it that scared you about feeling detached 
in the movie theater last night? 

Julie: It is just such a horrible feeling. 

tHeraPist: What makes it so horrible? 

Julie: I can’t tolerate it. 

tHeraPist: What makes you think you cannot tolerate 
it? What is the feeling of detachment going to do to 
you that makes you think it is horrible and intolerable? 


Julie: It might become so intense that it overwhelms 
me. 

tHeraPist: And if it overwhelms you, what would 
happen? 

Julie: I could become so distressed that I lose touch 
with reality. 

tHeraPist: What would it mean if you lost touch with 
reality? 

Julie: That I would be in a different mind state forever—
I would never come back to reality. That I would 
be so crazy that I would have to be carted out of the 
movie theater to a mental hospital and locked away 
forever. 

Overly general self-statements, such as “I feel 
terrible—something bad could happen,” are insufficient, 
nontherapeutic, and may serve to intensify anxiety 
by virtue of their global and nondirective nature. 
Instead, detail in thought content, such as “I am afraid 
that if I get too anxious while driving, then I’ll lose control 
of the wheel and drive off the side of the road and 
die,” permits subsequent cognitive restructuring. 

Analysis of anxious thought content yields two broad 
factors that are labeled as “risk” and “valence.” These 
two main types of cognitive errors are described to pa



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

tients. Risk translates to overestimation, or jumping to 
conclusions by viewing negative events as being probable 
events, when in fact they are unlikely to occur. 
The patient is asked to identify overestimations from 
the anxiety and panic incidents over the past couple of 
weeks: “Can you think of events that you felt sure were 
going to happen when you panicked, only to find out 
in the end that they did not happen at all?” Usually, 
patients can identify such events easily, but with protestations. 
For example, 

Julie: Well, several times I thought that I really was 
going to lose it this time . . . that I would flip out and 
never return to reality. It never actually happened, 
but it could still happen. 

tHeraPist: Why do you think “it” could still happen? 

Julie: Part of me feels like I’ve always managed to escape 
it just in time, by either removing myself from 
the situation or by having my husband help me, or by 
holding on long enough for the feeling to pass. But 
what if I can’t hold on the next time? 

tHeraPist: Knowing what we know about our 
thoughts when we are anxious, can you classify any 
of the ideas you just expressed, of “just holding on” 
or “just escaping in time,” as overestimations? 

Julie: I suppose you’re saying that I can hold on or I 
can always escape in time. 

tHeraPist: More that you feel the need to hold on and 
the need to escape because you are overestimating 
the likelihood of flipping out and never returning to 
reality. 

Julie: But it really feels like I will. 

tHeraPist: The confusion between what you think 
will happen and what actually happens is the very 
problem that we are addressing in this session. 

The reasons why overestimations persist despite 
repeated disconfirmation are explored. Typically, patients 
misattribute the absence of danger to external 
safety signals or safety behaviors (e.g., “I only made it 
because I managed to find help in time,” “If I had not 
taken Xanax last week when I panicked in the store, I’m 
sure I would have passed out,” or “I wouldn’t have made 
it if I hadn’t pulled off the road in time”), or to “luck,” 
instead of realizing the inaccuracy of the original prediction. 
Similarly, patients may assume that the only 
reason they are still alive, sane, and safe is because the 
“big one” has not happened. In this case, patients err by 

assuming that intensity of panic attacks increases the 
risk of catastrophic outcomes. 

The method for countering overestimation errors 
is to question the evidence for probability judgments. 
The general format is to treat thoughts as hypotheses 
or guesses rather than as facts, and to examine the evidence 
and generate alternative, more realistic predictions. 
This is best done by the therapist using a Socratic 
style, so that patients learn the skill of examining the 
content of their statements and arrive at alternative 
statements or predictions after they have considered all 
of the evidence. Questioning of the logic (e.g., “How 
does a racing heart lead to heart attack?”), or the bases 
from which judgments are made (e.g., misinformation 
from others, unusual sensations) is useful in this regard. 
Continuing with the previous example from Julie, 
the questioning took the following course: 

tHeraPist: One of the specific thoughts you have identified 
is that you will flip out and never return to reality. 
What specifically leads you to think that that is 
likely to happen? 

Julie: Well, I guess it really feels like that. 

tHeraPist: Describe the feelings? 

Julie: Well, I feel spacey and unreal, like things around 
me are different and that I’m not connected. 

tHeraPist: And why do you think those feelings mean 
that you have actually lost touch with reality? 
Julie: I don’t know—it feels as if I have. 

tHeraPist: So, let’s examine that assumption. What is 
your behavior like when you feel unreal? For example, 
do you respond if someone asks you a question 
during those episodes? 

Julie: Well, I respond to you even though I feel that 
way sometimes in here. 

tHeraPist: OK, and can you walk or write or drive 
when you feel that way? 
Julie: Yes, but it feels different. 

tHeraPist: But you do perform those functions despite 
feeling detached. So, what does that tell you? 
Julie: Well, maybe I haven’t lost complete touch with 
reality. But what if I do? 

tHeraPist: How many times have you felt detached? 

Julie: Hundreds and hundreds of times. 

tHeraPist: And how many times have you lost touch 
with reality permanently? 


Panic Disorder and Agoraphobia 

Julie: Never. But what if the feelings don’t go away? 
Maybe I’ll lose it then? 

tHeraPist: So what else tells you that this is a possibility? 


Julie: Well, what about my second cousin? He lost it 
when he was about 25, and now he’s just a mess. He 
can hardly function at all, and he is constantly in 
and out of psychiatric hospitals. They have him on a 
bunch of heavy-duty drugs. I’ll never forget the time 
I saw him totally out of it. He was talking to himself 
in jibberish. 

tHeraPist: So, do you make a connection between 
him and yourself? 

Julie: Yes. 

tHeraPist: What are the similarities between the two 
of you? 

Julie: There are none really. It’s just that he is what I 
think I will become. 

tHeraPist: Did he ever feel the way you feel now? 

Julie: I don’t know. 

tHeraPist: And if another one of your cousins had 
severe back problems, would you be concerned that 
you would end up with severe back problems? 

Julie: No. 

tHeraPist: Why not? 

Julie: Because it never crosses my mind. It is not 

something that I worry about. 

tHeraPist: So, it sounds like you think you will end 
up like your cousin because you are afraid of ending 

up like him. 

Julie: I suppose so. 

tHeraPist: So, let’s look at all of the evidence and 
consider some alternatives. You have felt unreal hundreds 
of times, and you’ve never lost touch with reality 
because you’ve continued to function in the midst 
of those feelings, and they have never lasted. You 
are afraid of becoming like your cousin, but there 
are no data to show that you and he have the same 
problem. In fact, the data suggest otherwise because 
you function and he does not. So what is the realistic 
probability that you will lose touch with reality 
permanently? Use a scale of 0 to 100, where 0 = No 
chance at all and 100 = Definitely will happen. 

Julie: Well, maybe it is lower than I thought. Maybe 
20%. 

tHeraPist: So that would mean that you have actually 
lost touch with reality in a permanent way once 
every five times you have felt unreal. 

Julie: When it’s put like that, I guess not. Maybe it’s a 
very small possibility. 
tHeraPist: Yes, so what is an alternative explanation? 


Julie: Perhaps the feelings of unreality are caused by 
feeling anxious or overbreathing, and having those 
feelings does not mean that I am actually losing 
touch with reality, and that I am not like my cousin 
at all. 

For homework, in addition to continuation of selfmonitoring 
and practice of diaphragmatic breathing, 
Julie was asked to identify her anxious thoughts in relation 
to every item on her agoraphobia hierarchy, and 
to use the in-session steps of examining the evidence 
and generating alternative evidence based interpretations 
for errors of overestimating the risk. She was to 
do the same for every panic attack that occurred over 
the next week. 

Session 3 

The goals of this session are to develop breathing retraining 
and to continue active cognitive restructuring. 
The therapist reviews the patient’s week of diaphragmatic 
breathing practice. Julie was disappointed with 
her attempts to practice. 

Julie: I just didn’t seem to be able to do it the right 
way. Sometimes I would start off OK and then the 
more I tried, the more it felt like I was running out of 
air, and I’d have to take a big gulp between breaths. 
At other times, I felt dizzy and the unreal feelings 
would start, at which point I would stop and do “busy 
work” to keep my mind occupied. 

tHeraPist: It sounds like quite a few things were going 
on. First of all, remember that this is a skill, just like 
learning to ride a bike, and you cannot expect it to 
be easy from the get-go. Second, it sounds like you 
experienced some uncomfortable physical symptoms 
that worried you. You said it felt like you were 
running out of air. Based on what we talked about 
last week, what do you think might have caused that 
feeling? 

Julie: Well, maybe I wasn’t getting enough air into my 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

lungs because it’s really hard for me to use my diaphragm 
muscle. I felt like I was suffocating myself. 

tHeraPist: Possibly it’s just a matter of learning to use 
the diaphragm muscle, but were you really suffocating 
or was it an interpretation that you might be suffocating? 


Julie: I don’t know. I’ve had the feeling of suffocating 
before, especially when I’m trapped in a crowded 
room. 

tHeraPist: So, how do you know you were suffocating? 


Julie: I don’t know. It just felt that way. 

tHeraPist: So, let’s put the evidence together. You’ve 
had the feelings before and never suffocated. As we 
discussed last time, anxiety can sometimes create a 
sensation of shortness of breath even though you are 
getting plenty of air. Can you think of an alternative 
explanation? 

Julie: Well, maybe I wasn’t suffocating. Maybe it just 
felt like that. 

Julie’s complaints represent typical concerns that 
should be addressed. The next step is to slow the rate of 
breathing until the patient can comfortably span a full 
inhalation and exhalation cycle of 6 seconds. Again, the 
therapist models slowed breathing, then provides corrective 
feedback on practice in the session. The patient 
is instructed to continue to practice slow breathing in 
“safe” or relaxing environments, and is discouraged 
from applying slow breathing when anxious or panicking, 
until fully skilled in its application. 

Also, cognitive restructuring is continued by addressing 
the second cognitive error, which involves 
viewing an event as “dangerous,” “insufferable,” or 
“catastrophic.” Typical examples of catastrophic errors 
are “If I faint, people will think that I’m weak, and that 
would be unbearable” or “Panic attacks are the worst 
thing I can imagine,” and “The whole evening is ruined 
if I start to feel anxious.” “Decatastrophizing” means to 
face the worst, to realize that the occurrences are not as 
“catastrophic” as stated, and to think about actual ways 
to cope with negative events rather than how “bad” 
they are. A key principle underlying decatastrophizing 
is that events can be endured even though they are uncomfortable. 
Recognition of the time-limited nature of 
discomfort contributes to the development of a sense 
of being able to cope. The critical distinction here is 
that although patients might prefer that these events not 

occur, they can tolerate the discomfort, if necessary. 
Thus, for the person who states that negative judgments 
from others are unbearable, it is important to discuss 
what he or she would do to cope should someone else 
make a direct negative judgment. Similarly, for the person 
who states that the physical symptoms of panic are 
intolerably embarrassing, the following type of questioning 
is helpful: 

Julie: I am really worried that I might lose control and 
do something crazy, like yell and scream. 

tHeraPist: Let’s face the worst and find out what is so 
bad about it. What would be so horrible about yelling 
and screaming? 

Julie: I could never live it down. 

tHeraPist: Well, let’s think it through. What are the 
various things you could do in the situation? You 
have just yelled and screamed—now what? 

Julie: Well, I guess the yelling and screaming would 
eventually stop. 

tHeraPist: That’s right—at the very least you would 
eventually exhaust yourself. What else? 

Julie: Well, maybe I would explain to the people 
around me that I was having a really bad day but that 
I would be OK. In other words, reassure them. 

tHeraPist: Good. What else? 

Julie: Maybe I would just get away—find someplace 
to calm down and reassure myself that the worst is 
over. 

tHeraPist: Good. 

Julie: But what if the police came and took me away, 
locked me up in a mental ward? 

tHeraPist: Again, let’s face the worst. What if the police 
did come when you were yelling and screaming, 
and what if the police did take you away? As scary 
as that may sound to you, let’s consider what actually 
would happen. 

Julie: I have this image of myself not being able to tell 
them what is really going on—that I am so out of it 
I don’t have the ability to let them know I am just 
anxious. 

tHeraPist: If you were so distraught that you could 
not clearly communicate, how long would that last? 

Julie: You’re right. I would eventually exhaust myself 
and then I could speak more clearly. But what if they 
didn’t believe me? 


Panic Disorder and Agoraphobia 

tHeraPist: What if they did not believe you at first? 
How long would it take before they would realize 
that you were not crazy? 

Julie: I guess that after a while they would see that I 
was OK, and maybe I could call a friend or my doctor 
to explain what was going on. 

The homework for this session, in addition to continued 
self-monitoring, is to practice slow and diaphragmatic 
breathing in relaxing environments, and to identify 
errors of catastrophizing in relation to each item 
on the agoraphobia hierarchy, followed by practice of 
decatastrophizing and generation of ways to cope. In 
addition, Julie was to use the skill of decatastrophizing 
for panic attacks that occurred over the following week. 

Session 4 

The main goal of this session is to use breathing retraining 
skills as a coping tool, to review cognitive restructuring 
skills, and to begin in vivo exposure to the 
first item on the agoraphobia hierarchy. 

Now that patients have practiced slow and diaphragmatic 
breathing sufficiently in relaxing environments, 
they are ready to use these methods in distracting environments 
and in anxious situations. Patients are encouraged 
to use breathing skills as a coping technique 
as they face fear, anxiety, and anxiety-provoking situations. 
Some patients use breathing skills as a safety 
signal or a safety behavior; in other words, they believe 
that they will be at risk for some mental, physical, or 
social calamity if they do not breathe correctly. This 
issue came up with Julie: 

Julie: When I panicked during the week, I tried to use 
the breathing. It didn’t work. It made me feel worse. 

tHeraPist: It sounds as if you might have attempted to 
use the breathing exercise as a desperate attempt to 
control the feelings you were experiencing. 

Julie: Yes, that’s right. 
tHeraPist: What did you think would have happened 
if you had not been able to control the feelings? 
Julie: I was really worried that I might not be able to 
handle the feelings. 
tHeraPist: And if you weren’t able to handle the feelings, 
what would happen? 
Julie: It just feels like I will lose it, permanently. 

tHeraPist: So this is one of those thoughts that we 
were talking about last time. What does your evidence 
tell you about the likelihood of losing touch 
with reality permanently? 

Julie: So you mean even if I don’t control my breathing, 
then I will be OK? 

tHeraPist: Well, you had not lost touch with reality 

permanently before you learned the breathing exer


cise, so what does that tell you? 

Julie: OK, I get it. 
tHeraPist: The breathing exercise is best thought of as 

a tool to help you face whatever is provoking anxiety. 

So, as you face situations and your anxiety increases, 

use the breathing exercise to help you to face rather 

than run away from anxiety. 

Patients who consistently use the breathing skills as 
a safety behavior might be discouraged from using the 
breathing skills because they learn that what they are 
most worried about either does not happen or it can be 
managed without using the breathing skills. 

In terms of the cognitive restructuring, therapists 
give corrective feedback to patients on the methods 
of questioning the evidence to generate realistic probabilities, 
facing the worst, and generating ways to cope 
with each item on the agoraphobia hierarchy and any 
panic attacks that occurred over the past week. Particular 
“corrective” feedback is given when patients lack 
specificity in their cognitive restructuring (e.g., patients 
who record that they are most worried about panicking 
should be encouraged to detail what it is about panicking 
that worries them) or rely on blanket reassurance 
(e.g., patients who record that “Everything will be 
OK” as their evidence and/or ways of coping should be 
encouraged to list the evidence and/or generate actual 
coping steps). 

Next, attention is given to how to practice the first 
item on the agoraphobia hierarchy. If appropriate, reasons 
why previous attempts at in vivo exposure may 
have failed are reviewed. Typical reasons for patients’ 
past failures at in vivo exposure include attempts that 
are too haphazard and/or brief, or spaced too far apart, 
and attempts conducted without a sense of mastery, or 
while maintaining beliefs that catastrophe is very possible. 
Julie had tried to face agoraphobic situations in 
the past, but each time she had escaped, feeling overwhelmed 
by panic and terrified of losing touch with 
reality permanently. The therapist helped Julie realize 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

how to approach the agoraphobic situations differently 
to benefit from the exposure. Julie’s typical safety signals 
were the presence of her husband, or at least knowing 
his whereabouts, and Klonopin (which she carried 
but rarely used). The therapist discussed the importance 
of eventual weaning from those safety signals. 

As mentioned earlier, the goal of exposure therapy 
is not immediate reduction in fear and anxiety; rather, 
the goal is for the patient to learn something new as 
a result of exposure. Clarification of what patients are 
most worried about as they face their feared situations 
and the conditions that best help them to learn that what 
worries them most never or rarely happens, and/or that 
they can cope with the situation and tolerate anxiety, 
is essential for effective exposure. If a patient is most 
worried that fear and anxiety will remain elevated for 
the duration of the practice, then corrective learning 
involves toleration of sustained anxiety. For Julie, the 
first situation on her hierarchy was to drive home from 
work, alone. She stated that what most worried her in 
that situation was that she would panic and lose touch 
with reality, and as a result, lose control of the car and 
die in an accident. She also stated that to drive at dusk 
was the condition under which she was most convinced 
of these eventualities. Thus, the task that the therapist 
considered most effective in teaching Julie that she 
would not lose touch with reality, or that she could cope 
with the sensations of unreality and panic, was to drive 
home from work at dusk. 

Delineate the exposure task as concretely as possible, 
so that patients clearly understand exactly what 
the practice entails (e.g., “Walk around inside of mall 
for 10 minutes by myself”). Importantly, the practice 
should not be ended because of anxiety (e.g., “Continue 
driving on the freeway until I feel anxious”) because 
the exposure practice would then reinforce avoidance 
of anxiety. 

Julie was reminded to use her coping skills should 
she panic as she practiced the task; that is, in moments 
of fear, patients are encouraged to use their breathing 
and thinking skills to complete the assigned task; the 
coping skills are not intended as means to reduce fear 
and anxiety, but to tolerate it. Acceptance and nonjudgmental 
observation of physical sensations and thoughts 
can be another strategy to use in the midst of exposure 
therapy. 

Patients are encouraged to maintain a regular schedule 
of repeated in vivo exposure practices at least three 
times per week, and to conduct these practices regardless 
of internal (e.g., having a “bad day,” feeling ill) or 

external (e.g., inclement weather, busy schedules) factors 
that may prompt postponement of practices. Julie 
expressed some concerns about being able to practice at 
least three times over the following week: 

Julie: I don’t know if I can practice three times because 
more days than not I feel pretty worn down; 
maybe I can practice on just Monday and Tuesday 
because they are the days I typically feel better. 

tHeraPist: What is it you are worried about happening 
if you practice on a day when you already feel 
worn down? 

Julie: I feel more fragile on those days. 

tHeraPist: And if you feel more fragile, what might 
happen? 

Julie: I just don’t think I could do it. It would be too 
hard. I might really freak out and lose touch with 
reality for ever. 

tHeraPist: OK, so let’s think about that thought. What 
does your experience tell you? How many times have 
you permanently lost touch with reality, including 
days when you were worn down? 

Julie: Well, never. 

tHeraPist: So, what does that tell you? 

Julie: OK, but it still feels difficult to drive on those 
days. 

tHeraPist: How about you start with Monday or Tuesday, 
but quickly move to the other days of the week 
when you are feeling worn down, so that you get a 
really good opportunity to learn whether you permanently 
lose touch with reality or not? 

Julie’s homework for this session involves continued 
self-monitoring, continued use of cognitive restructuring 
and breathing retraining in the event of elevated 
anxiety or panic, and practicing the first item on the 
agoraphobia hierarchy at least three times, with at least 
one of those times being without her husband Larry. 

Session 5 

The goals of this session are to review the practice of 
in vivo exposure, to design another exposure task to be 
practiced over the next week, and to begin interoceptive 
exposure. Note that in vivo and interoceptive exposure 
can be done simultaneously or sequentially. For Julie, 
in vivo exposure was begun in Session 4, whereas in



Panic Disorder and Agoraphobia 

teroceptive exposure was begun in this session, but they 
could easily have been done in the opposite order. 

It is essential to review the week’s practice of in vivo 
exposure. An objective evaluation of performance is 
considered necessary to offset subjective and damaging 
self-evaluations. As demonstrated in experimental 
literature on learning and conditioning, appraisals of 
aversive events after they have occurred can influence 
anxiety about future encounters with the same types 
of aversive events. Any practice that is terminated prematurely 
is to be reviewed carefully for contributing 
factors that can then be incorporated into subsequent 
trials of in vivo exposure. Recognition of the precipitant 
to escape is very important because the urge to escape 
is usually based on the prediction that continued 
endurance would result in some kind of danger. For 
example, patients may predict that the sensations will 
become intense and lead to an out-of-control reaction. 
This prediction can be discussed in terms of jumping 
to conclusions and blowing things out of proportion. 
At the same time, escape itself need not be viewed 
catastrophically (i.e., as embarrassing, or as a sign of 
failure). In addition, therapists reinforce the use of 
breathing and cognitive skills (or acceptance skills) to 
help patients remain in the situation until the specified 
duration or task has been completed, despite uncomfortable 
sensations. 

Again, it is important for patients to recognize that 
the goal is repeatedly to face situations despite anxiety, 
not to achieve a total absence of anxiety. Toleration of 
fear rather than immediate fear reduction is the goal 
for each exposure practice; this approach leads to an 
eventual fear reduction over time. Anxiety that does 
not decline over repeated days of in vivo exposure may 
result from too much emphasis on immediate fear and 
anxiety reduction; that is, trying too hard or wishing 
too much for anxiety to decline typically maintains 
anxiety. 

Julie had success with her first in vivo exposure practice; 
she managed to drive home from work at dusk, 
alone, four different times. She noted that the first time 
was easier than she had expected; the second was harder, 
and the one time she pulled off to the side of the 
road. The therapist helped Julie identify the thoughts 
and sensations that led her to “escape” from the situation: 
the sensations of unreality and fears of losing 
touch with reality. Julie had waited for a few minutes, 
then continued driving home—an action that was 
highly reinforced by the therapist. The third and fourth 
times were easier. 

Julie’s husband, Larry, attended Session 5, so that he 
could learn how to help Julie overcome her panic and 
agoraphobia. He was supportive and eager to help in 
any way possible, expressing frustration at having had 
no idea how to help in the past. 

There are general principles for involvement of significant 
others in treatment. First, a treatment conceptualization 
is provided to the significant other to reduce 
his or her frustration and/or negative attributions about 
the patient’s emotional functioning (e.g., “Oh, she’s just 
making it up. There’s nothing really wrong with her” 
or “He has been like this since before we were married, 
and he’ll never change”). The way in which the 
agoraphobic problem has disrupted daily routines and 
distribution of home responsibilities is explored and 
discussed also. Examples might include social activities, 
leisure activities, and household chores. The therapist 
explains that family activities may be structured 
around the agoraphobic fear and avoidance to help the 
patient function without intense anxiety. At the same 
time, reassignment of the patient’s tasks to the significant 
other may actually reinforce the agoraphobic pattern 
of behavior. Consequently, the importance of complying 
with in vivo exposure homework instructions, 
even though the patient may experience some distress 
initially, is emphasized. 

The significant other is encouraged to become an active 
participant by providing his or her perception of 
the patient’s behavior and fearfulness, and the impact 
on the home environment. Sometimes the significant 
other provides information of which the patient is not 
fully aware, or did not report, particularly in relation to 
how the patient’s behavior affects his or her own daily 
functioning. Larry, for example, described how he felt 
restricted at home in the evenings; whereas, before, he 
occasionally played basketball with his friends at the 
local gym, he now stays at home because he feels guilty 
if he leaves Julie alone. 

The next step is to describe the role of the significant 
other regarding in vivo exposure tasks. The significant 
other is viewed as a coach, and the couple is 
encouraged to approach the tasks as a problem-solving 
team. This includes deciding exactly where and when 
to practice in vivo exposure. In preparation for practices, 
the patient identifies his or her misappraisals 
about the task and generates cognitive alternatives. The 
significant other is encouraged to help the patient question 
his or her own “anxious” thoughts. Role plays of 
this type of questioning of the patient by the significant 
other may be conducted in the session, so that the 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

therapist can provide corrective feedback to each partner. 
Throughout in vivo exposure, the significant other 
reminds the patient to apply coping skills, whether it 
be cognitive challenges, breathing skills, or acceptance 
skills. Because the significant other is usually a safety 
signal, tasks are less anxiety provoking. However, the 
patient must be weaned from the safety signal eventually. 
Therefore, initial attempts at facing agoraphobic 
situations are conducted with the significant other, and 
later trials are conducted alone. Weaning from the significant 
other may be graduated, as in the case of Julie 

(1) driving first with Larry in the car, (2) with him in a 
car behind, (3) meeting him at a destination point, and 
(4) driving alone. 
Very important to the success of this collaboration is 
style of communication. On the one hand, the significant 
other is discouraged from magnifying the experience 
of panic and encouraged to help the patient apply 
coping statements when anxious. On the other hand, 
the significant other is encouraged to be patient given 
the fact that progress for the patient may be erratic. The 
patient and the significant other are instructed to use a 
0- to 10-point rating scale to communicate with each 
other about the patient’s current level of anxiety or distress, 
as a way of diminishing the awkwardness associated 
with discussion of anxiety, especially in public 
situations. The patient is warned about the potential 
motivation to avoid discussing his or her feelings with 
the significant other, due to embarrassment or an attempt 
to avoid the anxiety for fear that such discussion 
and concentration on anxiety may intensify his or her 
distress level. Avoidance of feelings is discouraged because 
distraction is viewed as less beneficial in the long 
term than objectively facing whatever is distressing and 
learning that predicted catastrophes do not occur. The 
patient is reassured that the initial discomfort and embarrassment 
will most likely diminish as the partners 
become more familiar with discussing anxiety levels 
and their management. Furthermore, the patient’s 
concerns about the significant other being insensitive 
or too pushy are addressed. For example, a significant 
other may presume to know the patient’s level of anxiety 
and anxious thoughts without confirmation from 
the patient, or the significant other may become angry 
at the patient for avoiding or escaping from situations, 
or being fearful. All of these issues are described as relatively 
common and understandable patterns of communication 
that are nevertheless in need of correction. 
In-session role playing of more adaptive communication 
styles during episodes of heightened anxiety is a 

useful learning technique. On occasion, more specific 
communications training may be beneficial, especially 
if the partners frequently argue in their attempts to generate 
items or methods for conducting in vivo exposure. 

The next in vivo exposure task for Julie was to sit in 
a crowded movie theater, gradually moving away from 
the aisle, toward the middle of the row, because that 
was the condition in which she was most concerned 
that she would lose control and draw attention to herself. 
Julie and Larry rehearsed their approach to the in 
vivo exposure task in session, while the therapist provided 
corrective feedback using the principles of communication 
and coping described earlier. They were 
instructed to practice this task at least three times over 
the next week. On at least one occasion, Julie was to 
practice the task alone. 

Next, interoceptive exposure was introduced. As with 
in vivo exposure, through repeated exposures to feared 
sensations, patients learn that they are not harmed by 
the sensations, and they achieve increased confidence 
in their ability to tolerate symptoms of anxiety. The procedure 
begins with assessment of the patient’s response 
to a series of standardized exercises. The therapist models 
each exercise first. Then, after the patient has completed 
the exercise, the therapist records the sensations, 
anxiety level (0 to 10), sensation intensity (0 to 10), and 
similarity to naturally occurring panic sensations (0 to 
10). The exercises include shaking the head from side 
to side for 30 seconds; placing the head between the 
legs for 30 seconds and lifting the head to an upright 
position quickly; running in place or using steps for l 
minute; holding one’s breath for as long as possible; 
complete body muscle tension for 1 minute or holding 
a push-up position for as long as possible; spinning 
in a swivel chair for 1 minute; hyperventilating for 1 
minute; breathing through a narrow straw (with closed 
nasal passages) or breathing as slowly as possible for 2 
minutes; and staring at a spot on the wall or at one’s mirror 
image for 90 seconds. If none of these exercises produce 
sensations at least moderately similar to those that 
occur naturally, other, individually tailored exercises 
are generated. For example, tightness around the chest 
may be induced by a deep breath before hyperventilating; 
heat may be induced by wearing heavy clothing in 
a heated room; choking sensations may be induced by a 
tongue depressor, a high-collared sweater, or a necktie; 
and startle may be induced by an abrupt, loud noise in 
the midst of relaxation. For Julie, the sensations produces 
by hyperventilating, spinning, and staring at a spot on 
the wall were most anxiety provoking. 


Panic Disorder and Agoraphobia 

Patients who report little or no fear because they feel 
safe in the presence of the therapist are asked to attempt 
each exercise alone, either at home or with the 
therapist out of the office. At the same time, discussing 
the influence of perceived safety as a moderating factor 
in the amount of fear experienced reinforces the value 
of cognitive restructuring. For a minority of patients, 
the known cause and course of the sensations override 
the fear response; that is, because the sensations are 
predictably related to a clear cause (the interoceptive 
exercise), and because the sensations can be relatively 
easily controlled by simply terminating the interoceptive 
exercise, fear is minimal. Under these conditions, 
discussion can productively center on the misassumptions 
that render naturally occurring sensations more 
frightening than the ones produced by the interoceptive 
exercises. Typically, these misassumptions are that 
naturally occurring sensations are unpredictable; that 
unpredictable sensations are more harmful; and that if 
naturally occurring sensations are not controlled, then 
they pose a potential threat. The majority of patients 
fear at least several of the interoceptive exercises despite 
knowing the cause of the sensations and their controllability. 


Interoceptive exercises rated as producing at least 
somewhat similar sensations to naturally occurring 
panic (at least 3 on the 0- to 10-point scale) are selected 
for repeated exposure. A graduated approach is used 
for interoceptive exposure, beginning with the lowest 
item on the hierarchy established in Session 4. For 
each trial of exposure, the patient is asked to begin the 
induction, to indicate when the sensations are first experienced 
(e.g., by raising a hand), and to continue the 
induction for at least 30 seconds longer to permit corrective 
learning. After terminating the induction, anxiety 
is rated, and the patient is given time to apply cognitive 
and breathing coping skills. Finally, the therapist 
reviews the induction experience and the application 
of management strategies with the patient. During this 
review, the therapist emphasizes the importance of experiencing 
the sensations fully during the induction, of 
concentrating objectively on the sensations versus distracting 
from them, and the importance of identifying 
specific cognitions and challenging them by considering 
all of the evidence. In addition, the therapist asks 
key questions to help the patient realize his or her safety 
(e.g., “What would have happened if you had continued 
spinning for another 60 seconds?”), and to generalize 
to naturally occurring experiences (e.g., “How is this 
different from when you feel dizzy at work?”). In other 

words, cognitive restructuring extends the cognitive reprocessing 
already taking place implicitly as a result of 
repeated interoceptive exposure. 

Specific, previously unrecognized cognitions sometimes 
become apparent during repeated exposure. For 
example, when Julie began to conduct repeated exposures 
to hyperventilation and spinning, she became 
more aware of her implicit assumption that sensations 
of spaciness or lightheadedness would lead her to lose 
control of her limbs. This related to her concern about 
causing an accident when driving. During repeated hyperventilation 
exercises, and with prompting of “what 
ifs” from the therapist, Julie discovered her fear of not 
being able to move her arms or legs. The therapist then 
behaviorally challenged this assumption by having 
Julie overbreathe for longer periods of time, followed 
immediately by walking, picking up objects, and so on. 

Homework practice is very important because safety 
signals present in the clinic setting or that derive from 
the therapist per se may, again, prevent generalizability 
to the natural setting. Patients are instructed to practice 
the interoceptive items conducted in session on a daily 
basis, three times each day. Julie was to practice hyperventilation 
over the following week. She expressed 
some concern at doing the exercises alone, so the 
therapist helped Julie to use her cognitive restructuring 
skills in relation to being alone. In addition, more 
graduation of homework was suggested, so that Julie 
would practice hyperventilating when her husband was 
at home the first couple of days, then when he was not 
at home the rest of the time. 

Sessions 6 and 7 

The primary goal of these sessions is to review the past 
week of in vivo exposure practices, design new exposures, 
review between-session practices of interoceptive 
exposure, conduct repeated interoceptive exposure 
in session, and assign those as homework for the next 
week. 

The in vivo exposure is reviewed, as in the previous 
session. In this case, Julie and Larry had done well with 
the movie theater practice. Julie even practiced going to 
the movies on her own. On that occasion she reported 
higher anxiety than when she was with Larry for fear 
of having to get up and leave the theater and worries 
about bothering others in the audience. The therapist 
helped Julie to identify what worry led her to think 
about leaving in the first place; in other words, what did 
she think might happen if she could not leave? When 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

Julie indicated that she had thoughts of losing control 
and causing a scene, she was then prompted to apply 
her cognitive restructuring skills of evidence-based 
analyses and decatastrophizing. She was ready to move 
to the next items on her hierarchy: to spend 2 hours 
alone at home during the day and to stay alone at home 
as day turned to night. As with every in vivo exposure 
task, Julie identified what she most feared happening in 
those situations, and the best practice conditions under 
which to learn that either those eventualities would not 
happen and/or she could cope with the worst. 

The past week of interoceptive exposure practice 
is reviewed in session with a mind toward avoidance: 
either overt failure to practice or covert avoidance by 
minimizing the intensity or duration of the sensations 
induced, or by limiting practice to the presence of a 
safety signal (e.g., a significant other) or times when 
background anxiety is minimal. Reasons for avoidance 
may include continued misinterpretation of the dangers 
of bodily sensations (i.e., “I don’t want to hyperventilate 
because I’m afraid that I won’t be able to stop 
overbreathing and no one will be there to help me”) or 
the belief that anxiety will not reduce with repetition 
of the task. 

For the first week, Julie practiced interoceptive exposure 
exercises about half of the days between sessions. 
The therapist used a “downward arrow” method 
to explore Julie’s reasons for not practicing every day. 

Julie: I tried hyperventilating on my own. However, I 

wasn’t very successful because I felt too scared and 

I stopped it as soon as I noticed the strange feelings. 

tHeraPist: What did you think would happen if the 
sensations became more intense? 

Julie: I thought the feelings would get worse and worse 

and worse, and just overwhelm me. I didn’t want to 

have that feeling of panic again. 

tHeraPist: If you did become overwhelmed, then 

what would happen to you? 
Julie: Then I’d feel really terrible. 

tHeraPist: And if you felt really terrible? 

Julie: Well, nothing. I’d just feel terrible. 

tHeraPist: The word “terrible” carries a lot of mean


ing. Let’s see if we can pin down your anxious 

thoughts that make the feelings so terrible. 

Julie: I just can’t tolerate the feeling. 

tHeraPist: What tells you that you cannot tolerate it? 
How do you know you can’t tolerate it? 

And the discussion continued, so that Julie realized 
what was most important for her to learn by the 
repeated hyperventilation: She could tolerate the sensations 
and anxiety. However, after the subsequent week 
of repeated practice, Julie remained cautious for fear 
that the exercises would cause her to revert to her state 
of several weeks earlier; that is, she was concerned that 
the inductions would leave her in a persistent symptomatic 
state. Furthermore, she was particularly reluctant 
to practice interoceptive exposure at the end of the day, 
when she was more likely to feel unreal, or on a day 
when an important social event was scheduled. Again, 
these avoidance patterns were related to fears that the 
symptoms would become too intense or result in some 
type of mental or social catastrophe. These types of 
avoidance patterns are addressed in the following vignette: 


tHeraPist: When did you practice deliberately spinning 
and hyperventilating? 

Julie: Usually in the mornings. One day I left it until 
the end of the day, and that turned out to be a bad 
idea. I felt terrible. 

tHeraPist: Let’s think about that a bit more. What 
made it terrible when you practiced at the end of the 
day? 

Julie: Well, I was already feeling pretty unreal—I usually 
do around that time of the day. So I was much 
more anxious about the symptoms. 

tHeraPist: Being more anxious implies that you 
thought the symptoms were more harmful. Is that 
what happened on the day that you practiced interoceptive 
exposure when you were already feeling unreal? 


Julie: Yes, I felt that because I was already feeling unreal, 
I was on the edge, and that I might push myself 
over the edge if I tried to increase the feelings of unreality. 


tHeraPist: What do you mean by “push myself over 
the edge”? 
Julie: That I would make the feelings so intense that I 
really would lose it—go crazy. 

tHeraPist: So there is one of those hypotheses: to feel 
more intense unreality means to be closer to going 
crazy. Let’s examine the evidence. Is it necessarily 
the case that more intense unreality means you are 
closer to craziness? 


Panic Disorder and Agoraphobia 

In sessions, the therapist continued practice of interoceptive 
exposure with the next item on Julie’s hierarchy, 
which was to stare at a spot on the wall and to 
spin around. 

The homework from this session is to continue selfmonitoring, 
in vivo exposure to an item from the agoraphobia 
hierarchy at least three times, and daily practice 
of interoceptive exposure. 

Sessions 8 and 9 

The primary goals of these sessions are to continue in 
vivo exposure, as described in the prior sessions, and to 
extend interoceptive exposure to natural activities. Julie 
had practiced staying at home for 2 hours alone during 
the day and as daylight turned to dusk, with good 
results. In particular, despite experiencing a couple of 
panic attacks during these in vivo exposure practices, 
she continued with the assigned practice. This was 
critical for Julie because it allowed her to learn that she 
could survive the feeling of panic; it was the first time 
she had remained in a situation despite panicking. 

In reviewing the week’s practice of interoceptive 
exposure, it became apparent that Julie was separating 
the practices from real-life experiences of bodily sensations 
in a way that would limit generalization. This was 
addressed as follows: 

Julie: After spinning and hyperventilating several 
times, I really do feel much less anxious. I was terrified 
at the start, but now I am only mildly anxious, if 
at all. But this is different than what happens to me 
when I’m on the freeway or at home. 

tHeraPist: How is it different? 

Julie: I don’t know when the feelings of dizziness and 
unreality are going to hit. 

tHeraPist: From our previous discussions, let’s think 
of potential reasons why you might feel dizzy or unreal 
at a particular time? 

Julie: I know. I have to keep remembering that it could 
be my breathing, or just feeling anxious, or tired, or 
a bunch of different things. 

tHeraPist: OK. And why is it so important to know 
when those feelings will occur? 
Julie: Because I don’t want them to be there at all. 

tHeraPist: And why not . . . what are you afraid of? 

Julie: I guess it’s the same old thing . . . that I’ll lose 
it somehow? 

tHeraPist: So let’s go back to the cognitive restructuring 
that you have been doing. What specifically are 
you afraid of? How likely is it to happen? What are 
the alternatives? 

Julie: I understand. 
tHeraPist: So, now you see that whether the sensa


tions of dizziness or unreality are produced by anxi


ety, overbreathing, diet, or the exercises we do here, 

they’re all the same—they are just uncomfortable 

physical sensations. The only reason they perturb 

you more when you are driving or at home is be


cause of the meaning you still give to them in those 

situations. 

“Naturalistic” interoceptive exposure refers to exposure 
to daily tasks or activities that have been avoided 
or endured with dread because of the associated sensations. 
Typical examples include aerobic exercise or 
vigorous physical activity, running up flights of stairs, 
eating foods that create a sensation of fullness or are associated 
with sensations of choking, saunas or steamy 
showers, driving with the windows rolled up and the 
heater on, caffeine consumption, and so on. (Of course, 
these exercises may be modified in the event of actual 
medical complications, such as asthma or high blood 
pressure.) From a list of typically feared activities and 
generation of items specific to the individual’s own experience, 
a hierarchy is established. Each item is ranked 
in terms of anxiety ratings (0–10). Julie’s hierarchy was 
as follows: looking out through venetian blinds (anxiety 
= 3); watching One Flew over the Cuckoo’s Nest 
(anxiety = 4); playing tennis (anxiety = 4); scanning 
labels on a supermarket shelf (anxiety = 5); concentrating 
on needlework for an hour (anxiety = 6); driving 
with windows closed and heater on (anxiety = 7); a 
nightclub with strobe lights (anxiety = 8); and rides at 
Disneyland (anxiety = 10). 

Like the symptom exercises, the activity exercises 
are designed to be systematically graduated and repetitive. 
Patients may apply the breathing and cognitive 
skills while the activity is ongoing. This is in contrast 
to the symptom induction exercises, in which coping 
skills are used only after completion of the symptom 
exercise, because the activities often are considerably 
longer than the symptom induction exercises. Nevertheless, 
patients are encouraged to focus on the sensations 
and experience them fully throughout the activity, 
and not use the coping skills to prevent or remove the 
sensations. 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

Patients are instructed to identify maladaptive cognitions 
and rehearse cognitive restructuring before beginning 
each activity. In-session rehearsal of the cognitive 
preparation allows therapists to provide corrective 
feedback. Julie did this with her therapist for her first 
two naturalistic activities, which were to look at venetian 
blinds and to watch One Flew over the Cuckoo’s 
Nest. Julie realized that she was most worried about 
sensations of unreality and fears of going crazy, although, 
as a result of her various exposure exercises 
up to this point, she quickly was able to recognize that 
such sensations were harmless and that she could tolerate 
them, and that such fears were unrealistic based on 
the evidence. 

As with all exposures, it is important to identify 
and remove (gradually, if necessary) safety signals or 
protective behaviors, such as portable phones, lucky 
charms, walking slowly, standing slowly, and staying 
in close proximity to medical facilities. These safety 
signals and behaviors reinforce catastrophic misappraisals 
about bodily sensations. Julie’s safety behaviors 
were identified as checking the time on the clock 
(as a reassurance that she was in touch with reality) and 
pinching herself (again, to feel reality). She was asked 
to practice the two naturalistic interoceptive exposures 
at least three times each before the next treatment session, 
without the safety behaviors. 

Sessions 10 and 11 

The primary goals of these sessions are to review the 
in vivo and naturalistic exposure exercises over the past 
week, and to combine exposure to feared and avoided 
agoraphobic situations with deliberate induction of 
feared sensations into those situations. As with earlier 
interoceptive exposure homework assignments, it is 
important to evaluate and correct tendencies to avoid 
naturalistic interoceptive exposure tasks, mainly by 
considering the underlying misassumptions that lead to 
avoidance. Remember also that a form of avoidance is 
to rely on safety signals or safety behaviors, so careful 
questioning of the way in which the naturalistic exposure 
was conducted, and under what conditions, may 
help to identify inadvertent reliance on these unnecessary 
precautions. Julie reported that she was successful 
in looking at the venetian blinds, even though she experienced 
sensations of unreality. She had more difficulty 
watching One Flew over the Cuckoo’s Nest because it 
tapped directly into her worst fears of losing touch with 
reality permanently; she tried but terminated the film 

early. The second time, she watched it with Larry, who 
prompted Julie to remember her cognitive and breathing 
skills, and she was able to watch the entire film. She 
watched the film one more time on her own. Two new 
naturalistic exposure items were selected for the coming 
week, with special attention to weaning or removing 
safety signals and safety behaviors, and rehearsal of 
cognitive restructuring in session. For Julie, these were 
playing tennis (something she had avoided for years) 
and scanning items on supermarket shelves. 

The notion of deliberately inducing feared bodily 
symptoms within the context of feared agoraphobic situations 
derives from the evidence that compound relationships 
between external and internal cues can be the 
most potent anxiogenic agent (i.e., deepened extinction, 
as reviewed in earlier sections); that is, neither just the 
situation nor just the bodily sensation triggers distress. 
It is the combination of the bodily sensation and the 
situation that is most distressing. Thus, effective exposure 
targets both types of cues. Otherwise, patients run 
the risk of later return of fear. For example, repeated 
practice walking through a shopping mall without feeling 
dizzy does not adequately prepare patients for occasions 
on which they feel dizzy walking through a shopping 
mall, and without such preparation, patients may 
be likely to panic and escape should they feel dizzy in 
this or similar situations in the future. Wearing heavy 
clothing in a restaurant helps patients to learn to be less 
afraid of not only the restaurant but also of feeling hot 
in a restaurant. Other examples include drinking coffee 
before any of the agoraphobic tasks, turning off the 
air-conditioning or turning on the heater while driving, 
breathing very slowly in a crowded area, and so on. 

Patients choose an item from their hierarchy of agoraphobia 
situations, either one already completed or a 
new item, and also choose which symptom to induce 
and ways of inducing that symptom in that situation. 
Julie’s task was to drink coffee as she went to a movie. 
She expressed the following concerns: 

Julie: Do you really think I am ready to drink coffee 
and go to the movie? 

tHeraPist: What worries you about the combination 
of coffee and the movie theater? 

Julie: Well, I’ve practiced in the movie theaters a lot, 

so that feels pretty good, but the coffee is going to 

make me feel very anxious. 

tHeraPist: And if you feel very anxious in the movie 
theater, then what? 

###CUT###
Panic Disorder and Agoraphobia 

Julie: Then, I don’t know what. Maybe I will get those 
old feelings again, like I have to get out. 

tHeraPist: Based on everything you have learned, 
how can you manage those feelings? 

Julie: Well, I guess my number one rule is never to 
leave a situation because I am feeling anxious. I will 
stick it out, no matter what. 

tHeraPist: That sounds great. It means you are accepting 
the anxiety and taking the opportunity to 
learn that you can tolerate it. What else? 

Julie: I can ask myself what is the worst that can happen. 
I know I am not going to die or go crazy. I will 
probably feel my heart rate going pretty fast because 
of the coffee. 

tHeraPist: And if your heart rate goes fast, what does 
that mean? 
Julie: I guess it just means that my heart rate will go 
fast. 

tHeraPist: This will be a really good way for you to 
learn that you can tolerate the anxiety and the symptoms 
of a racing heart. 

The homework for this session is to continue selfmonitoring, 
to practice in vivo exposure combined with 
interoceptive exposure, and to continue naturalistic interoceptive 
exposure. 

Session 12 

The last treatment session reviews the principles and 
skills learned and provides the patient with a template 
of coping techniques for potentially high-risk situations 
in the future. Julie finished the program after 12 sessions, 
by which time she had not panicked in 8 weeks, 
rarely experienced dizziness or feelings of unreality, 
and was driving further distances. There were some 
situations still in need of exposure practices (e.g., driving 
very long distances away from home and on the 
freeway at dusk). However, Julie and Larry agreed to 
continue in vivo exposure practices over the next few 
months to consolidate her learning and to continue her 
improvement. 

coNclusioN 

As noted earlier in this chapter, cognitive-behavioral 
treatments for panic disorder and agoraphobia are 

highly effective and represent one of the success stories 
of psychotherapy. Between 80 and 100% of patients 
undergoing these treatments will be panic free at the 
end of treatment and maintain these gains for up to 2 
years. These results reflect substantially more durability 
than medication treatments. Furthermore, between 
50 and 80% of these patients reach a point of “high end 
state,” which means their symptoms and functioning 
are within normative realms, and many of the remainder 
have only residual symptomatology. Nevertheless, 
major difficulties remain. 

First, these treatments are not foolproof. As many 
as 50% of patients retain substantial symptomatology 
despite improvement from baseline, and this is particularly 
likely for those with more severe agoraphobia. 
Further research must determine how treatments can 
be improved or better individualized to alleviate continued 
suffering. For example, one of us (D. H. B.) saw 
a patient several years ago who had completed an initial 
course of treatment but required continued periodic 
visits for over 4 years. This patient was essentially improved 
for approximately 9 months but found himself 
relapsing during a particularly stressful time at work. 
A few booster sessions restored his functioning, but he 
was back in the office 6 months later with reemerging 
symptomatology. This pattern essentially continued for 
4 years and was characterized by symptom-free periods 
followed by (seemingly) stress-related relapses. 
Furthermore, the reemerging panic disorder would 
sometimes last from 3 to 6 months before disappearing 
again, perhaps with the help of a booster session. 

Although this case was somewhat unusual in our experience, 
there was no easy explanation for this pattern 
of relapses and remissions. The patient, who has a graduate 
degree, understood and accepted the treatment 
model and fully implemented the treatment program. 
There was also no question that he fully comprehended 
the nature of anxiety and panic, and the intricacies of 
the therapeutic strategies. While in the office, he could 
recite chapter and verse on the nature of these emotional 
states, as well as the detailed process of his own reaction 
while in these states. Nevertheless, away from the 
office, the patient found himself repeatedly hoping that 
he would not “go over the brink” during a panic attack, 
despite verbalizing very clearly the irrationality of this 
concept while in the office. In addition, he continued 
to attempt to reduce minor physiological symptoms associated 
with anxiety and panic, despite a full rational 
understanding of the nature of these symptoms (including 
the fact that they are the same symptoms he experi



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

enced during a state of excitement, which he enjoyed). 
His limited tolerance of these physical sensations was 
also puzzling in view of his tremendous capacity to endure 
pain. 

Any number of factors might account for what 
seemed to be “overvalued ideation” or very strongly 
held irrational ideas during periods of anxiety, including 
the fact that the patient has several relatives who 
have repeatedly been hospitalized for emotional disorders 
(seemingly mood disorders or schizoaffective 
disorder). Nevertheless, the fact remains that we do 
not know why this patient did not respond as quickly 
as most people. Eventually he made a full recovery, 
received several promotions at work, and considered 
treatment to be the turning point in his life. But it took 
5 years. 

Other patients, as noted earlier, seem uninterested 
in engaging in treatment, preferring to conceptualize 
their problems as chemical imbalances. Still others 
have difficulty grasping some of the cognitive strategies, 
and further attempts are necessary to make these 
treatments more “user-friendly.” 

It also may seem that this structured, protocol-driven 
treatment is applied in a very standard fashion across 
individuals. Nothing could be further from the truth. 
The clinical art involved in this, and in all treatments 
described in this book, requires a careful adaptation of 
these treatment strategies to the individual case. Many 
of Julie’s symptoms revolved around feelings of unreality 
(derealization and depersonalization). Emphasizing 
rational explanations for the production of such feelings, 
as well as adapting cognitive and exposure exercises 
to maximize these sensations, is an important part 
of this treatment program. Although standard interoceptive 
provocation exercises seemed sufficient to produce 
relevant symptomatology in Julie’s case, we have 
had to develop new procedures to deal with people with 
more idiosyncratic symptoms and fears, particularly 
those involving feelings of unreality or dissociation. 
Other innovations in both cognitive and behavioral 
procedures will be required by individual therapists as 
they apply these procedures. 

Although these new treatments seem highly successful 
when applied by trained therapists, treatment is not 
readily available to individuals with these disorders. In 
fact, these treatments, although brief and structured, 
are far more difficult to deliver than, for example, pharmacological 
treatments (which are also often misapplied). 
Furthermore, few people are currently skilled 
in the application of these treatments. What seems to 

be needed for these and other successful psychosocial 
treatments is a new method of disseminating them, so 
that they reach the maximum number of patients. Modification 
of these treatment protocols into more userfriendly 
formats, as well as brief periods of training for 
qualified therapists to a point of certification, would be 
important steps in successfully delivering these treatments. 
This may be difficult to accomplish. 

note 

1. Specific phobias were not assessed, but by being most circumscribed, 
they would be hypothesized to load the least 
on negative affectivity. 
referenCes 

Aaronson, C. J., Shear, M. K., Goetz, R. R., Allen, L. B., Barlow, 
D. H., White, K. S., et al. (2008). Predictors and time 
course of response among panic disorder patients treated 
with cognitive-behavioral therapy. Journal of Clinical 
Psychiatry, 69, 418–424. 

Allen, L. B., White, K. S., Barlow, D. H., Shear, M. K., Gorman, 
J. M., & Woods, S. W. (2010). Cognitive-behavior 
therapy (CBT) for panic disorder: Relationship of anxiety 
and depression comorbidity with treatment outcome. Journal 
of Psychopathology and Behavioral Assessment, 32, 
185–192. 

Alneas, R., & Torgersen, S. (1990). DSM-III personality 
disorders among patients with major depression, anxiety 
disorders, and mixed conditions. Journal of Nervous and 
Mental Disease, 178, 693–698. 

American Psychiatric Association. (1980). Diagnostic and 
statistical manual of mental disorders (3rd ed.). Washington, 
DC: Author. 

American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and 
statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.). Arlington, 
VA: Author. 

Amering, M., Katschnig, H., Berger, P., Windhaber, J., 
Baischer, W., & Dantendorfer, K. (1997). Embarrassment 
about the first panic attack predicts agoraphobia in 
disorder patients. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 35, 
517–521. 

Andrews, G., Cuijpers, P., Craske, M. G., McEvoy, P., & 
Titov, N. (2010). Computer therapy for the anxiety and 
depressive disorders is effective, acceptable and practical 
health care: A meta-analysis. PLoS ONE, 5, e13196. 

Antony, M. M., Brown, T. A., Craske, M. G., Barlow, D. H., 
Mitchell, W. B., & Meadows, E. A. (1995). Accuracy of 
heartbeat perception in panic disorder, social phobia, and 
nonanxious subjects. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 9, 
355–371. 


Panic Disorder and Agoraphobia 

Antony, M. M., Ledley, D. R., Liss, A., & Swinson, R. P. 
(2006). Responses to symptom induction exercises in 
panic disorder. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 44, 
85–98. 

Antony, M. M., Meadows, E. A., Brown, T. A., & Barlow, D. 

H. (1994). Cardiac awareness before and after cognitivebehavioral 
treatment for panic disorder. Journal of Anxiety 
Disorders, 8, 341–350. 
Arch, J. J., Eifert, G. H., Davies, C., Plumb, J. C., Rose, R. D., 
& Craske, M. G. (2012). Randomized trial of cognitive behavioral 
therapy versus acceptance and commitment therapy 
for the treatment of mixed anxiety disorders. Journal 
of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 80, 750–765. 

Arnow, B. A., Taylor, C. B., Agras, W. S., & Telch, M. J. 
(1985). Enhancing agoraphobia treatment outcome by 
changing couple communication patterns. Behavior Therapy, 
16, 452–467. 

Arrindell, W., & Emmelkamp, P. (1987). Psychological states 
and traits in female agoraphobics: A controlled study. 
Journal of Psychopathology and Behavioral Assessment, 
9, 237–253. 

Baldwin, D. S. (1998). Depression and panic: Comorbidity. 
European Psychiatry, 13, 65s–70s. 

Bandelow, B., Spath, C., Tichaner, G. A., Brooks, A., Hajak, 
G., & Ruther, E. (2002). Early traumatic life events, parental 
attitudes, family history, and birth risk factors in 
patients with panic disorder. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 
43, 269–278. 

Barlow, D. H. (1988). Anxiety and its disorders: The nature 
and treatment of anxiety and panic. New York: Guilford 
Press. 

Barlow, D. H. (2002). Anxiety and its disorders: The nature 
and treatment of anxiety and panic (2nd ed.). New York: 
Guilford Press. 

Barlow, D. H., Brown, T. A., & Craske, M. G. (1994). Definitions 
of panic attacks and panic disorder in the DSM-IV: 
Implications for research. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 
103, 553–564. 

Barlow, D. H., Cohen, A., Waddell, M., Vermilyea, J., Klosko, 
J., Blanchard, E., et al. (1984). Panic and generalized anxiety 
disorders: Nature and treatment. Behavior Therapy, 
15, 431–449. 

Barlow, D. H., & Craske, M. G. (1994). Mastery of your anxiety 
and panic (2nd ed.) San Antonio, TX: Harcourt Brace. 

Barlow, D. H., & Craske, M. G. (2006). Mastery of your anxiety 
and panic: Patient workbook (4th ed.). New York: Oxford 
University Press. 

Barlow, D. H., Craske, M. G., Cerny, J. A., & Klosko, J. S. 
(1989). Behavioral treatment of panic disorder. Behavior 
Therapy, 20, 261–282. 

Barlow, D. H., Gorman, J. M., Shear, M. K., & Woods, S. 

W. (2000). Cognitive-behavioral therapy, imipramine, or 
their combination for panic disorder: A randomized controlled 
trial. Journal of the American Medical Association, 
283(19), 2529–2536. 
Barlow, D. H., O’Brien, G. T., & Last, C. G. (1984). Couples 
treatment of agoraphobia. Behavior Therapy, 15(1), 
41–58. 

Barlow, D. H., O’Brien, G. T., Last, C. G., & Holden, A. E. 
(1983). Couples treatment of agoraphobia. In K. D. Craig 
& R. J. McMahon (Eds.), Advances in clinical behavior 
therapy (pp. 99–127). New York: Brunner/Mazel. 

Barlow, D. H., Vermilyea, J., Blanchard, E., Vermilyea, B., 
Di Nardo, P., & Cerny, J. (1985). Phenomenon of panic. 
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 94, 320–328. 

Barsky, A. J., Cleary, P. D., Sarnie, M. K., & Ruskin, J. N. 
(1994). Panic disorder, palpitations, and the awareness of 
cardiac activity. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 
182, 63–71. 

Basoglu, M., Marks, I. M., Kilic, C., Brewin, C. R., & Swinson, 
R. P. (1994). Alprazolam and exposure for panic disorder 
with agoraphobia: Attribution of improvement to 
medication predicts subsequent relapse. British Journal of 
Psychiatry, 164, 652–659. 

Beck, J. G., & Shipherd, J. C. (1997). Repeated exposure to 
interoceptive cues: Does habituation of fear occur in panic 
disorder patients?: A preliminary report. Behaviour Research 
and Therapy, 35, 551–557. 

Beck, J. G., Shipherd, J. C., & Zebb, B. J. (1997). How does 
interoceptive exposure for panic disorder work?: An uncontrolled 
case study. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 11, 
541–556. 

Beck, J. G., Stanley, M. A., Baldwin, L. E., Deagle, E. A., & 
Averill, P. M. (1994). Comparison of cognitive therapy and 
relaxation training for panic disorder. Journal of Consulting 
and Clinical Psychology, 62, 818–826. 

Beesdo, K., Knappe, S., & Pine, D. S. (2007). Anxiety and 
anxiety disorders in children and adolescents: developmental 
issues and implications for DSM-V. Psychiatric 
Clinics of North America, 32, 483–524. 

Biederman, J., Faraone, S. V., Marrs, A., & Moore, P. (1997). 
Panic disorder and agoraphobia in consecutively referred 
children and adolescents. Journal of the American Academy 
of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 36(12), 214–223. 

Bittner, A., Egger, H. L., Erkanli, A., Costello, J., Foley, D. L., 
& Angold, A. (2007). What do childhood anxiety disorders 
predict? Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 
48, 1174–1183. 

Black, D. W., Monahan, P., Wesner, R., Gabel, J., & Bowers, 

W. (1996). The effect of fluvoxamine, cognitive therapy, 
and placebo on abnormal personality traits in 44 patients 
with panic disorder. Journal of Personality Disorders, 10, 
185–194. 
Bland, K., & Hallam, R. (1981). Relationship between response 
to graded exposure and marital satisfaction in agoraphobics. 
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 19, 335–338. 

Block, R. I., Ghoneim, M. M., Fowles, D. C., Kumar, V., & 
Pathak, D. (1987). Effects of a subanesthetic concentration 
of nitrous oxide on establishment, elicitation and semantic 
and phonemic generalization of classically conditioned 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

skin conductance responses. Pharmacological and Biochemical 
Behavior, 28, 7–14. 

Bohni, M. K., Spindler, H., Arendt, M., Hougaard, E., & 
Rosenberg, N. K. (2009). A randomized study of massed 
three-week cognitive behavioural therapy schedule for 
panic disorder. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 120(3), 
187–195. 

Bonn, J. A., Harrison, J., & Rees, W. (1971). Lactate-induced 
anxiety: Therapeutic application. British Journal of Psychiatry, 
119, 468–470. 

Bouchard, S., Gauthier, J., Laberge, B., French, D., Pelletier, 
M., & Godbout, D. (1996). Exposure versus cognitive restructuring 
in the treatment of panic disorder with agoraphobia. 
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 34, 213–224. 

Bouchard, S., Paquin, B., Payeur, R., Allard, M., Rivard, V., 
Gournier, T., et al. (2004). Delivering cognitive-behavior 
therapy for panic disorder with agoraphobia in videoconference 
[Special issue: Telemedicine in Canada]. Telemedicine 
Journal and E-Health, 10(1), 13–24. 

Bouton, M. E. (1993). Context, time and memory retrieval in 
the interference paradigms of Pavlovian learning. Psychological 
Bulletin, 114, 90–99. 

Bouton, M. E., Mineka, S., & Barlow, D. H. (2001). A modern 
learning-theory perspective on the etiology of panic disorder. 
Psychological Review, 108(1), 4–32. 

Bouton, M. E., & Swartzentruber, D. (1991). Sources of relapse 
after extinction in Pavlovian conditioning and instrumental 
conditioning. Behavioral Neuroscience, 104, 
44–55. 

Broocks, A., Bandelow, B., Pekrun, G., George, A., Meyer, T., 
Bartmann, U., et al. (1998). Comparison of aerobic exercise, 
clomipramine, and placebo in the treatment of panic 
disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 155, 603–609. 

Brown, T. A., Antony, M. M., & Barlow, D. H. (1995). Diagnostic 
comorbidity in panic disorder: Effect on treatment 
outcome and course of comorbid diagnoses following 
treatment. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 
63, 408–418. 

Brown, T. A., & Barlow, D. H. (1995). Long-term outcome in 
cognitive-behavioral treatment of panic disorder: Clinical 
predictors and alternative strategies for assessment. Journal 
of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 63, 754–765. 

Brown, T. A., & Barlow, D. H. (in press). Anxiety Disorders 
Interview Schedule–5. New York: Oxford University 
Press. 

Brown, T. A., Campbell, L. A., Lehman, C. L., Grisham, J. 
R., & Mancill, R. B. (2001). Current and lifetime comorbidity 
of the DSM-IV anxiety and mood disorders in a 
large clinical sample. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 
110(4), 585–599. 

Brown, T. A., Chorpita, B. F., & Barlow, D. H. (1998). Structural 
relationships among dimensions of the DSM-IV 
anxiety and mood disorders and dimensions of negative 
affect, positive affect, and autonomic arousal. Journal of 
Abnormal Psychology, 107(2), 179–192. 

Brown, T. A., Di Nardo, P. A., Lehman, C. L., & Campbell, 

L. A. (2001). Reliability of DSM-IV anxiety and mood 
disorders: Implications for the classification of emotional 
disorders. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 110(1), 49– 
58. 
Brown, T. A., White, K. S., Forsyth, J. P., & Barlow, D. H. 
(2004). The structure of perceived emotional control: Psychometric 
properties of a revised Anxiety Control Questionnaire. 
Behavior Therapy, 35(1), 75–99. 

Buglass, P., Clarke, J., Henderson, A., & Presley, A. (1977). 
A study of agoraphobic housewives. Psychological Medicine, 
7, 73–86. 

Butler, A. C., Chapman, J. E., Forman, E. M., & Beck, A. 

T. (2006). The empirical status of cognitive-behavioral 
therapy: A review of meta-analyses. Clinical Psychology 
Review, 26, 17–31. 
Campbell-Sills, L., Barlow, D. H., Brown, T. A., & Hofmann, 

S. G. (2006). Acceptability and suppression of negative 
emotion in anxiety and mood disorders. Emotion, 6(4), 
587–595. 
Carlbring, P., Ekselius, L., & Andersson, G. (2003). Treatment 
of panic disorder via the Internet: A randomized trial 
of CBT vs. applied relaxation. Journal of Behavior Therapy 
and Experimental Psychiatry, 34, 129–140. 

Carlbring, P., Nilsson-Ihrfelt, E., Waara, J., Kollenstam, C., 
Buhrman, M, Klado, V., et al. (2005). Treatment of panic 
disorder: live therapy vs. self-help via the internet. Behaviour 
Research and Therapy, 43, 1321–1333. 

Carter, M. M., Sbrocco, T., Gore, K. L., Marin, N. W., & 
Lewis, E. L. (2003). Cognitive-behavioral group therapy 
versus a wait-list control in the treatment of African American 
women with panic disorder. Cognitive Therapy and 
Research, 27(5), 505–518. 

Cerny, J. A., Barlow, D. H., Craske, M. G., & Himadi, W. 

G. (1987). Couples treatment of agoraphobia: A two-year 
follow-up. Behavior Therapy, 18, 401–415. 
Chambless, D. L. (1990). Spacing of exposure sessions in 
treatment of agoraphobia and simple phobia. Behavior 
Therapy, 21, 217–229. 

Chambless, D. L., Caputo, G., Bright, P., & Gallagher, R. 
(1984). Assessment of fear in agoraphobics: The Body 
Sensations Questionnaire and the Agoraphobic Cognitions 
Questionnaire. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 
52, 1090–1097. 

Chambless, D. L., Caputo, G., Gracely, S., Jasin, E., & Williams, 
C. (1985). The Mobility Inventory for Agoraphobia. 
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 23, 35–44. 

Chambless, D. L., & Renneberg, B. (1988, September). Personality 
disorders of agoraphobics. Paper presented at 
World Congress of Behavior Therapy, Edinburgh, Scotland. 


Clark, D. M. (1996). Panic disorder: From theory to therapy. 
In P. M. Salkovskis (Ed.), From frontiers of cognitive 
therapy: The state of art and beyond (pp. 318–344). New 
York: Guilford Press. 


Panic Disorder and Agoraphobia 

Clark, D. M. (1986). A cognitive approach to panic. Behaviour 
Research and Therapy, 24, 461–470. 

Clark, D. M., & Ehlers, A. (1993). An overview of the cognitive 
theory and treatment of panic disorder. Applied and 
Preventive Psychology, 2, 131–139. 

Clark, D. M., Salkovskis, P., & Chalkley, A. (1985). Respiratory 
control as a treatment for panic attacks. Journal of Behavior 
Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry, 16, 23–30. 

Clark, D. M., Salkovskis, P., Gelder, M., Koehler, C., Martin, 
M., Anastasiades, P., et al. (1988). Tests of a cognitive 
theory of panic. In I. Hand & H. Wittchen (Eds.), Panic 
and phobias II (pp. 71–90). Berlin: Springer-Verlag. 

Clark, D. M., Salkovskis, P. M., Hackmann, A., Middleton, 
H., Anastasiades, P., & Gelder, M. (1994). A comparison 
of cognitive therapy, applied relaxation and imipramine 
in the treatment of panic disorder. British Journal of Psychiatry, 
164, 759–769. 

Clark, D. M., Salkovskis, P. M., Hackmann, A., Wells, A., 
Ludgate, J., & Gelder, M. (1999). Brief cognitive therapy 
for panic disorder: A randomized controlled trial. Journal 
of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 67, 583–589. 

Cote, G., Gauthier, J. G., Laberge, B., Cormier, H. J., & Plamondon, 
J. (1994). Reduced therapist contact in the cognitive 
behavioral treatment of panic disorder. Behavior 
Therapy, 25, 123–145. 

Cox, B. J., Endler, N. S., & Swinson, R. P. (1995). An examination 
of levels of agoraphobic severity in panic disorder. 
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 33, 57–62. 

Craske, M. G., & Barlow, D. H. (1988). A review of the relationship 
between panic and avoidance. Clinical Psychology 
Review, 8, 667–685. 

Craske, M. G., & Barlow, D. H. (1989). Nocturnal panic. 
Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 177(3), 160–167. 

Craske, M. G., & Barlow, D. H. (2006). Mastery of your anxiety 
and panic: Therapist guide (3rd ed.). New York: Oxford 
University Press. 

Craske, M. G., Brown, T. A., & Barlow, D. H. (1991). Behavioral 
treatment of panic disorder: A two-year follow-up. 
Behavior Therapy, 22, 289–304. 

Craske, M. G., DeCola, J. P., Sachs, A. D., & Pontillo, D. C. 
(2003). Panic control treatment of agoraphobia. Journal of 
Anxiety Disorders, 17(3), 321–333. 

Craske, M. G., Farchione, T., Allen, L., Barrios, V., Stoyanova, 
M., & Rose, D. (2007). Cognitive behavioral therapy 
for panic disorder and comorbidity: More of the same or 
less of more. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 45(6), 
1095–1109. 

Craske, M. G., & Freed, S. (1995). Expectations about arousal 
and nocturnal panic. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 
104, 567–575. 

Craske, M. G., Glover, D., & DeCola, J. (1995). Predicted 
versus unpredicted panic attacks: Acute versus general 
distress. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 104, 214–223. 

Craske, M. G., Golinelli, D., Stein, M. B., Roy-Byrne, P., Bystritsky, 
A., & Sherbourne, C. (2005). Does the addition of 

cognitive behavioral therapy improve panic disorder treatment 
outcome relative to medication alone in the primarycare 
setting? Psychological Medicine, 35(11), 1645–1654. 

Craske, M. G., Kircanski, K., Epstein, A., Wittchen, H.-U., 
Pine, D.S., Lewis-Fernandez, R., et al. (2010). Panic disorder: 
A review of DSM-IV panic disorder and proposals for 
DSM-V. Depression and Anxiety, 27, 93–112. 

Craske, M. G., Kircanski, K., Zelikowsky, M., Mystkowski, 
J., Chowdhury, N., & Baker, A. (2008). Optimizing inhibitory 
learning during exposure therapy. Behaviour Research 
and Therapy, 46, 5–27. 

Craske, M. G., Lang, A. J., Aikins, D., & Mystkowski, J. L. 
(2005). Cognitive behavioral therapy for nocturnal panic. 
Behavior Therapy, 36, 43–54. 

Craske, M. G., Lang, A. J., Rowe, M., DeCola, J. P., Simmons, 
J., Mann, C., et al. (2002). Presleep attributions 
about arousal during sleep: Nocturnal panic. Journal of 
Abnormal Psychology, 111, 53–62. 

Craske, M. G., Liao, B., Brown, L., & Vervliet, B. (2012). 
Role of inhibition in exposure therapy. Journal of Experimental 
Psychopathology, 3(3), 322–345. 

Craske, M. G., Maidenberg, E., & Bystritsky, A. (1995). Brief 
cognitive-behavioral versus non directive therapy for 
panic disorder. Journal of Behavior Therapy and Experimental 
Psychiatry, 26, 113–120. 

Craske, M. G., Miller, P. P., Rotunda, R., & Barlow, D. H. 
(1990). A descriptive report of features of initial unexpected 
panic attacks in minimal and extensive avoiders. 
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 28, 395–400. 

Craske, M. G., Poulton, R., Tsao, J. C. I., & Plotkin, D. (2001). 
Paths to panic–agoraphobia: An exploratory analysis from 
age 3 to 21 in an unselected birth cohort. American Journal 
of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 40, 556–563. 

Craske, M. G., Rapee, R. M., & Barlow, D. H. (1988). The 
significance of panic–expectancy for individual patterns 
of avoidance. Behavior Therapy, 19, 577–592. 

Craske, M. G., Rose, R. D., Lang, A., Welch, S., Campbell-
Sills, L., Sullivan, G., et al. (2009). Computer-assisted 
delivery of cognitive-behavioral therapy for anxiety disorders 
in primary care settings. Depression and Anxiety, 
26, 235–242. 

Craske, M. G., & Rowe, M. K. (1997a). A comparison of behavioral 
and cognitive treatments of phobias. In G. C. L. 
Davey (Ed.), Phobias—a handbook of theory, research 
and treatment (pp. 247–280). West Sussex, UK: Wiley. 

Craske, M. G., & Rowe, M. K. (1997b). Nocturnal panic. 
Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 4, 153–174. 

Craske, M. G., Rowe, M., Lewin, M., & Noriega-Dimitri, R. 
(1997). Interoceptive exposure versus breathing retraining 
within cognitive-behavioural therapy for panic disorder 
with agoraphobia. British Journal of Clinical Psychology, 
36, 85–99. 

Craske, M. G., Roy-Byrne, P., Stein, M. B., Donald-
Sherbourne, C., Bystritsky, A., Katon, W., et al. (2002). 
Treating panic disorder in primary care: A collaborative 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

care intervention. General Hospital Psychiatry, 24(3), 
148–155. 

Craske, M. G., Roy-Byrne, P., Stein, M. B., Sullivan, G., 
Hazlett-Stevens, H., Bystritsky, A., et al. (2006). CBT intensity 
and outcome for panic disorder in a primary care 
setting. Behavior Therapy, 37, 112–119. 

Craske, M. G., Stein, M. B., Sullivan, G., Sherbourne, C., 
Bystritsky, A., Rose, D., et al. (2011). Disorder specific impact 
of CALM treatment for anxiety disorders in primary 
care. Archives of General Psychiatry, 68, 378–388. 

Craske, M. G., & Tsao, J. C. I. (1999). Self-monitoring with 
panic and anxiety disorders. Psychological Assessment, 
11, 466–479. 

Culver, N., Stoyanova, M. S., & Craske, M. G. (2012). Emotional 
variability and sustained arousal during exposure. 
Journal of Behavior Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry, 
43, 787–793. 

Culver, N., Vervliet, B., & Craske, M. G. (in press). Compound 
extinction: Using the Rescorla-Wagner model to 
maximize the effects of exposure therapy for anxiety disorders. 
Clinical Psychological Science. 

Dattilio, F. M., & Salas-Auvert, J. A. (2000). Panic disorder: 
Assessment and treatment through a wide-angle lens. 
Phoenix, AZ: Zeig, Tucker. 

Deacon, B., & Abramowitz, J. (2006). A pilot study of twoday 
cognitive-behavioral therapy for panic disorder. Behaviour 
Research and Therapy, 44, 807–817. 

de Beurs, E., Lange, A., van Dyck, R., & Koele, P. (1995). Respiratory 
training prior to exposure in vivo in the treatment 
of panic disorder with agoraphobia: Efficacy and predictors 
of outcome. Australian and New Zealand Journal of 
Psychiatry, 29, 104–113. 

de Beurs, E., van Balkom, A. J., Lange, A., Koele, P., & van 
Dyck, R. (1995). Treatment of panic disorder with agoraphobia: 
Comparison of fluvoxamine, placebo, and psychological 
panic management combined with exposure and of 
exposure in vivo alone. American Journal of Psychiatry, 
152, 683–691. 

Debiec, J., & Le Doux, J. E. (2004). Disruption of reconsolidation 
but not consolidation of auditory fear conditioning 
by noradrenergic blockade in the amygdala. Neuroscience, 
129(2), 267–272. 

Deckert, J., Nothen, M. M., Franke, P., Delmo, C., Fritze, J., 
Knapp, M., et al. (1998). Systematic mutation screening 
and association study of the A1 and A2a adenosine receptor 
genes in panic disorder suggest a contribution of the 
A2a gene to the development of disease. Molecular Psychiatry, 
3, 81–85. 

De Cort, K., Hermans, D., Spruyt, A., Griez, E., & Schruers, 

K. (2008). A specific attentional bias in panic disorder? 
Depression and Anxiety, 25(11), 951–955. 
de Jong, M. G., & Bouman, T. K. (1995). Panic disorder: A 
baseline period: Predictability of agoraphobic avoidance 
behavior. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 9, 185–199. 

Dewey, D., & Hunsley, J. (1990). The effects of marital adjustment 
and spouse involvement on the behavioral treatment 
of agoraphobia: A meta-analytic review. Anxiety Research, 
2(2), 69–83. 

Di Nardo, P., Brown, T. A., & Barlow, D. H. (1994). Anxiety 
Disorders Interview Schedule—Fourth Edition (ADIS-
IV). New York: Oxford University Press. 

Domschke, K., Agineszka, G., Winter, B., Hermann, M. J., 
Warrings B., Muhlberger, A., et al. (2011). ADORA2A 
gene variation, caffeine, and emotional processing: A 
multi-level interaction on startle reflex. Neuropsychopharmacology, 
37, 759–769. 

Dow, M., Kenardy, J., Johnston, D., Newman, M., Taylor, C., 
& Thomson, A. (2007). Prognostic indices with brief and 
standard CBT for panic disorder: I. Predictors of outcome. 
Psychological Medicine, 27, 1493–1502. 

Dreessen, L., Arntz, A., Luttels, C., & Sallaerts, S. (1994). 
Personality disorders do not influence the results of cognitive 
behavior therapies for anxiety disorders. Comprehensive 
Psychiatry, 35(4), 265–274. 

Dworkin, B. R., & Dworkin, S. (1999). Heterotopic and 
homotopic classical conditioning of the baroreflex. Integrative 
Physiological and Behavioral Science, 34(3), 
158–176. 

Ehlers, A. (1995). A 1–year prospective study of panic attacks: 
Clinical course and factors associated with maintenance. 
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 104, 164–172. 

Ehlers, A., & Breuer, P. (1992). Increased cardiac awareness 
in panic disorder. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 101, 
371–382. 

Ehlers, A., & Breuer, P. (1996). How good are patients with 
panic disorder at perceiving their heartbeats? Biological 
Psychology, 42, 165–182. 

Ehlers, A., Breuer, P., Dohn, D., & Fiegenbaum, W. (1995). 
Heartbeat perception and panic disorder: Possible explanations 
for discrepant findings. Behaviour Research and 
Therapy, 33, 69–76. 

Ehlers, A., & Margraf, J. (1989). The psychophysiological 
model of panic attacks. In P. M. G. Emmelkamp (Ed.), 
Anxiety disorders: Annual series of European research in 
behavior therapy (Vol. 4, pp. 1–29). Amsterdam: Swets. 

Ehlers, A., Margraf, J., Davies, S., & Roth, W. T. (1988). Selective 
processing of threat cues in subjects with panic attacks. 
Cognition and Emotion, 2, 201–219. 

Ehlers, A., Margraf, J., Roth, W. T., Taylor, C. B., & 
Birnbaumer, N. (1988). Anxiety induced by false heart 
rate feedback in patients with panic disorder. Behaviour 
Research and Therapy, 26(1), 1–11. 

Eifert, G. H., & Heffner, M. (2003). The effects of acceptance 
versus control contexts on avoidance of panic-related 
symptoms. Journal of Behavior Therapy and Experimental 
Psychiatry, 34(3–4), 293–312. 

Eley, T. C. (2001). Contributions of behavioral genetics research: 
Quantifying genetic, shared environmental and 


Panic Disorder and Agoraphobia 

nonshared environmental influences. In M. W. Vasey & M. 

R. Dadds (Eds.), The developmental psychopathology of 
anxiety (pp. 45–59). New York: Oxford University Press. 
Emmelkamp, P. (1980). Agoraphobic’s interpersonal problems. 
Archives of General Psychiatry, 37, 1303–1306. 
Emmelkamp, P. M., & Wittchen, H.-U. (2009). Specific 
phobias. In G. Andrews (Ed.), Stress-induced and fear 
circuitry disorders: Advancing the research agenda for 
DSM-V (pp. 77–104). Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric 
Association. 

Evans, L., Holt, C., & Oei, T. P. S. (1991). Long term followup 
of agoraphobics treated by brief intensive group cognitive 
behaviour therapy. Australian and New Zealand Journal 
of Psychiatry, 25, 343–349. 

Eysenck, H. J. (1967). The biological basis of personality. 
Springfield, IL: Thomas. 
Faravelli, C., Pallanti, S., Biondi, F., Paterniti, S., & Scarpato, 

M. A. (1992). Onset of panic disorder. American Journal 
of Psychiatry, 149, 827–828. 
Feigenbaum, W. (1988). Long-term efficacy of ungraded versus 
graded massed exposure in agoraphobics. In I. Hand & 

H. Wittchen (Eds.), Panic and phobias: Treatments and 
variables affecting course and outcome (pp. 83–88). Berlin: 
Springer-Verlag. 
First, M. B., Spitzer, R. L., Gibbon, M., & Williams, J. B. W. 
(1994). Structured Clinical Interview for Axis I DSM-IV 
Disorders. New York: Biometric Research Department, 
New York State Psychiatric Institute. 

Foa, E. B., & Kozak, M. J. (1986). Emotional processing of 
fear: exposure to corrective information. Psychological 
Bulletin, 99, 20–35. 

Foa, E. B., & McNally, R. J. (1996). Mechanisms of change in 
exposure therapy. In R. M. Rapee (Ed.), Current controversies 
in the anxiety disorders (pp. 329–343). New York: 
Guilford Press. 

Forsyth, J. P., Palav, A., & Duff, K. (1999). The absence of 
relation between anxiety sensitivity and fear conditioning 
using 20% versus 13% CO2-enriched air as unconditioned 
stimuli. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 37(2), 143–153. 

Friedman, S., & Paradis, C. (1991). African-American patients 
with panic disorder and agoraphobia. Journal of 
Anxiety Disorders, 5, 35–41. 

Friedman, S., Paradis, C. M., & Hatch, M. (1994). Characteristics 
of African-American and white patients with panic 
disorder and agoraphobia. Hospital and Community Psychiatry, 
45, 798–803. 

Fry, W. (1962). The marital context of an anxiety syndrome. 
Family Process, 1, 245–252. 

Garssen, B., de Ruiter, C., & van Dyck, R. (1992). Breathing 
retraining: A rational placebo? Clinical Psychology 
Review, 12, 141–153. 

Ghosh, A., & Marks, I. M. (1987). Self-treatment of agoraphobia 
by exposure. Behavior Therapy, 18, 3–16. 
Glenn, D., Golinelli, D., Rose, R., Roy-Byrne, P., Stein, M., 

Sullivan, G., et al. (in press). Who gets the most out of 
cognitive behavioral therapy for anxiety disorders: The 
role of treatment dose and patient engagement. Journal of 
Consulting and Clinical Psychology. 

Gloster, A. T., Wittchen, H.-U., Einsle, F., Lang, T., Helbig-
Lang, S., Fydrich, T., et al. (2011). Psychological treatment 
for panic disorder with agoraphobia: A randomized controlled 
trial to examine the role of therapist-guided exposure 
in situ in CBT. Journal of Consulting and Clinical 
Psychology, 79, 406–420. 

Goisman, R. M., Goldenberg, I., Vasile, R. G., & Keller, M. B. 
(1995). Comorbidity of anxiety disorders in a multicenter 
anxiety study. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 36, 303–311. 

Goisman, R. M., Warshaw, M. G., Peterson, L. G., Rogers, 

M. P., Cuneo, P., Hunt, M. F., et al. (1994). Panic, agoraphobia, 
and panic disorder with agoraphobia: Data from 
a multicenter anxiety disorders study. Journal of Nervous 
and Mental Disease, 182, 72–79. 
Goldstein, A. J., & Chambless, D. L. (1978). A reanalysis of 
agoraphobia. Behavior Therapy, 9, 47–59. 

Goodwin, R. D., Fergusson, D. M., & Horwood, L. J. (2005). 
Childhood abuse and familial violence and the risk of 
panic attacks and panic disorder in young adulthood. Psychological 
Medicine, 35, 881–890. 

Gorman, J. M., Papp, L. A., Coplan, J. D., Martinez, J. M., 
Lennon, S., Goetz, R. R., et al. (1994). Anxiogenic effects 
of CO2 and hyperventilation in patients with panic disorder. 
American Journal of Psychiatry, 151(4), 547–553. 

Gould, R. A., & Clum, G. A. (1995). Self-help plus minimal 
therapist contact in the treatment of panic disorder: A replication 
and extension. Behavior Therapy, 26, 533–546. 

Gould, R. A., Clum, G. A., & Shapiro, D. (1993). The use 
of bibliotherapy in the treatment of panic: A preliminary 
investigation. Behavior Therapy, 24, 241–252. 

Gray, J. A. (1982). The neuropsychology of anxiety: An enquiry 
into the functions of the septo-hippocampal system. 
New York: Oxford University Press. 

Griez, E., & van den Hout, M. A. (1986). CO2 inhalation in 
the treatment of panic attacks. Behaviour Research and 
Therapy, 24, 145–150. 

Grilo, C. M., Money, R., Barlow, D. H., Goddard, A. W., Gorman, 
J. M., Hofmann, S. G., et al. (1998). Pretreatment 
patient factors predicting attrition from a multicenter randomized 
controlled treatment study for panic disorder. 
Comprehensive Psychiatry, 39, 323–332. 

Haby, M., Donnelly, M., Corry, J., & Vos, T. (2006). Cognitive 
behavioural therapy for depression, panic disorder and 
generalized anxiety disorder: A meta-regression of factors 
that may predict outcome. Australian and New Zealand 
Journal of Psychiatry, 40, 9–19. 

Hafner, R. J. (1984). Predicting the effects on husbands of behavior 
therapy for agoraphobia. Behaviour Research and 
Therapy, 22, 217–226. 

Hamilton, S. P., Fyer, A. J., Durner, M., Heiman, G. A., Baisre 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

de Leon, A., Hodge, S. E., et al. (2003). Further genetic evidence 
for a panic disorder syndrome mapping to chromosome 
13q. Proceedings of National Academy of Science 
USA, 100, 2550–2555. 

Hamilton, S. P., Slager, S. L., De Leon, A. B., Heiman, G. 
A., Klein, D. F., Hodge, S. E., et al. (2004). Evidence for 
genetic linkage between a polymorphism in the adenosine 
2A receptor and panic disorder. Neuropsychopharmacology, 
29, 558–565. 

Hamilton, S. P., Slager, S. L., Helleby, L., Heiman, G. A., 
Klein, D. F., Hodge, S. E., et al. (2001). No association 
or linkage between polymorphisms in the genes encoding 
cholecystokinin and the cholecystokinin B receptor and 
panic disorder. Molecular Psychiatry, 6, 59–65. 

Hand, I., & Lamontagne, Y. (1976). The exacerbation of interpersonal 
problems after rapid phobia removal. Psychotherapy: 
Theory, Research and Practice, 13, 405–411. 

Haslam, M. T. (1974). The relationship between the effect of 
lactate infusion on anxiety states and their amelioration by 
carbon dioxide inhalation. British Journal of Psychiatry, 
125, 88–90. 

Hayes, S. C., Strosahl, K. D., & Wilson, K. G. (1999). Acceptance 
and commitment therapy: An experiential approach 
to behavior change. New York: Guilford Press. 

Hayes, S. C., Wilson, K. G., Gifford, E. V., & Follette, V. M. 
(1996). Experiential avoidance and behavioral disorders: 
A functional dimensional approach to diagnosis and treatment. 
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 
64(6), 1152–1168. 

Hayward, C., Killen, J. D., Hammer, L. D., Litt, I. F., Wilson, 
D. M., Simmonds, B., et al. (1992). Pubertal stage 
and panic attack history in sixth- and seventh-grade girls. 
American Journal of Psychiatry, 149, 1239–1243. 

Hayward, C., Killen, J. D., Kraemer, H. C., & Taylor, C. B. 
(2000). Predictors of panic attacks in adolescents. Journal 
of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 
39(2), 1–8. 

Hecker, J. E., Losee, M. C., Fritzler, B. K., & Fink, C. M. 
(1996). Self-directed versus therapist-directed cognitive 
behavioral treatment for panic disorder. Journal of Anxiety 
Disorders, 10, 253–265. 

Hecker, J. E., Losee, M. C., Roberson-Nay, R., & Maki, K. 
(2004). Mastery of your anxiety and panic and brief therapist 
contact in the treatment of panic disorder. Journal of 
Anxiety Disorders, 18(2), 111–126. 

Helbig-Lang, S., & Petermann, F. (2010). Tolerate or eliminate?: 
A systematic review on the effects of safety behavior 
across anxiety disorders. Clinical Psychology: Science 
and Practice, 17(3), 218–233. 

Heldt, E., Manfro, G. G., Kipper, L., Blaya, C., Isolan, 
L., & Otto, M. W. (2006). One-year follow-up of 
pharmacotherapy-resistant patients with panic disorder 
treated with cognitive-behavior therapy: Outcome and 
predictors of remission. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 
44(5), 657–665. 

Hermans, D., Craske, M. G., Mineka, S., & Lovibond, P. F. 
(2006). Extinction in human fear conditioning. Biological 
Psychiatry, 60, 361–368. 

Heuzenroeder, L., Donnelly, M., Haby, M. M., Mihalopoulos, 
C., Rossell, R., Carter, R., et al. (2004). Cost-effectiveness 
of psychological and pharmacological interventions for 
generalized anxiety disorder and panic disorder. Australian 
and New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry, 38(8), 
602–612. 

Hibbert, G., & Pilsbury, D. (1989). Hyperventilation: Is it a 
cause of panic attacks? British Journal of Psychiatry, 155, 
805–809. 

Himadi, W., Cerny, J., Barlow, D., Cohen, S., & O’Brien, G. 
(1986). The relationship of marital adjustment to agoraphobia 
treatment outcome. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 
24, 107–115. 

Hoffart, A. (1995). A comparison of cognitive and guided 
mastery therapy of agoraphobia. Behaviour Research and 
Therapy, 33, 423–434. 

Hoffart, A. (1997). Interpersonal problems among patients 
suffering from panic disorder with agoraphobia before and 
after treatment. British Journal of Medical Psychology, 
70(2), 149–157. 

Hoffart, A., & Hedley, L. M. (1997). Personality traits among 
panic disorder with agoraphobia patients before and after 
symptom-focused treatment. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 
11, 77–87. 

Hoffart, A., Sexton, H., Hedley, L., & Martinsen, E. W. 
(2008). Mechanisms of change in cognitive therapy for 
panic disorder with agoraphobia. Journal of Behavior 
Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry, 39(3), 262–275. 

Hofmann, S. G., Shear, M. K., Barlow, D. H., Gorman, J. M., 
Hershberger, D., Patterson, M., et al. (1988). Effects of 
panic disorder treatments on personality disorder characteristics. 
Depression and Anxiety, 8(1), 14–20. 

Hofmann, S. G., Suvak, M. K., Barlow, D. H., Shear, M. K., 
Meuret, A. E., et al. (2007). Preliminary evidence for cognitive 
mediation during cognitive-behavioral therapy of 
panic disorder. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 
75(3), 374–379. 

Holden, A. E. O., O’Brien, G. T., Barlow, D. H., Stetson, D., 
& Infantino, A. (1983). Self-help manual for agoraphobia: 
A preliminary report of effectiveness. Behavior Therapy, 
14, 545–556. 

Holt, P., & Andrews, G. (1989). Hyperventilation and anxiety 
in panic disorder, agoraphobia, and generalized anxiety 
disorder. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 27, 453– 
460. 

Hope, D. A., Rapee, R. M., Heimberg, R. G., & Dombeck, 

M. J. (1990). Representations of the self in social phobia: 
Vulnerability to social threat. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 
14, 177–189. 
Hornsveld, H., Garssen, B., Fiedeldij Dop, M., & van Spiegel, 

P. (1990). Symptom reporting during voluntary hyperventilation 
and mental load: Implications for diagnosing 

Panic Disorder and Agoraphobia 

hyperventilation syndrome. Journal of Psychosomatic Research, 
34, 687–697. 

Huppert, J. D., Bufka, L. F., Barlow, D. H., Gorman, J. M., 
Shear, M. K., & Woods, S. W. (2001). Therapist, therapist 
variables, and cognitive-behavioral therapy outcome in a 
multicenter trial for panic disorder. Journal of Consulting 
and Clinical Psychology, 69(5), 747–755. 

Issakidis, C., & Andrews, G. (2004). Pretreatment attrition 
and dropout in an outpatient clinic for anxiety disorders. 
Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 109(6), 426–433. 

Ito, L. M., Noshirvani, H., Basoglu, M., & Marks, I. M. 
(1996). Does exposure to internal cues enhance exposure 
to external exposure to external cues in agoraphobia with 
panic. Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics, 65, 24–28. 

Izard, C. E. (1992). Basic emotions, relations among emotions, 
and emotion cognition relations. Psychological Review, 
99, 561–565. 

Jacob, R. G., Furman, J. M., Clark, D. B., & Durrant, J. D. 
(1992). Vestibular symptoms, panic, and phobia: Overlap 
and possible relationships. Annals of Clinical Psychiatry, 
4(3), 163–174. 

Kampfe, C. K., Gloster, A. T., Wittchen, H.-U., Helbig-Lang, 
S., Lang, T., & Gerlach, A. L. (2012). Experiential avoidance 
and anxiety sensitivity in patients with panic disorder 
and agoraphobia: Do both constructs measure the same? 
International Journal of Clinical and Health Psychology, 
12, 5–22. 

Kampman, M., Keijsers, G. P. J., Hoogduin, C. A. L., & Hendriks, 
G.-J. (2002). A randomized, double-blind, placebocontrolled 
study of the effects of adjunctive paroxetine 
in panic disorder patients unsuccessfully treated with 
cognitive-behavioral therapy alone. Journal of Clinical 
Psychiatry, 63(9), 772–777. 

Katon, W., Von Korff, M., Lin, E., Lipscomb, P., Russo, J., 
Wagner, E., et al. (1990). Distressed high utilizers of medical 
care: DSM-III-R diagnoses and treatment needs. General 
Hospital Psychiatry, 12(6), 355–362. 

Katschnig, H., & Amering, M. (1998). The long-term course 
of panic disorder and its predictors. Journal of Clinical 
Psychopharmacology, 18(6, Suppl. 2), 6S–11S. 

Keijsers, G. P., Kampman, M., & Hoogduin, C. A. (2001). 
Dropout prediction in cognitive behavior therapy for panic 
disorder. Behavior Therapy, 32(4), 739–749. 

Keijsers, G. P., Schaap, C. P., Hoogduin, C. A., & Lammers, 

M. W. (1995). Patient–therapist interaction in the behavioral 
treatment of panic disorder with agoraphobia. Behavior 
Modification, 19, 491–517. 
Keller, M. L., & Craske, M. G. (2008). Panic disorder and 
agoraphobia. In J. Hunsley & E. J. Mash (Eds.), A guide to 
assessments that work (pp. 229–253). New York: Oxford 
University Press. 

Kendler, K. S., Bulik, C. M., Silberg, J., Hettema, J. M., 
Myers, J., & Prescott, C. A. (2000). Childhood sexual 
abuse and adult psychiatric and substance use disorders 

in women: An epidemiological and co-twin analysis. Archives 
of General Psychiatry, 57, 953–959. 

Kendler, K. S., Heath, A. C., Martin, N. G., & Eaves, L. J. 
(1987). Symptoms of anxiety and symptoms of depression: 
Same genes, different environments? Archives of General 
Psychiatry, 44, 451–457. 

Kessler, R. C., Berglund, P., Demler, O., Jin, R., & Walters, E. 

E. (2005). Lifetime prevalence and age-of-onset distributions 
of DSM-IV disorders in the National Comorbidity 
Survey Replication. Archives of General Psychiatry, 62, 
593–602. 
Kessler, R. C., Chiu, W. T., Demler, O., & Walters, E. E. 
(2005). Lifetime prevalence and age-of-onset distributions 
of DSM-IV disorders in the National Comorbidity Survey 
Replication. Archives of General Psychiatry, 62(6), 
593–602. 

Kessler, R. C., Chiu, W. T., Jin, R., Ruscio, A. M., Shear, K., 
& Walters, E. E. (2006). The epidemiology of panic attacks, 
panic disorder, and agoraphobia in the National Comorbidity 
Survey Replication. Archives of General Psychiatry, 
63, 415–424. 

Kessler, R. C., Davis, C. G., & Kendler, K. S. (1997). Childhood 
adversity and adult psychiatric disorder in the U.S. 
National Comorbidity Survey. Psychological Medicine, 
27, 1101–1119. 

Kessler, R. C., McGonagle, K. A., Zhao, S., Nelson, C. B., 
Hughes, M., Eshkeman, S., et al. (1994). Lifetime and 12 
month prevalence of DSM-III-R psychiatric disorders in 
the United States: Results from the National Comorbidity 
Study. Archives of General Psychiatry, 51, 8–19. 

Kessler, R. C., Petukhova, M., Sampson, N. A., Zaslavsky, 

A. M., & Wittchen, H.-U. (2012). Twelve-month and 
life time prevalence and lifetime morbid risk of anxiety 
and mood disorders in the United States. International 
Journal of Methods in Psychiatric Research, 21(3), 169– 
184. 
Keyl, P. M., & Eaton, W. W. (1990). Risk factors for the onset 
of panic disorder and other panic attacks in a prospective, 
population-based study. American Journal of Epidemiology, 
131, 301–311. 

Kikuchi, M., Komuro, R., Hiroshi, O., Kidani, T., Hanaoka, 
A., & Koshino, Y. (2005). Panic disorder with and without 
agoraphobia: Comorbidity within a half-year of the onset 
of panic disorder. Psychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences, 
58, 639–643. 

Kindt, M., Soeter, M., & Vervliet, B. (2009). Beyond extinction: 
Erasing human fear responses and preventing the return 
of fear. Nature Neuroscience, 12, 256–258. 

Kircanski, K., Craske, M. G., Epstein, A. M., & Wittchen, 
H.-U. (2009). Subtypes of panic attacks: A critical review 
of the empirical literature. Depression and Anxiety, 26, 
878–887. 

Kircanski, K., Mortazavi, A., Castriotta, N., Baker, A., Mystkowski, 
J., Yi, R., et al. (2011). Challenges to the traditional 
exposure paradigm: variability in exposure therapy 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

for contamination fears. Journal of Behavior Therapy and 
Experimental Psychiatry, 43, 745–751. 

Kiropoulos, L. A., Klein, B., Austin, D. W., Gilson, K., Pier, 
C., Mitchell J., et al. (2008). Is internet-based CBT for 
panic disorder and agoraphobia as effective as face-to-face 
CBT? Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 22, 1273–1284. 

Kraft, A. R., & Hoogduin, C. A. (1984). The hyperventilation 
syndrome: A pilot study of the effectiveness of treatment. 
British Journal of Psychiatry, 145, 538–542. 

Kroeze, S., & van den Hout, M. A. (2000). Selective attention 
for cardiac information in panic patients. Behaviour 
Research and Therapy, 38, 63–72. 

Krystal, J. H., Woods, S. W., Hill, C. L., & Charney, D. S. 
(1991). Characteristics of panic attack subtypes: Assessment 
of spontaneous panic, situational panic, sleep panic, 
and limited symptom attacks. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 
32(6), 474–480. 

Lake, R. I., Eaves, L. J., Maes, H. H., Heath, A. C., & Martin, 

N. G. (2000). Further evidence against the environmental 
transmission of individual differences in neuroticism from 
a collaborative study of 45,850 twins and relatives of two 
continents. Behavior Genetics, 30(3), 223–233. 
Lang, A. J., & Craske, M. G. (2000). Manipulations of exposure 
based therapy to reduce return of fear: a replication. 
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 38, 1–12. 

Lehman, C. L., Brown, T. A., & Barlow, D. H. (1998). Effects 
of cognitive-behavioral treatment for panic disorder 
with agoraphobia on concurrent alcohol abuse. Behavior 
Therapy, 29, 423–433. 

Lelliott, P., Marks, I., McNamee, G., & Tobena, A. (1989). 
Onset of panic disorder with agoraphobia: Toward an 
integrated model. Archives of General Psychiatry, 46, 
1000–1004. 

Levitt, J. T., Brown, T. A., Orsillo, S. M., & Barlow, D. H. 
(2004). The effects of acceptance versus suppression of 
emotion on subjective and psychophysiological response 
to carbon dioxide challenge in patients with panic disorder. 
Behavior Therapy, 35, 747–766. 

Lewis-Fernandez, R., Hinton, D. E., Laria, A. J., Patterson, 

E. H., Hofmann, S. G., Craske, M. et al. (2010). Culture 
and the anxiety disorders: recommendations for DSM-V. 
Depression and Anxiety, 27, 212–229. 
Lidren, D. M., Watkins, P., Gould, R. A., Clum, G. A., Asterino, 
M., & Tulloch, H. L. (1994). A comparison of 
bibliotherapy and group therapy in the treatment of panic 
disorder. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 
62, 865–869. 

Lovibond, P. F., Davis, N. R., & O’Flaherty, A. S. (2000). 
Protection from extinction in human fear conditioning. 
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 38, 967–983. 

Lissek, S., Powers, A. S., McClure, E. B., Phelps, E. A., Wolderhawariat, 
G., et al. (2005). Classical fear conditioning 
in the anxiety disorders: A meta-analysis. Behaviour Research 
and Therapy, 43, 1391–1424. 

Lissek, S., Rabin, S. J., Heller, R. E., Lukenbaugh, D., Geraci, 

M., Pine, D. S., et al. (2010). Overgeneralization of conditioned 
fear as a pathogenic marker of panic disorder. 
American Journal of Psychiatry, 167(1), 47–55. 

Lissek, S., Rabin, S. J., McDowell, D. J., Divir, S., Bradford, 

D. E., Geraci, M., et al. (2009). Impaired discriminative 
fear-conditioning resulting from elevated fear responding 
to learned safety cues among individuals with panic disorder. 
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 47(2), 111–118. 
Maidenberg, E., Chen, E., Craske, M., Bohn, P., & Bystritsky, 

A. (1996). Specificity of attentional bias in panic disorder 
and social phobia. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 10, 
529–541. 
Maier, S. F., Laudenslager, M. L., & Ryan, S. M. (1985). 
Stressor controllability, immune function and endogenous 
opiates. In F. R. Brush & J. B. Overmeier (Eds.), Affect, 
conditioning and cognition: Essays on the determinants 
of behavior (pp. 183–201). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. 

Maller, R. G., & Reiss, S. (1992). Anxiety sensitivity in 1984 
and panic attacks in 1987. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 
6(3), 241–247. 

Mannuzza, S., Fyer, A. J., Liebowitz, M. R., & Klein, D. F. 
(1990). Delineating the boundaries of social phobia: Its 
relationship to panic disorder and agoraphobia. Journal of 
Anxiety Disorders, 4(1), 41–59. 

Marchand, A., Goyer, L. R., Dupuis, G., & Mainguy, 

N. (1998). Personality disorders and the outcome of 
cognitive-behavioural treatment of panic disorder with 
agoraphobia. Canadian Journal of Behavioural Science, 
30(1), 14–23. 
Margraf, J., Taylor, C. B., Ehlers, A., Roth, W. T., & Agras, 

W. S. (1987). Panic attacks in the natural environment. 
Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 175, 558–565. 
Marks, I. M., Swinson, R. P., Basoglu, M., Kuck, K., 
Noshirvani, H., O’Sullivan, G., et al. (1993). Alprazolam 
and exposure alone and combined in panic disorder with 
agoraphobia: A controlled study in London and Toronto. 
British Journal of Psychiatry, 162, 776–787. 

Martin, N. G., Jardine, R., Andrews, G., & Heath, A. C. 
(1988). Anxiety disorders and neuroticism: Are there genetic 
factors specific to panic? Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 
77, 698–706. 

Mavissakalian, M., & Hamman, M. (1987). DSM-III personality 
disorder in agoraphobia: II. Changes with treatment. 
Comprehensive Psychiatry, 28, 356–361. 

McLean, P. D., Woody, S., Taylor, S., & Koch, W. J. (1998). 
Comorbid panic disorder and major depression: Implications 
for cognitive-behavioral therapy. Journal of Consulting 
and Clinical Psychology, 66, 240–247. 

McNally, R. J., & Lorenz, M. (1987). Anxiety sensitivity in 
agoraphobics. Journal of Behavior Therapy and Experimental 
Psychiatry, 18(1), 3–11. 

McNally, R. J., Riemann, B. C., Louro, C. E., Lukach, B. 
M., & Kim, E. (1992). Cognitive processing of emotional 
information in panic disorder. Behaviour Research and 
Therapy, 30, 143–149. 


Panic Disorder and Agoraphobia 

McNamee, G., O’Sullivan, G., Lelliott, P., & Marks, I. M. 
(1989). Telephone-guided treatment for housebound agoraphobics 
with panic disorder: Exposure vs. relaxation. 
Behavior Therapy, 20, 491–497. 

Mellman, T. A., & Uhde, T. W. (1989). Sleep panic attacks: 
New clinical findings and theoretical implications. American 
Journal of Psychiatry, 146, 1204–1207. 

Messenger, C., & Shean, G. (1998). The effects of anxiety 
sensitivity and history of panic on reactions to stressors in 
a non-clinical sample. Journal of Behavior Therapy, 29, 
279–288. 

Meuret, A. E., Rosenfield, D., Seidel, A., Bhaskara, L., & 
Hofmann, S. G. (2010). Respiratory and cognitive mediators 
of treatment change in panic disorder: Evidence for 
intervention specificity. Journal of Consulting and Clinical 
Psychology, 78, 691–704. 

Meuret, A. E., Twohig, M. P., Rosenfield, D., Hayes, S. C., 
& Craske, M. G. (2012). Brief acceptance and commitment 
therapy and exposure for panic disorder: A pilot 
study. Cognitive and Behavioral Practice, 19(4), 606– 
618. 

Meuret, A. E., Wilhelm, F. H., Ritz, T., & Roth, W. T. (2008). 
Feedback of end-tidal pCO2 as a therapeutic approach for 
panic disorder. Journal of Psychiatric Research, 42(7), 
560–568. 

Michelson, L., Mavissakalian, M., Marchione, K., Ulrich, 
R., Marchione, N., & Testa, S. (1990). Psychophysiological 
outcome of cognitive, behavioral, and psychophysiologically 
based treatments of agoraphobia. Behaviour 
Research and Therapy, 28, 127–139. 

Milton, F., & Hafner, J. (1979). The outcome of behavior 
therapy for agoraphobia in relation to marital adjustment. 
Archives of General Psychiatry, 36, 807–811. 

Mineka, S., Cook, M., & Miller, S. (1984). Fear conditioned 
with escapable and inescapable shock: The effects of a 
feedback stimulus. Journal of Experimental Psychology: 
Animal Behavior Processes, 10, 307–323. 

Moisan, D., & Engels, M. L. (1995). Childhood trauma and 
personality disorder in 43 women with panic disorder. 
Psychological Reports, 76, 1133–1134. 

Murphy, M. T., Michelson, L. K., Marchione, K., Marchione, 
N., & Testa, S. (1998). The role of self-directed in vivo 
exposure in combination with cognitive therapy, relaxation 
training, or therapist-assisted exposure in the treatment of 
panic disorder with agoraphobia. Behaviour Research and 
Therapy, 12, 117–138. 

Mystkowski, J. L., Craske, M. G., Echiverri, A. M., & Labus, 

J. S. (2006). Mental reinstatement of context and return 
of fear in spider-fearful participants. Behavior Therapy, 
37(1), 49–60. 
Nader, K., Schafe, G. E., & Le Doux, J. E. (2000). Fear memories 
require protein synthesis in the amygdala for reconsolidation 
after retrieval. Nature, 406, 722–726. 

Neron, S., Lacroix, D., & Chaput, Y. (1995). Group vs individual 
cognitive behaviour therapy in panic disorder: An 

open clinical trial with a six month follow-up. Canadian 
Journal of Behavioural Science, 27, 379–392. 

Neumann, D. L., Lipp, O. V., & Cory, S. E. (2007). Conducting 
extinction in multiple contexts does not necessarily 
attenuate the renewal of shock expectancy in a fearconditioning 
procedure with humans. Behaviour Research 
and Therapy, 45, 385–394. 

Niles, A. N., Sherbourne, C., Roy-Byrne, P., Stein, M., Sullivan, 
G., Bystritsky, A., et al. (2013). Anxiety treatment 
improves physical functioning with oblique scoring of the 
SF-12 Short Form Health Survey. General Hospital Psychiatry, 
35(3), 291–296. 

Norberg, M. M., Krystal, J. H., & Tolin, D. F. (2008). A metaanalysis 
of D-cycloserine and the facilitation of fear extinction 
and exposure therapy. Biological Psychiatry, 63, 
1118–1126. 

Norton, G. R., Cox, B. J., & Malan, J. (1992). Nonclinical 
panickers: A critical review. Clinical Psychology Review, 
12, 121–139. 

Norton, P., & Price, E. (2007). A meta-analytic review of 
adult cognitive-behavioral treatment outcome across the 
anxiety disorders. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 
195, 521–531. 

Noyes, R., Clancy, J., Garvey, M. J., & Anderson, D. J. (1987). 
Is agoraphobia a variant of panic disorder or a separate illness? 
Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 1, 3–13. 

Noyes, R., Crowe, R. R., Harris, E. L., Hamra, B. J., 
McChesney, C.M., & Chaudhry, D. R. (1986). Relationship 
between panic disorder and agoraphobia: A family 
study. Archives of General Psychiatry, 43, 227–232. 

Noyes, R., Reich, J., Suelzer, M., & Christiansen, J. (1991). 
Personality traits associated with panic disorder: Change 
associated with treatment. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 32, 
282–294. 

Okamura, N., Garau, C., Duangdao, D. M., Clark, S. D., 
Jungling, K., Hans-Christian, P., et al. (2011). Neuropeptide 
S enhances memory during the consolidation phase 
and interacts with noradrenergic systems in the brain. 
Neuropsychopharmacology, 36(4), 744–752. 

Öst, L.-G. (1988). Applied relaxation vs. progressive relaxation 
in the treatment of panic disorder. Behaviour Research 
and Therapy, 26, 13–22. 

Öst, L.-G., Thulin, U., & Ramnero, J. (2004). Cognitive 
behavior therapy vs exposure in vivo in the treatment of 
panic disorder with agoraphobia. Behaviour Research and 
Therapy, 42(1), 1105–1127. 

Öst, L. G., & Westling, B. E. (1995). Applied relaxation vs 
cognitive behavior therapy in the treatment of panic disorder. 
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 33, 145–158. 

Öst, L. G., Westling, B. E., & Hellström, K. (1993). Applied 
relaxation, exposure in vivo, and cognitive methods in the 
treatment of panic disorder with agoraphobia. Behaviour 
Research and Therapy, 31, 383–394. 

Otto, M. W., Pollack, M. H., & Sabatino, S. A. (1996). Maintenance 
of remission following cognitive behavior therapy 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

for panic disorder: Possible deleterious effects of concurrent 
medication treatment. Behavior Therapy, 27, 473– 
482. 

Otto, M. W., Tolin, D. F., Simon, N. M., Pearlson, G. D., 
Basden, S., Meunier, S. A., et al. (2010). Efficacy of Dcycloserine 
for enhancing response to cognitive-behavior 
therapy for panic disorder. Biological Psychiatry, 67(4), 
365–370. 

Pauli, P., Amrhein, C., Muhlberger, A., Dengler, W., & Wiedemann, 
G. (2005). Electrocortical evidence for an early 
abnormal processing of panic-related words in panic disorder 
patients. International Journal of Psychophysiology, 
57, 33–41. 

Payne, L. A., White, K. S., Gallagher, M. W., Woods, S. 
W., Shear, M. K., Gorman, J. M., et al. (2012). Secondstage 
treatments for relative non-responders to cognitivebehavioral 
therapy (CBT) for panic disorder with and 
without agoraphobia. Manuscript submitted for publication. 


Pennebaker, J. W., & Roberts, T. (1992). Toward a his and 
hers theory of emotion: Gender differences in visceral 
perception. Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 
11(30), 199–212. 

Perna, G., Bertani, A., Arancio, C., Ronchi, P., & Bellodi, 

L. (1995). Laboratory response of patients with panic and 
obsessive–compulsive disorders to 35% CO2 challenges. 
American Journal of Psychiatry, 152, 85–89. 
Prenoveau, J. M., Zinbarg, R. E., Craske, M. G., Mineka, S., 
Griffith, J. W., & Epstein, A. (2010). Testing a hierarchical 
model of anxiety and depression in adolescents: A trilevel 
model. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 24, 334–344. 

Rachman, S., Lopatka, C., & Levitt, K. (1988). Experimental 
analyses of panic: II. Panic patients. Behaviour Research 
and Therapy, 26, 33–40. 

Rachman, S., Shafran, R., Radomsky, A. S., & Zysk, E. 
(2011). Reducing contamination by exposure plus safety 
behaviour. Journal of Behavior Therapy and Experimental 
Psychiatry, 42, 397–404. 

Rapee, R. (1986). Differential response to hyperventilation in 
panic disorder and generalized anxiety disorder. Journal 
of Abnormal Psychology, 95, 24–28. 

Rapee, R. M. (1994). Detection of somatic sensations in 
panic disorder. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 32, 
825–831. 

Rapee, R. M., Brown, T. A., Antony, M. M., & Barlow, D. 

H. (1992). Response to hyperventilation and inhalation of 
5.5% carbon dioxide-enriched air across the DSM-III-R 
anxiety disorders. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 101, 
538–552. 
Rapee, R. M., Craske, M. G., & Barlow, D. H. (1990). Subject 
described features of panic attacks using a new selfmonitoring 
form. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 4, 171– 
181. 

Rapee, R. M., Craske, M. G., & Barlow, D. H. (1995). Assessment 
instrument for panic disorder that includes fear 

of sensation-producing activities: The Albany Panic and 
Phobia Questionnaire. Anxiety, 1, 114–122. 

Rapee, R. M., Craske, M. G., Brown, T. A., & Barlow, D. H. 
(1996). Measurement of perceived control over anxietyrelated 
events. Behavior Therapy, 27(2), 279–293. 

Rapee, R. M., & Medoro, L. (1994). Fear of physical sensations 
and trait anxiety as mediators of the response to 
hyperventilation in nonclinical subjects. Journal of Abnormal 
Psychology, 103(4), 693–699. 

Rapee, R. M., & Murrell, E. (1988). Predictors of agoraphobic 
avoidance. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 2, 203–217. 

Rathus, J. H., Sanderson, W. C., Miller, A. L., & Wetzler, S. 
(1995). Impact of personality functioning on cognitive behavioral 
treatment of panic disorder: A preliminary report. 
Journal of Personality Disorders, 9, 160–168. 

Razran, G. (1961). The observable unconscious and the inferable 
conscious in current soviet psychophysiology: Interoceptive 
conditioning, semantic conditioning, and the 
orienting reflex. Psychological Review, 68, 81–147. 

Reich, J., Perry, J. C., Shera, D., Dyck, I., Vasile, R., Goisman, 

R. M., et al. (1994). Comparison of personality disorders 
in different anxiety disorder diagnoses: Panic, agoraphobia, 
generalized anxiety, and social phobia. Annals of 
Clinical Psychiatry, 6(2), 125–134. 
Reiss, S. (1980). Pavlovian conditioning and human fear: An 
expectancy model. Behavior Therapy, 11, 380–396. 

Reiss, S., Peterson, R., Gursky, D., & McNally, R. (1986). 
Anxiety sensitivity, anxiety frequency, and the prediction 
of fearfulness. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 24, 1–8. 

Rescorla, R. A. (2006). Deepened extinction from compound 
stimulus presentation. Journal of Experimental Psychology: 
Animal Behavior Processes, 32, 135–144. 

Richards, J., Klein, B., & Carlbring, P. (2003). Internet-based 
treatment for panic disorder. Cognitive Behaviour Therapy, 
32, 125–135. 

Richards, J. C., Klein, B., & Austin, D. W. (2006). Internet 
cognitive behavioural therapy for panic disorder: Does the 
inclusion of stress management information improve endstate 
functioning? Clinical Psychologist, 10(1), 2–15. 

Rowe, M. K., & Craske, M. G. (1998). Effects of an 
expanding-spaced vs massed exposure schedule on fear 
reduction and return of fear. Behaviour Research and 
Therapy, 36, 701–717. 

Roy-Byrne, P. P., & Cowley, D. S. (1995). Course and outcome 
in panic disorder: A review of recent follow-up studies. 
Anxiety, 1, 151–160. 

Roy-Byrne, P., Craske, M. G., Stein, M. B., Sullivan, G., Bystritsky, 
A., Katon, W., et al. (2005). A randomized effectiveness 
trial of cognitive-behavioral therapy and medication 
for primary care panic disorder. Archives of General 
Psychiatry, 62, 290–298. 

Roy-Byrne, P., Craske, M. G., Sullivan, G., Rose, R. D., Edlund, 
M. J., Lang, A. J., et al. (2010). Delivery of evidencebased 
treatment for multiple anxiety disorders in primary 
care. Journal of American Medicine, 303(19), 1921–1928. 


Panic Disorder and Agoraphobia 

Roy-Byrne, P., Stein, M. B., Russo, J., Craske, M. G., Katon, 
W., Sullivan, G., et al. (2005). Medical illness and response 
to treatment in primary care panic disorder. General 
Hospital Psychiatry, 27(4), 237–243. 

Roy-Byrne, P. P., Mellman, T. A., & Uhde, T. W. (1988). 
Biologic findings in panic disorder: Neuroendocrine and 
sleep-related abnormalities [Special issue: Perspectives on 
Panic-Related Disorders]. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 
2, 17–29. 

Roy-Byrne, P. P., Stein, M. B., Russo, J., Mercier, E., Thomas, 
R., McQuaid, J., et al. (1999). Panic disorder in the primary 
care setting: Comorbidity, disability, service utilization, 
and treatment. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 60(7), 
492–499. 

Safren, S. A., Gershuny, B. S., Marzol, P., Otto, M. W., & Pollack, 
M. H. (2002). History of childhood abuse in panic 
disorder, social phobia, and generalized anxiety disorder. 
Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 190(7), 453–456. 

Salkovskis, P., Clark, D., & Hackmann, A. (1991). Treatment 
of panic attacks using cognitive therapy without exposure 
or breathing retraining. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 
29, 161–166. 

Salkovskis, P. M. (1991). The importance of behaviour in the 
maintenance of anxiety and panic: A cognitive account 
[Special issue: The changing Face of Behavioural Psychotherapy]. 
Behavioural Psychotherapy, 19(1), 6–19. 

Salkovskis, P. M., Clark, D. M., & Gelder, M. G. (1996). 
Cognition–behaviour links in the persistence of panic. Behaviour 
Research and Therapy, 34, 453–458. 

Schade, A., Marquenie, L. A., van Balkom, A. J., Koeter, M. 
W., de Beurs, E., van den Brink, W., et al. (2005). The 
effectiveness of anxiety treatment on alcohol-dependent 
patients with a comorbid phobic disorder: A randomized 
controlled trial. Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental 
Research, 29(5), 794–800. 

Schmidt, N. B., Lerew, D. R., & Jackson, R. J. (1997). The 
role of anxiety sensitivity in the pathogenesis of panic: 
Prospective evaluation of spontaneous panic attacks during 
acute stress. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 106, 
355–364. 

Schmidt, N. B., Lerew, D. R., & Jackson, R. J. (1999). Prospective 
evaluation of anxiety sensitivity in the pathogenesis 
of panic: Replication and extension. Journal of Abnormal 
Psychology, 108, 532–537. 

Schmidt, N. B., McCreary, B. T., Trakowski, J. J., Santiago, 

H. T., Woolaway-Bickel, K., & Ialong, N. (2003). Effects 
of cognitive behavioral treatment on physical health status 
in patients with panic disorder. Behavior Therapy, 34(1), 
49–63. 
Schmidt, N. B., Woolaway-Bickel, K., Trakowski, J., Santiago, 
H., Storey, J., Koselka, M., et al. (2000). Dismantling 
cognitive-behavioral treatment for panic disorder: Questioning 
the utility of breathing retraining. Journal of Consulting 
and Clinical Psychology, 68(3), 417–424. 

Schneider, A. J., Mataix-Cols, D., Marks, I. M., & Bachofen, 

M. (2005). Internet-guided self-help with or without exposure 
therapy for phobic and panic disorders. Psychotherapy 
and Psychosomatics, 74(3), 154–164. 
Schumacher, J., Jamra, R. A., Becker, T., Klopp, N., Franke, 
P., Jacob, C., et al. (2005). Investigation of the DAOA/ 
G30 locus in panic disorder. Molecular Psychiatry, 10, 
428–429. 

Seidel, A., Rosenfield, D., Bhaskara, L., Hofmann, S. G., & 
Meuret, A. E. (2009). Pathways of biobehavioral change 
in exposure therapy of panic disorder. Paper presented 
at the 43rd Annual Convention of the Association of Advancement 
for Behavioral and Cognitive Therapies, New 
York. 

Sharp, D. M., Power, K. G., Simpson, R. J., Swanson, V., & 
Anstee, J. A. (1997). Global measures of outcome in a controlled 
comparison of pharmacological and psychological 
treatment of panic disorder and agoraphobia in primary 
care. British Journal of General Practice, 47, 150–155. 

Sharp, D. M., Power, K. G., & Swanson, V. (2004). A comparison 
of the efficacy and acceptability of group versus 
individual cognitive behaviour therapy in the treatment of 
panic disorder and agoraphobia in primary care. Clinical 
Psychology and Psychotherapy, 11(2), 73–82. 

Shear, M. K., Brown, T. A., Barlow, D. H., Money, R., Sholomskas, 
D. E, Woods, S. W., et al. (1997). Multicenter 
collaborative Panic Disorder Severity Scale. American 
Journal of Psychiatry, 154, 1571–1575. 

Shear, M. K., Rucci, P., Williams, J., Frank, E., Grochocinski, 
V., Vander-Bilt, J., et al. (2001). Reliability and validity of 
the Panic Disorder Severity Scale: Replication and extension. 
Journal of Psychiatric Research, 35(5), 293–296. 

Shear, M. K., & Schulberg, H. C. (1995). Anxiety disorders 
in primary care. Bulletin of the Menninger Clinic, 59(2, 
Suppl. A), A73–A85. 

Shulman, I. D., Cox, B. J., Swinson, R. P., Kuch, K., & Reichman, 
J. T. (1994). Precipitating events, locations and reactions 
associated with initial unexpected panic attacks. 
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 32, 17–20. 

Sloan, T., & Telch, M. J. (2002). The effects of safety-seeking 
behavior and guided threat reappraisal on fear reduction 
during exposure: An experimental investigation. Behaviour 
Research and Therapy, 40(3), 235–251. 

Soeter, M., & Kindt, M. (2010). Dissociating response systems: 
Erasing fear from memory. Neurobiology of Learning 
and Memory, 94(1), 30–41. 

Sokolowska, M., Siegel, S., & Kim, J. A. (2002). Intraadministration 
associations: Conditional hyperalgesia elicited by 
morphine onset cues. Journal of Experimental Psychology: 
Animal Behavior Processes, 28(3), 309–320. 

Sotres-Bayon, F., Cain, C. K., & LeDoux, J. E. (2006). Brain 
mechanisms of fear extinction: historical perspectives on 
the contribution of prefrontal cortex. Biological Psychiatry, 
60, 329–336. 

Spiegel, D. A., Bruce, T. J., Gregg, S. F., & Nuzzarello, A. 
(1994). Does cognitive behavior therapy assist slow-taper 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

alprazolam discontinuation in panic disorder? American 
Journal of Psychiatry, 151(6), 876–881. 

Stein, M. B., Walker, J. R., Anderson, G., Hazen, A. L., Ross, 

C. A., Eldridge, G., et al. (1996). Childhood physical and 
sexual abuse in patients with anxiety disorders and a community 
sample. American Journal of Psychiatry, 153, 
275–277. 
Sturges, L. V., Goetsch, V. L., Ridley, J., & Whittal, M. 
(1998). Anxiety sensitivity and response to hyperventilation 
challenge: Physiologic arousal, interoceptive acuity, 
and subjective distress. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 
12(2), 103–115. 

Suárez, L., Bennett, S., Goldstein, C., & Barlow, D. H. 
(2008). Understanding anxiety disorders from a “triple 
vulnerabilities” framework. In M. M. Anthony & M. B. 
Stein (Eds.), Oxford handbook of anxiety and related disorders 
(pp. 153–172). New York: Oxford University Press. 

Swinson, R. P., Fergus, K. D., Cox, B. J., & Wickwire, K. 
(1995). Efficacy of telephone-administered behavioral 
therapy for panic disorder with agoraphobia. Behaviour 
Research and Therapy, 33, 465–469. 

Taylor, S., Koch, W. J., & McNally, R. J. (1992). How does 
anxiety sensitivity vary across the anxiety disorders? 
Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 6, 249–259. 

Taylor, S., Zvolensky, M. J., Cox, B .J., Deacon, B., Heimberg, 

R. G., Ledley, D. R., et al. (2007). Robust dimensions of 
anxiety sensitivity: development and initial validation of 
the Anxiety Sensitivity Index–3. Psychological Assessment, 
19(2), 176–188. 
Teachman, B. A., Marker, C. D., & Smith-Janik, S. B. (2008). 
Automatic associations and panic disorder: Trajectories of 
change over the course of treatment. Journal of Consulting 
and Clinical Psychology, 76(6), 988–1002. 

Telch, M. J., Brouillard, M., Telch, C. F., Agras, W. S., & 
Taylor, C. B. (1989). Role of cognitive appraisal in panicrelated 
avoidance. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 27, 
373–383. 

Telch, M. J., Lucas, J. A., & Nelson, P. (1989). Nonclinical 
panic in college students: An investigation of prevalence 
and symptomatology. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 
98, 300–306. 

Telch, M. J., Lucas, J. A., Schmidt, N. B., Hanna, H. H., LaNae, 
Jaimez, T., et al. (1993). Group cognitive-behavioral treatment 
of panic disorder. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 
31, 279–287. 

Telch, M. J., Sherman, M., & Lucas, J. (1989). Anxiety sensitivity: 
Unitary personality trait or domain specific appraisals? 
Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 3, 25–32. 

Thorgeirsson, T. E., Oskarsson, H., Desnica, N., Kostic, J. P., 
Stefansson, J. G., Kolbeinsson, H., et al. (2003). Anxiety 
with panic disorder linked to chromosome 9q in Iceland. 
American Journal of Human Genetics, 72, 1221–1230. 

Thyer, B. A., Himle, J., Curtis, G. C., Cameron, O. G., & 
Nesse, R. M. (1985). A comparison of panic disorder and 

agoraphobia with panic attacks. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 
26, 208–214. 

Tiemens, B. G., Ormel, J., & Simon, G. E. (1996). Occurrence, 
recognition, and outcome of psychological disorders 
in primary care. American Journal of Psychiatry, 
153, 636–644. 

Tsao, J. C. I., Lewin, M. R., & Craske, M. G. (1998). The effects 
of cognitive-behavior therapy for panic disorder on 
comorbid conditions. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 12, 
357–371. 

Tsao, J. C. I., Mystkowski, J. L., Zucker, B. G., & Craske, 

M. G. (2002). Effects of cognitive-behavioral therapy for 
panic disorder on comorbid conditions: Replication and 
extension. Behavior Therapy, 33, 493–509. 
Tsao, J. C. I., Mystkowski, J. L., Zucker, B. G., & Craske, 

M. G. (2005). Impact of cognitive-behavioral therapy for 
panic disorder on comorbidity: A controlled investigation. 
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 43, 959–970. 
Uhde, T. W. (1994). The anxiety disorders: Phenomenology 
and treatment of core symptoms and associated sleep 
disturbance. In M. Kryger, T. Roth, & W. Dement (Eds.), 
Principles and practice of sleep medicine (pp. 871–898). 
Philadelphia: Saunders. 

van Balkom, A. J., de Beurs, E., Koele, P., Lange, A., & van 
Dyck, R. (1996). Long-term benzodiazepine use is associated 
with smaller treatment gain in panic disorder with 
agoraphobia. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 
184, 133–135. 

van Beek, N., Schruers, K. R., & Friez, E. J. (2005). Prevalence 
of respiratory disorders in first-degree relatives of 
panic disorder patients. Journal of Affective Disorders, 87, 
337–340. 

van den Hout, M., Arntz, A., & Hoekstra, R. (1994). Exposure 
reduced agoraphobia but not panic, and cognitive therapy 
reduced panic but not agoraphobia. Behaviour Research 
and Therapy, 32, 447–451. 

van den Hout, M., Brouwers, C., & Oomen, J. (2006). Clinically 
diagnosed Axis II co-morbidity and the short term 
outcome of CBT for Axis I disorders. Clinical Psychology 
and Psychotherapy, 13(1), 56–63. 

van Megen, H. J., Westenberg, H. G., Den Boer, J. A., & Kahn, 

R. S. (1996). The panic-inducing properties of the cholecystokinin 
tetrapeptide CCK4 in patients with panic disorder. 
European Neuropsychopharmacology, 6, 187–194. 
Vansteenwegen, D., Vervliet, B., Iberico, C., Baeyens, F., van 
den Bergh, O., & Hermans, D. (2007). The repeated confrontation 
with videotapes of spiders in multiple contexts 
attenuates renewal of fear in spider-anxious students. Behavior 
Research and Therapy, 45(6), 1169–1179. 

Veltman, D. J., van Zijderveld, G., Tilders, F. J., & van Dyck, 

R. (1996). Epinephrine and fear of bodily sensations in 
panic disorder and social phobia. Journal of Psychopharmacology, 
10(4), 259–265. 
Verburg, K., Griez, E., Meijer, J., & Pols, H. (1995). Respira



Panic Disorder and Agoraphobia 

tory disorders as a possible predisposing factor for panic 
disorder. Journal of Affective Disorders, 33, 129–134. 

Vos, S. P., Huibers, M. J., Diels, L., & Arntz, A. (2012). 
A randomized clinical trial of cognitive behavioral therapy 
and interpersonal psychotherapy for panic disorder 
with agoraphobia. Psychological Medicine, 42(12), 2661– 
2672. 

Wade, W. A., Treat, T. A., & Stuart, G. L. (1998). Transporting 
an empirically supported treatment for panic disorder 
to a service clinic setting: A benchmarking strategy. 
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 66, 
231–239. 

Walker, D. L., & Davis, M. (2002). The role of amygdala glutamate 
receptors in fear learning, fear-potentiated startle, 
and extinction. Pharmacology, 71, 379–392. 

Wardle, J., Hayward, P., Higgitt, A., Stabl, M., Blizard, R., & 
Gray, J. (1994). Effects of concurrent diazepam treatment 
on the outcome of exposure therapy in agoraphobia. Behaviour 
Research and Therapy, 32, 203–215. 

Watson, D., & Clark, L. A. (1984). Negative affectivity: The 
disposition to experience aversive emotional states. Psychological 
Bulletin, 96(3), 465–490. 

Weems, C. F., Hayward, C., Killen, J., & Taylor, C. B. (2002). 
A longitudinal investigation of anxiety sensitivity in adolescence. 
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 111(3), 471– 
477. 

Welkowitz, L., Papp, L., Cloitre, M., Liebowitz, M., Martin, 
L., & Gorman, J. (1991). Cognitive-behavior therapy for 
panic disorder delivered by psychopharmacologically oriented 
clinicians. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 
179, 473–477. 

Westra, H. A., Stewart, S. H., & Conrad, B. E. (2002). Naturalistic 
manner of benzodiazepine use and cognitive behavioral 
therapy outcome in panic disorder and agoraphobia. 
Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 16(3), 223–246. 

White, K. S., Allen, L. B., Barlow, D. H., Gorman, J. M., 
Shear, M. K., & Woods, S. W. (2010). Attrition in a multicenter 
clinical trial of panic disorder. Journal of Nervous 
and Mental Diseases, 198, 665–671. 

White, K. S., Payne, L. A., Gorman, J. M., Shear, M. K., 
Woods, S. W., Saska, J. R., et al. (2013). Does maintenance 
CBT contribute to long-term treatment response of panic 

disorder with or without agoraphobia?: A randomized controlled 
clinical trial. Journal of Consulting and Clinical 
Psychology, 81, 47–57. 

Wilkinson, D. J., Thompson, J. M., Lambert, G. W., Jennings, 
G. L., Schwarz, R. G., Jefferys, D., et al. (1998). 
Sympathetic activity in patients with panic disorder at rest, 
under laboratory mental stress, and during panic attacks. 
Archives of General Psychiatry, 55(6), 511–520. 

Williams, K. E., & Chambless, D. (1990). The relationship 
between therapist characteristics and outcome of in vivo 
exposure treatment for agoraphobia. Behavior Therapy, 
21, 111–116. 

Williams, K. E., & Chambless, D. L. (1994). The results of 
exposure-based treatment in agoraphobia. In S. Friedman 
(Ed.), Anxiety disorders in African Americans (pp. 149– 
165). New York: Springer. 

Williams, S. L., & Falbo, J. (1996). Cognitive and 
performance-based treatments for panic attacks in people 
with varying degrees of agoraphobic disability. Behaviour 
Research and Therapy, 34, 253–264. 

Williams, S. L., & Zane, G. (1989). Guided mastery and stimulus 
exposure treatments for severe performance anxiety 
in agoraphobics. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 27, 
237–245. 

Wittchen, H.-U., Gloster, A. T., Beesdo-Baum, K., Fava, G. 
A., & Craske, M. G. (2010). Agoraphobia: A review of the 
diagnostic classificatory position and criteria. Depression 
and Anxiety, 27, 113–133. 

Wolitzky-Taylor, K., Castriotta, N., Lenze, E., Stanley, M. 
A., & Craske, M. G. (2010). Anxiety disorders in older 
adults: A comprehensive review. Depression and Anxiety, 
27, 190–211. 

Zinbarg, R. E., & Barlow, D. H. (1996). Structure of anxiety 
and the anxiety disorders: A hierarchical model. Journal 
of Abnormal Psychology, 105(2), 184–193. 

Zinbarg, R. E., Barlow, D. H., & Brown, T. A. (1997). Hierarchical 
structure and general factor saturation of the 
Anxiety Sensitivity Index: Evidence and implication. Psychological 
Assessment, 9, 277–284. 

Zoellner, L. A., & Craske, M. G. (1999). Interoceptive accuracy 
and panic. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 37, 
1141–1158. 


CHaPter 2 

Posttraumatic stress Disorder 

caNDice M. MoNsoN 
Patricia a. resick 
shireeN l. rizvi 

severe, unexpected trauma may occur in less than a minute but have lifelong consequences. 
The tragedy that is posttraumatic stress disorder (PTsD) is brought into stark 
relief when the origins of the trauma occur in the context of people’s inhumanity to 
others. in this chapter, the case of “Tom” illustrates the psychopathology associated with 
PTsD in all its nuances and provides a very personal account of its impact. in one of any 
number of events summarized dryly every day in the middle pages of the newspaper, 
Tom, in the fog of war in iraq, shoots and kills a pregnant woman and her young child 
in the presence of her husband and father. The impact of this event devastates him. The 
sensitive and skilled therapeutic intervention described in this chapter is a model for new 
therapists, and belies the notion that, in these severe cases, manualized therapy can be 
rote and automated. in addition, the next generation of treatment for PTsD, termed “cognitive 
processing therapy” by the authors, is sufficiently detailed to allow knowledgeable 
practitioners to incorporate this treatment program into their practice. This comprehensive 
treatment program takes advantage of the latest developments in our knowledge of 
the psychopathology of trauma impact by incorporating treatment strategies specifically 
tailored to overcome trauma‑related psychopathology, and does so in the context of the 
significant changes to diagnostic criteria in DsM‑5.—D. H. B. 

DiaGNosis 

Unlike most other psychological disorders, posttraumatic 
stress disorder (PTSD) requires the occurrence 
of a specific type of event from which the person affected 
does not recover. First, to qualify for a diagnosis 
of PTSD according to the fifth edition of the Diagnostic 
and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders 

(DSM-5; American Psychiatric Association, 2013), the 
individual must have experienced, witnessed, or otherwise 
been confronted with an event or events that 
involved actual or threatened death, serious injury, or 
sexual violence. Exposure to traumatic events may take 

the form of experiencing an event directly, witnessing 
the event happen to someone else, learning of violent 
or accidental trauma that happened to a close friend or 
family member, or being repeatedly or extremely exposed 
to aversive elements of a traumatic event (e.g., a 
rescue worker collecting body parts). Symptom criteria 
fall into four broad categories: reexperiencing (criterion 
B), avoidance (criterion C), negative alterations 
in cognition and mood (criterion D; e.g., memory difficulties, 
feeling detached, persistent negative beliefs) 
and hyperarousal (criterion E). According to criterion 
B, the reexperiencing symptoms must be experienced 
in one of the following ways: Memories of the trauma 

62 


Posttraumatic Stress Disorder 

may intrude into consciousness repetitively, without 
warning, seemingly “out of the blue,” without triggers 
or reminders to elicit them. The person with PTSD may 
experience intensely vivid reenactment experiences, or 
flashbacks. Intrusive memories may also occur during 
the sleeping state in the form of thematically related 
nightmares. Additionally, when faced with cues associated 
with the traumatic event, whether actual or symbolic, 
the individual may exhibit intense psychological 
reactions (e.g., terror, disgust, depression) and/or physiological 
responses (e.g., increased heart rate, perspiration, 
rapid breathing). 

These reexperiencing symptoms are generally distressing 
and intrusive because the individual has no control 
over when or how they occur, and they elicit strong 
negative emotions associated with the initial trauma 
(Janoff-Bulman, 1992; Resick & Schnicke, 1992). Fear 
stimuli (cues) are sometimes obvious, such as the combat 
veteran who ducks in fear when a car backfires and 
sounds like gunfire. But sometimes the relationship between 
the trauma and the cue is not immediately clear. 
For example, one survivor of rape was fearful of taking 
showers, even though the rape had occurred away 
from her home. However, as she began to process the 
rape in treatment, she realized that every time she took a 
shower, she felt very vulnerable because she was alone, 
naked, had no escape routes, and had diminished vision 
and hearing—all stimuli that reminded her of the rape. 

Avoidance symptoms (criterion C) reflect the individual’s 
attempt to gain physical and psychological 
distance from the trauma. Some have suggested that 
avoidance symptoms are a response to reexperiencing 
symptoms (Buckley, Blanchard, & Hickling, 1998; 
Creamer, Burgess, & Pattison, 1992; Taylor, Kuch, 
Koch, Crockett, & Passey, 1998). As traumatic memories 
intrude into consciousness, so do the painful negative 
emotions associated with the trauma. Thus, the 
individual may avoid thoughts and feelings about the 
trauma, may avoid situations and events reminiscent of 
the trauma, or may actually forget significant aspects 
of the trauma (criterion D1). Avoidance of the trauma 
memory leads to a temporary decrease in painful emotions 
but, paradoxically, increases avoidance behavior. 
Trauma survivors frequently report highly constricted 
lifestyles after the traumatic experience due to the need 
to avoid reminders of the traumatic memory and associated 
emotions. At least three types of avoidance 
behavior are required before a diagnosis can be made. 

Similarly, detachment or numbing symptoms (part 
of criterion D) are attempts to cut off the aversive feel


ings associated with intrusive memories (Astin, Layne, 
Camilleri, & Foy, 1994; Resick & Schnicke, 1992). 
This detachment may then generalize to all emotions, 
both positive and negative. Trauma survivors commonly 
state that they no longer have any strong feelings, or 
that they feel numb a great deal of the time. This sort 
of pervasive detachment may interfere profoundly with 
the individual’s ability to relate to others, enjoy daily 
life, remain productive, and plan for the future. It is also 
important to note that not all trauma survivors experience 
emotional numbing. On the contrary, some find 
themselves experiencing continuous, intense negative 
emotions such as anger or shame. Trauma survivors 
may experience persistent cognitive symptoms, also 
classified under criterion D. These include negative beliefs 
about about themselves, others, or life in general 
(e.g., “I’ll never be able to have a normal relationship,” 
“Nowhere is 100% safe”). They may have distorted 
perceptions, often involving self-blame, about why the 
trauma occurred or its consequences. 

The trauma survivor may also experience symptoms 
of hyperarousal (criterion E). This suggests that the individual 
is in a constant state of “fight or flight,” which 
is similar to how the individual’s body responded during 
the actual traumatic event. In this state of alert, the 
individual is primed to react to new threats of danger, 
even in relatively safe situations. During a crisis, this 
is adaptive because it facilitates survival. However, 
as a steady state, hyperarousal interferes with daily 
functioning and leads to exhaustion. In this state, the 
individual spends a great deal of energy scanning the 
environment for danger cues (hypervigilance). The 
individual is likely to experience sleep disturbance, 
decreased concentration, irritability, and overreactivity 
to stimuli (exaggerated startle response). There is 
evidence to suggest that this constant state of tension 
has deleterious effects on overall physical health (e.g., 
Kulka et al., 1990). At least two criterion E behaviors 
must be present for a diagnosis of PTSD. 

The previously described symptom criteria must be 
met concurrently for at least 1 month to warrant a diagnosis 
of PTSD, and the symptoms must be perceived as 
distressing or cause functional impairment. A substantial 
proportion of trauma survivors exhibit symptoms 
consistent with a PTSD diagnosis immediately after 
the traumatic event. However, these rates drop almost 
in half within 3 months posttrauma, then tend to stabilize. 
For example, rape trauma survivors assessed at 
2 weeks, 1 month, 3 months, 6 months, and 9 months 
posttrauma exhibited PTSD diagnostic rates of 94, 65, 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

47, 42, and 42%, respectively (Rothbaum & Foa, 1992). 
Thus, after 3 months, PTSD rates did not decrease 
substantially. Another study that assessed survivors of 
rape trauma at approximately 2 weeks and at 3 months 
postassault found very similar rates of PTSD (Gutner, 
Rizvi, Monson, & Resick, 2006). At the first assessment, 
81% of the rape survivors met symptom criteria 
for PTSD (minus the time criterion), and at 3 months 
postrape, 53% continued to meet criteria. Other, more 
heterogeneous events (greater variability in the severity 
of the event), such as combat, disasters, or physical 
assaults, are associated with lower rates of PTSD than 
rape (Kessler, Sonnega, Bromet, Hughes, & Nelson, 
1995). Delayed onset of PTSD is rare and may reflect 
earlier subthreshold symptoms (perhaps due to dissociation, 
amnesia, or extensive avoidance) or a change in 
the meaning of the event at a later time (e.g., the perpetrator 
kills a later victim, thereby changing the meaning 
of the event for the survivor). 

The introduction of DSM-5 in 2013 brought about 
changes in diagnostic criteria that impact research and 
treatment of PTSD. Whereas PTSD was classified as 
an anxiety disorder in previous DSM editions, it is currently 
listed among trauma- and stressor-related disorders. 
This change makes sense given that PTSD does 
not group cleanly with the anxiety disorders based on 
factor analyses (e.g., Cox, Clara, & Enns, 2002; Miller, 
Greif, & Smith, 2003; Miller, Kaloupek, Dillon, & 
Keane, 2004; Miller & Resick, 2007) and may include 
a range of emotions such as anger, sadness, guilt, or 
horror (see DSM-5 criterion D). DSM-5 also tightened 
the stressor criterion, and criterion D (negative alterations 
in cognitions and mood) is new to DSM-5. 

The intrusion criterion clearly does not include ruminating 
about the event but it does include at least 
one of the following: spontaneous or cued distressing 
memories of the traumatic event; recurrent distressing 
dreams in which the content or emotions are related to 
the event; dissociative reactions in which the individual 
feels or acts as if the traumatic event(s) are happening 
again; psychological distress when confronted with internal 
or external cues that symbolize or resemble the 
traumatic event; or marked physiological reactions to 
reminders of the traumatic event(s). 

The avoidance criterion includes two items: avoidance 
of internal reminders or avoidance of external reminders 
of the traumatic event. Only one of the two is 
required for diagnosis. 

The third symptom criterion includes some clarified 
items and some items newly introduced in DSM-5. The 

individual must experience at least two of the following 
types of symptoms: inability to remember an important 
aspect of the traumatic event(s); persistent and exaggerated 
negative cognitions about one’s self, others, or 
the world; distorted blame of self or others about the 
cause or consequences of the event(s); global negative 
emotional states (e.g., fear, horror, anger, guilt, shame); 
markedly diminished interest or participation in significant 
activities; feeling of detachment or estrangement 
from others; or persistent inability to experience 
positive emotions (e.g., inability to have loving feelings, 
psychic numbing). 

Compared to DSM-IV, in DSM-5 the fourth symptom 
criterion is expanded beyond physiological arousal 
to dysfunctional and impulsive behaviors, and includes 
irritable or aggressive behavior; reckless or selfdestructive 
behavior; hypervigilance; exaggerated startle 
response; problems with concentration; and sleep 
disturbance. 

Unlike DSM-IV, DSM-5 stipulates that symptoms 
cannot be due to the direct physiological effects of a 
substance or a general medical condition (e.g., traumatic 
brain injury, coma). 

New to DSM-5 is a dissociative subtype of PTSD, 
which has been added due to a convergence of literature 
from epidemiological studies (e.g., Wolf et al., 2012), 
psychophysiological studies (e.g., Griffin, Resick & 
Mechanic, 1997); neuroimaging studies (e.g., Lanius 
et al., 2010), and treatment studies (Cloitre, Petkova, 
Wang, & Lu Lassell, 2012; Resick, Williams, Suvak, 
Monson, & Gradus, 2012) that have found a small 
group (15%) of people with severe PTSD who are also 
highly dissociative. These individuals appear to respond 
differently to treatment than those with severe 
PTSD without dissociative features. 

In addition, DSM-5 offers separate classification for 
PTSD in young children, as well as PTSD in which 
symptom onset is not for at least 6 months after the 
trauma. 

PrevaleNce 

Epidemiological studies document high rates of trauma 
exposure and PTSD in the population (Kessler et al., 
1995; Kilpatrick, Saunders, Veronen, Best, & Von, 
1987; Kulka et al., 1990). In a national (U.S.) random 
probability sample of 4,008 women, Resnick, Kilpatrick, 
Dansky, Saunders, and Best (1993) found a high 
rate of trauma experiences (69%). When they extrapo



Posttraumatic Stress Disorder 

lated their results to the U.S. population based on census 
statistics for 1989, they estimated that 66 million 
women in the United States had experienced at least 
one major traumatic event. Of those who had experienced 
a criterion A stressor, Resnick and colleagues 
found the following lifetime PTSD rates: completed 
rape, 32%; other sexual assault, 31%; physical assault, 
39%; homicide of family or friend, 22%; any crime 
victimization, 26%; and noncrime trauma (e.g., natural 
and manmade disasters, accidents, injuries), 9%. 

In the first large national civilian prevalence study 
of the psychological effects of trauma, Kessler and colleagues 
(1995) surveyed a representative U.S. national 
sample of 5,877 persons (2,812 men and 3,065 women). 
This study assessed 12 categories of traumatic stressors 
and found that a majority of people had experienced at 
least one major traumatic event. They found that whereas 
20.4% of women and 8.2% of men were likely to develop 
PTSD following exposure to trauma, the rates for 
specific traumas were often much higher. For example, 
rape was identified as the trauma most likely to lead to 
PTSD among men, as well as women, and 65% of men 
and 46% of women who identified rape as their most 
distressing trauma were diagnosed with PTSD. Among 
men who identified other traumas as most distressing, 
the probability of having PTSD was 39% for those with 
combat exposure, 24% for those who suffered childhood 
neglect, and 22% of those who experienced childhood 
physical abuse. Among women, aside from rape, 
PTSD was associated with physical abuse in childhood 
(49%), threat with a weapon (33%), sexual molestation 
(27%), and physical attack (21%). As with Resnick and 
colleagues’ (1993) study, accidents and natural disasters 
were much less likely to precipitate PTSD among 
men and women. On the other hand, Norris (1992) 
pointed out that although motor vehicle accidents 
(MVAs) occur less frequently than some traumas (e.g., 
tragic death or robbery) and are less traumatic than 
some events (sexual and physical assault), when both 
frequency and impact are considered together, MVAs 
may be the single most significant event. The lifetime 
frequency of MVAs is 23%, and the PTSD rate is 12%, 
which results in a rate of 28 seriously distressed people 
for every 1,000 adults in the United States, just from 
one type of event. 

More recently, Kessler and his colleagues (Kessler, 
Berglund, et al., 2005; Kessler, Chiu, Demler, Merikangas, 
& Walters, 2005) reported on another large 
National Comorbidity Survey with over 9,200 respondents. 
The overall prevalence of PTSD was 6.8% in this 

study; this compares to the 7.8% population prevalence 
reported in the 1995 study. 

The largest study of combat veterans to date, the National 
Vietnam Veterans Readjustment Study (NVVRS; 
Kulka et al., 1990), was mandated by the U.S. Congress 
in 1983 to assess PTSD and other psychological problems 
following the Vietnam War. During the years 
of the war, over 8 million people served in the U.S. 
military. Of those, 3.1 million served in Vietnam (theater 
veterans) and the remainder served in other areas 
abroad or in the United States (era veterans). Women 
comprised 7,200 of those serving in Vietnam, and over 
255,000 of those serving elsewhere during the Vietnam 
era. The NVVRS conducted in-depth interviews and 
assessments with three groups: 1,632 Vietnam theater 
veterans, 716 Vietnam era veterans, and 668 nonveterans/
civilian counterparts, for a total of 3,016 participants. 


The results of the NVVRS indicated that the majority 
of Vietnam theater veterans made a successful readjustment 
to civilian life and did not suffer from PTSD 
or other problems. However, the researchers also found 
that 31% of men and 27% of women veterans had a 
full diagnosis of PTSD at some time during their lives. 
Furthermore, 15% of men and 9% of women veterans 
had PTSD at the time of the study, over a decade after 
the end of the war. These rates translated to 479,000 
Vietnam veterans with current PTSD. In addition, 11% 
of men and 8% of women veterans were found to have 
significant symptoms and distress but did not meet the 
full criteria for PTSD. This translated to an additional 
350,000 men and women in the United States alone 
who were still suffering in the aftermath of the Vietnam 
War. 

Data from the NVVRS were reevaluated using very 
strict criteria that only included those incidents that 
could be verified through historical records. Dohrenwend 
and colleagues (2006) found very little falsification 
of events and a strong relationship between the 
amount of trauma exposure and rates of PTSD (i.e., 
dose–response relationship). They did, however, find 
lower rates of PTSD after controlling for people who 
developed PTSD before or after their deployment to 
Vietnam and eliminating those people with unverifiable 
events. Using these stricter criteria, they found that 
18.7% of the veterans met the criteria for war-related 
PTSD at some point, and 9.1% still had PTSD when 
assessed 11 to 12 years later. These rates should be 
considered minimum likelihood rates given that people 
can be traumatized by events that may not be verifi



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

able (e.g., rape, accidents) in historical accounts of war. 
Currently under way is a study of the participants of the 
NVVRS, called the National Vietnam Veterans Longitudinal 
Study (NVVLS), which will inform us about 
the long-term effects of PTSD. 

More recent conflicts in Iraq and Afghanistan saw 
the first attempts to assess PTSD during a war (Hoge 
et al., 2004; Hoge, Auchterlonie, & Milliken, 2006). 
Hoge and his colleagues (2004) studied 2,530 Army 
soldiers and Marines before and 3,671 after deployment 
to Iraq or Afghanistan. They found that mental health 
problems were significantly greater among those who 
returned from deployment than among those not yet 
deployed, and that mental health problems were greater 
in those who deployed to Iraq compared with Afghanistan. 
Prior to deployment, 9% of the service personnel 
exceeded the cutoff used for likely PTSD, whereas 
11.5% of those deployed to Afghanistan and 18–20% of 
those deployed to Iraq exceeded the cutoff. There was 
a linear relationship between the number of firefights 
reported and the severity of PTSD. Being wounded or 
otherwise physically injured was also associated with 
greater PTSD symptomatology. 

Because the military began screening all military 
personnel for PTSD following deployment, a 
population-based study of 303,905 Army soldiers and 
Marines who deployed to Afghanistan, Iraq, or other 
locations could be conducted for a 1-year period (May 
2003 to April 2004; Hoge et al., 2006). As with the 
previous report, service men and women were more 
likely to report mental health problems after serving in 
Iraq (19.1%) than after serving in Afghanistan (11.3%) 
or other locations (8.5%). In this study 32,500 women 
were also assessed, comprising 10.7% of the total 
sample. There was an overall sex difference in mental 
health concerns, with 23.6% of women compared 
with 18.6% of men reporting a mental health concern. 
However, this sex comparison did not take into account 
preexisting traumas or PTSD, exposure to combat traumas 
or sexual assault, or other variables that might 
explain these differences. Also, the PTSD screen was 
a four-item questionnaire in which two “yes” answers 
indicated possible PTSD. On this screen, 9.8% of those 
who had served in Iraq met criteria for possible PTSD, 
and there was again an association between the amount 
of combat exposure and PTSD. 

Recently, Vogt and colleagues (2011) reported on the 
effects of combat on women, which is a change from 
prior wars, as well as predictors of PTSD with a national 
random survey of veterans of Iraq and Afghanistan 

who had returned from deployment within the previous 
year. The researchers attempted to contact 2,000 
veterans, oversampling female veterans to have equal 
numbers of men and women. The sample comprised 
579 veterans who completed the survey. Significantly 
more men (49%) than women (43%) reported warfare 
exposure. Women also reported significantly lower levels 
of relationship concerns. However, men and women 
did not differ with regard to perceived threat, childhood 
family functioning, prior stressors, postdeployment 
stressors, postdeployment social support, or PTSD 
symptom severity. This study did not examine military 
sexual trauma, which has been found to be higher 
among women, perhaps explaining the equal rates of 
PTSD for men and women in this sample (Street, Gradus, 
Vogt, Giasson, & Resick, 2013). 

theoretical MoDels of PtsD 

As researchers and clinicians began to study and treat 
survivors of rape trauma and Vietnam veterans in the 
1970s, they began to draw upon learning theory as an 
explanation for the symptoms they were observing. 
Mowrer’s two-factor theory (1947) of classical and 
operant conditioning was first proposed to account for 
posttrauma symptoms (Becker, Skinner, Abel, Axelrod, 
& Cichon, 1984; Holmes & St. Lawrence, 1983; 
Keane, Zimering, & Caddell, 1985; Kilpatrick, Veronen, 
& Best, 1985; Kilpatrick, Veronen, & Resick, 
1982). Classical conditioning was used to explain the 
high levels of distress and fear observed in trauma 
victims in reaction to trauma-related stimuli. Operant 
conditioning explained the onset of PTSD avoidance 
symptoms and maintenance of fear over time, despite 
the fact that the unconditioned stimulus, the traumatic 
stressor, does not recur. Because the trauma memory 
and other cues (conditioned stimuli) elicit fear and anxiety 
(conditioned emotional responses), people avoid 
(or escape from) these cues, and the result is a reduction 
in fear and anxiety. In this manner, avoidance of the 
conditioned stimuli is negatively reinforced, which prevents 
deterioration of the link between the trauma cues 
and anxiety that would normally be expected without 
repetition of the trauma itself. 

Although learning theory accounts for much of the 
onset and maintenance of the fear and avoidance in 
PTSD, it does not fully explain “intrusion symptoms” 
(i.e., repetitive memories of the trauma that intrude 
into survivors’ thoughts in both conscious and uncon



Posttraumatic Stress Disorder 

scious, states such as nightmares). Based on Lang’s 
(1977) information-processing theory of anxiety development, 
Foa, Steketee, and Rothbaum (1989) suggested 
that PTSD emerges due to the development of a 
fear network in memory that elicits escape and avoidance 
behavior. Mental fear structures include stimuli, 
response, and meaning elements. Anything associated 
with the trauma may elicit the fear structure or 
schema and subsequent avoidance behavior. The fear 
network in people with PTSD is thought to be stable 
and to generalize broadly, so that it is easily accessed. 
Chemtob, Roitblat, Hamada, Carlson, and Twentyman 
(1988) proposed that these structures are always at least 
weakly activated in individuals with PTSD and guide 
their interpretation of events as potentially dangerous. 
When the fear network is activated by reminders of 
the trauma, the information in the network enters consciousness 
(intrusive symptoms). Attempts to avoid this 
activation result in the avoidance symptoms of PTSD. 
According to information-processing theory, repetitive 
exposure to the traumatic memory in a safe environment 
results in habituation of fear and subsequent 
changes in the fear structure. As emotion decreases, 
clients with PTSD begin to modify their meaning elements 
spontaneously, and consequently change their 
self-statements and reduce their generalization. 

Cognitive theories are also concerned with information 
processing, but they focus on the effect of trauma 
on the survivor’s belief system and the adjustments 
that are necessary to reconcile a traumatic event with 
prior beliefs and expectations. The first and most influential 
cognitive theorist, Horowitz (1986), moved from 
a more psychodynamic view to a cognitive processing 
theory. Horowitz proposed that processing is driven by a 
“completion tendency,” the psychological need for new, 
incompatible information to be integrated with existing 
beliefs. The completion tendency keeps the trauma information 
in active memory until the processing is complete 
and the event is resolved. Horowitz also theorized 
that there is a basic conflict between the person’s need 
to resolve and reconcile the event into his or her history, 
and the desire to avoid emotional pain. When images 
of the event (flashbacks, nightmares, intrusive recollections), 
thoughts about the meanings of the trauma, 
and emotions associated with the trauma become overwhelming, 
psychological defense mechanisms take over, 
and the person exhibits numbing or avoidance. Horowitz 
suggested that a person with PTSD oscillates between 
phases of intrusion and avoidance, and that if successfully 
processed, the oscillations become less frequent 

and less intense. According to this theory, chronic PTSD 
occurs because the trauma remains in active memory 
without becoming fully integrated; therefore, it is still 
able to stimulate intrusive and avoidant reactions. 

Several other social-cognitive researchers and theorists 
who have focused more on the content of the cognitions 
in PTSD propose that basic assumptions about 
the world and oneself are “shattered.” Constructivist 
theories are based on the idea that people actively create 
their own internal representations of the world (and 
themselves). New experiences are assigned meaning 
based on a person’s model of the world (Janoff-Bulman, 
1985, 1992; Mahoney & Lyddon, 1988; McCann & 
Pearlman, 1990). The task for recovery is to reconstruct 
fundamental beliefs and establish equilibrium. 
Janoff-Bulman (1985) suggested that this process is 
accomplished by reinterpreting the event to reduce the 
distance between the prior beliefs and the new beliefs. 
Other theorists have proposed that if one’s preexisting 
beliefs are particularly positive or particularly negative, 
then more severe PTSD symptoms result (McCann & 
Pearlman, 1990; Resick & Schnicke, 1992; Resick, 
Monson, & Chard, 2007). Foa, Steketee, and Rothbaum 
(1989) focused particularly on beliefs regarding 
the predictability and controllability of the trauma, 
whereas McCann and Pearlman (1990) proposed that 
several areas of cognition might be either disrupted or 
seemingly confirmed, that is, beliefs regarding safety, 
trust, control/power, esteem, and intimacy. The Resick 
and colleauges (2007) model focuses particularly on 
the “just world” myth and the human desire (and illusion) 
that we can predict and control our lives. 

In a cognitive model, affective expression is needed, 
not for habituation, but for the trauma memory to be 
processed fully. It is assumed that the natural affect, 
once accessed, dissipates rather quickly, and that the 
work of accommodating the memory with beliefs can 
begin. Once faulty beliefs regarding the event (selfblame, 
guilt) and overgeneralized beliefs about oneself 
and the world (e.g., safety, trust, control, esteem, 
intimacy) are challenged, then the secondary emotions 
also decrease, along with the intrusive reminders. 
The fact that both stress inoculation training without 
trauma exposure exercises (Foa, Rothbaum, Riggs, & 
Murdock, 1991; Foa et al., 1999) and cognitive therapy 
without written or oral accounts of the traumatic experience 
(e.g., Ehlers et al., 2003; Resick et al., 2008; 
Tarrier et al., 1999) are effective treatments for PTSD 
undermines the assumption that habituation is the sole 
mechanism of change. 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

Ehlers and Clark (2000) proposed a cognitive model 
of PTSD that focuses on perceived threat and memory. 
Although the event occurred in the past, Ehlers and 
Clark propose that people with PTSD are unable to see 
the event as time-limited and assume that it has larger 
implications for the future. Individuals with PTSD appraise 
the event such that they believe themselves to be 
currently at risk. There are several ways in which this 
misappraisal happens. One is to overgeneralize based 
on the event and assume that normal activities are more 
dangerous than they objectively are. Individuals may 
overestimate the probability that the event will recur. 
After the trauma happens, they may misconstrue the 
meaning of their PTSD symptoms such that they perceive 
themselves to be in greater danger (false alarms 
are assumed to be true alarms) or interpret their symptoms 
to mean that they cannot cope with events in the 
future. 

Ehlers and Clark’s (2000) cognitive theory also 
considers the apparent memory disturbance that occurs, 
such that persons with PTSD may have trouble 
intentionally accessing their memory of the event but 
have involuntary intrusions of parts of the event. They 
propose that because memory encoded at the time of 
the trauma is poorly elaborated and integrated with 
other memories with regard to details, context of time, 
sequence, and so forth, this might explain why people 
with PTSD have poor autobiographical memory, yet 
may be triggered to have memory fragments that have 
a here-and-now quality (no time context) or lack appropriate 
posttrauma appraisals (e.g., “I did not die”). Like 
the emotional processing models, Ehlers and Clark 
also propose that strong associative learning is paired 
with fear responses and may generalize. In response to 
perceptions of threat, people with PTSD adopt various 
maladaptive coping strategies, depending on their 
appraisals. For example, people who believe they will 
go crazy if they think about the traumatic event try to 
avoid thoughts about the trauma and keep their minds 
occupied as much as possible. Someone who believes 
that he or she must figure out why the traumatic event 
occurred to keep it from happening again will ruminate 
about how it could have been prevented. Those 
who think they were being punished for their actions 
may become immobilized and be unable to make decisions. 
These maladaptive strategies, most often avoidance 
behaviors, may (1) increase symptoms, (2) prevent 
change in negative appraisals, or (3) prevent change in 
the trauma memory. 

In an attempt to reconcile the theories of PTSD, 
Brewin, Dalgleish, and Joseph (1996) proposed a 
dual-representation theory that incorporates both 
information-processing and social-cognitive theories, 
and introduces research and theory from cognitive science 
with regard to memory. They have suggested that 
the concept of a single emotional memory is too narrow 
to describe the full range of memory that has been 
evident in research and clinical observations. Based 
on prior research, they proposed that sensory input is 
subject to both conscious and nonconscious processing. 
The memories that are conscious and can be deliberately 
retrieved, termed “verbally accessible memories” 
(VAMs), contain some sensory information, information 
about emotional and physical reactions, and the 
personal meaning of the event. Although VAMs might 
be reasonably detailed, they may also be very selective 
because attention is narrowed under conditions 
of stress, and short-term memory capacity may be decreased. 


The other type of memories are theorized to be 
nonconsious and are termed “situationally accessed 
memories” (SAMs). This type of information, which 
is probably much more extensive than autobiographical 
memories of the event, cannot be accessed deliberately 
and is not as easily altered or edited as the more 
explicitly accessed VAMs. SAMs comprise sensory 
(e.g., auditory, visual, tactile), physiological, and motoric 
information that may be accessed automatically 
when a person is exposed to a stimulus situation similar 
in some fashion to the trauma, or when that person 
consciously thinks about the trauma. SAMs are then 
experienced as intrusive sensory images or flashbacks 
accompanied by physiological arousal. 

Dual-representation theory posits two types of emotional 
reactions: One type is conditioned during the 
event (e.g., fear, anger), recorded in the SAMs, and activated 
along with reexperienced sensory and physiological 
information. The other type, secondary emotions, 
result from the consequences and implications (meaning) 
of the trauma. These secondary emotions may include 
not only fear and anger but also guilt, shame, and 
sadness. 

Brewin and colleagues (1996) proposed that emotional 
processing of the trauma has two elements. One 
element of the processing is the activation of SAMS 
(as suggested by information-processing theories), the 
purpose of which is to aid in cognitive readjustment by 
supplying detailed sensory and physiological informa



Posttraumatic Stress Disorder 

tion concerning the trauma. The activation of SAMs 
may eventually diminish in frequency when they are 
blocked by the creation of new SAMs, or when they are 
altered by the incorporation of new information. When 
the SAMs are brought into consciousness, they can 
be altered by being paired with different bodily states 
(e.g., relaxation or habituation) or different conscious 
thoughts. Eventually, if the SAMs are replaced or altered 
sufficiently, there is a reduction in negative emotions 
and a subsequent reduction in attentional bias and 
accessibility of the memory. 

The second element (as proposed by the socialcognitive 
theorists) is the conscious attempt to search 
for meaning, to ascribe cause or blame, and to resolve 
conflicts between the event and prior expectations and 
beliefs. The goal of this process is to reduce the negative 
emotions and to restore a sense of relative safety 
and control in one’s environment. To obtain this second 
goal, the traumatized person may have to edit his or her 
autobiographical memory (VAMs) to reconcile conflicts 
between the event and the person’s belief system. 
The traumatized person may either alter the memory of 
the event in some way to reestablish the preexisting belief 
system or alter preexisting beliefs and expectations 
to accommodate this new information. 

Brewin and colleagues (1996) suggest that for cases 
in which the emotions are primary and driven by 
SAMs, exposure therapy may be all that is needed. 
However, when secondary emotions such as self-blame, 
guilt, or shame are present, cognitive therapy may be 
needed. Although both exposure and cognitive therapies 
have been found to be effective in treating PTSD, 
no research thus far has matched types of therapy to 
client profiles. 

Another multirepresentational cognitive model 
called SPAARS (Dalgleish, 2004) was originally 
proposed to explain everyday emotional experience 
and was then applied to PTSD. This model also endeavors 
to encompass previous theories. The model 
proposes four types or levels of mental representation 
systems: schematic, propositional, analogue, and associative 
representational systems. The schematic level 
represents abstract generic information, or schemas. 
Propositional-level information is verbally accessible 
meanings, similar to VAMs, whereas information at 
the analogue level is stored as “images” across all types 
of sensory systems, similar to SAMs. Associative representations 
are similar to the fear structures hypothesized 
in emotional processing theory as representing 

the connections between other types of representations. 
In the SPAARS model, emotions are generated through 
two routes. One, similar to the Ehlers and Clark (2000) 
cognitive model, is through appraisals at the schematic 
level, in which events are compared against important 
goals. A person appraises an event to be threatening 
if it blocks an important goal, then experiences fear. 
Because traumatic events are threats to survival, they 
are appraised as threatening and elicit fear. The second 
route to emotion is through associative learning, which 
is automatic and similar to the fear activation described 
by Foa and her colleagues (1989). 

Within the SPAARS model, a traumatic event triggers 
intense appraisal-driven fear, helplessness, or horror, 
as well as a range of other emotions. Information 
about the traumatic event is encoded in the schematic, 
propositional, and analogue levels simultaneously. Because 
the memory of the traumatic event represents 
an ongoing threat to goals, the person is left with lowlevel 
fear activation, cognitive bias to attend to threat 
appraisals, and intrusive sensory images and appraisals. 
The trauma memory exists across different levels 
of mental representation but is unincorporated into 
the person’s larger mental representations; the memory 
may be elicited as flashbacks or nightmares. Such 
strong memory and emotional intrusions result in efforts 
to cope through avoidance. 

assessMeNt 

Any comprehensive assessment of PTSD must capture 
whether or not a life event meets the seriousness and 
subjective response requirements of a traumatic stressor 
(criterion A), as well as the presence and severity 
of the DSM-IV-TR 20 associated symptoms (criteria 
B–E). Although interview-based measures are considered 
the “gold standard” for assessing PTSD, a number 
of self-report measures have been developed in recent 
years to provide a quicker, less resource-heavy method 
for assessing PTSD. New DSM-5 criteria continue to 
be psychometrically validated, and assessment and research 
are adapting accordingly. 

Assessment of Traumatic Events 

The first essential step in the assessment of PTSD is to 
identify traumas in the patient’s history. Often this is 
difficult to achieve because many trauma survivors, es



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

pecially rape and child sexual abuse trauma survivors, 
do not spontaneously disclose their trauma history. 
This is consistent with general patterns of avoidance 
of trauma-related reminders and may reflect shame, 
embarrassment, and self-blame regarding the incidents. 
Even when seeking treatment for mental health problems, 
trauma survivors often fail to recognize that their 
psychological difficulties may be associated with their 
trauma history. Kilpatrick (1983) suggested several 
other reasons survivors might not be forthcoming with 
this information, including fear of a negative reaction 
to disclosure, especially if previous disclosure has resulted 
in disbelief or blame. Additionally, many trauma 
survivors do not recognize or label their experience as 
“trauma,” “rape,” or “abuse,” especially if the assailant 
was an acquaintance or a relative, or if the trauma 
was experienced by many people, as in combat. Finally, 
in the absence of a strong alliance with the therapist, 
many people choose not to disclose such deeply personal 
information. It is therefore important for the clinician 
to forge a positive alliance as early as possible and 
be forthcoming about the purpose of the questioning, 
any limits of confidentiality, and how the obtained information 
may be used (i.e., diagnosis, treatment planning, 
research purposes). 

In terms of questions regarding the presence of traumatic 
experiences, a behavioral, descriptive prompt 
such as “Has anyone ever made you have unwanted 
sexual contact by physical force or threat of force?” is 
more detailed and is preferable to asking, “Have you 
ever been raped?” In the latter case, someone who is 
married (or dating) and has been sexually assaulted 
may say “no,” because “rape” might not be a term that 
he/she associates with forced sex by one’s partner. The 
same problem may exist with child abuse. A client may 
indicate that he was not abused as a child but readily 
admit, when asked, that a parent whipped him with a 
belt until he had welts. In general, it is recommended 
that clinicians always begin with broad questions about 
experiences, then move to more specific, behaviorally 
anchored questions. 

Some structured interviews have been developed 
with the primary purpose of assessing traumas in more 
detail. The Potential Stressful Events Interview (Kilpatrick, 
Resnick, & Freedy, 1991) has behaviorally 
anchored questions that are particularly good for assessing 
interpersonal victimization, as well as a range 
of other traumatic stressors. The DSM-IV version of 
the Clinician-Administered PTSD Scale (CAPS; Blake 
et al., 1995; reviewed in more detail later, and used 

in the majority of extant PTSD research), includes a 
self-report screening scale (Life Events Checklist), followed 
by interviewer prompts to establish whether a 
trauma meets criterion A. Validation of the most recent 
CAPS (Weathers, Blake, et al., 2013), reflecting current 
DSM-5 criteria, is ongoing. 

Many clinicians may choose to circumvent some 
of these extensive questions by using self-report measures, 
such as checklists, to acquire some initial information. 
Although clinicians should not rely on them 
exclusively, a number of checklists can be used as a 
springboard for further inquiry. In addition to the Life 
Events Checklist, the Traumatic Stress Schedule (Norris, 
1990), the Trauma History Questionnaire (THQ; 
Green, 1996), the Traumatic Life Events Questionnaire 
(TLEQ; Kubany, Haynes, et al., 2000), and the 
Traumatic Events Scale (Vrana & Lauterbach, 1994) 
all assess a number of different types of trauma, including 
accidents, natural disaster, sexual assault, and 
threats of, or actual, physical harm. The Posttraumatic 
Stress Diagnostic Scale (PDS; Foa, 1995) has two sections 
prior to assessment of symptoms. The first section 
assesses 13 potentially traumatic events, whereas 
the second has questions to determine whether an event 
meets the definition of criterion A. With regard to combat 
in particular, the Combat Exposure Scale (Keane, 
Fairbank, Caddell, & Zimering, 1989) has been used 
widely to assess the degree of combat exposure. 

Structured Diagnostic Interviews 

The CAPS, developed by Blake and colleagues (1995), 
has become a “gold-standard” assessment of PTSD 
and is now the most widely used diagnostic interview 
(Weathers, Keane, & Davidson, 2001; Weathers, Ruscio, 
& Keane, 1999). The CAPS has several attractive 
features. In addition to a detailed assessment of individual 
trauma experiences, it assesses both severity 
and frequency of symptoms, using specific criteria. 
Furthermore, the CAPS includes questions on associated 
features of PTSD, including dissociation, survivor 
guilt, and social and occupational impairment. Additionally, 
it gives clear guidelines for assessing changes 
in behavior following exposure to trauma. The CAPS 
has a large body of research demonstrating its reliability 
and validity across a wide variety of trauma populations. 
One disadvantage is its length of administration, 
which, on average, takes about 1 hour, and the need 
for administration by a mental health clinician. The 
length of administration may be decreased slightly 


Posttraumatic Stress Disorder 

by assessing only the 17 core DSM-IV symptoms. As 
mentioned, the CAPS has been revised to be consistent 
with DSM-5 criteria (Weathers, Blake, et al., 2013) and 
is currently undergoing testing. 

The Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV 
(SCID; First, Spitzer, Williams, & Gibbon, 1995), one 
of the most widely used diagnostic scales, includes assessment 
of PTSD symptomatology and was developed 
for use by experienced clinicians. Although it assesses 
all of the symptoms of PTSD and can provide information 
about whether an individual meets criteria for 
the diagnosis, it is important to note that the interview 
does not assess for frequency or severity of individual 
symptoms. Furthermore, by using the SCID, one can 
only determine a count of the number of positive symptoms, 
thereby limiting its utility in research or clinical 
settings in which a continuous measure of severity may 
be desirable. Resnick, Kilpatrick, and Lipovsky (1991) 
recommended certain modifications of the SCID for 
use with rape victims, including more sensitive screening 
questions for history of rape and other major traumatic 
events. The SCID is being modified to reflect 
current DSM-5 criteria for PTSD. 

Another highly structured interview, the Diagnostic 
Interview Schedule (DIS; Robins, Helzer, Croughan, 
& Ratcliff, 1981), has the advantage of requiring less 
training and experience to administer than the CAPS 
and the SCID. Like the SCID, the DIS results in diagnosis 
but does not have continuous severity scores. One 
potential problem is that the PTSD section assesses 
exposure to civilian trauma, including sexual assault, 
but uses the term “rape” without any further specification. 
Thus, the modifications suggested by Resnick and 
colleagues (1991) relative to rape may be appropriate 
for this instrument, as well as when assessing interpersonal 
traumas. Kessler and colleagues (1995) also have 
modified the DIS for better diagnosis of PTSD in large 
studies with lay interviewers. 

The PTSD Symptom Scale—Interview (PSS-I; Foa, 
Riggs, Dancu, & Rothbaum, 1993) has a particular 
advantage in its ease of administration and brevity. 
The PSS-I originally comprised 17 items and prompts 
matching the 17-symptom PTSD criteria in DSM-IV, 
and an updated version reflecting DSM-5 criteria is undergoing 
validation. The PSS-I can result in continuous 
scores to reflect frequency of symptoms or to determine 
PTSD diagnosis. Another advantage is its companion 
self-report measure (PSS-SR), to which scores on the 
interview can be compared. Thus, after conducting an 
initial interview, one could administer the PSS-SR on 

a more regular basis (e.g., biweekly) to monitor symptom 
change, without having to readminister the interview 
frequently. A disadvantage of the interview is that 
symptoms are assessed only over a current, 2-week 
period instead of 1 month, so it is possible that some 
diagnoses may be incorrect per DSM-5. The time frame 
should be modified for careful diagnosis. 

Self‑Report Instruments 

There are now a number of self-report scales of PTSD 
that have good psychometric properties. Among them 
are the PSS-SR (Falsetti, Resnick, Resick, & Kilpatrick, 
1993; Foa et al., 1993), the Purdue PTSD Scale— 
Revised (Lauterbach & Vrana, 1996), the PTSD Checklist 
(PCL; Weathers, Litz, Herman, Huska, & Keane, 
1993), the Distressing Event Questionnaire (DEQ; 
Kubany, Leisen, Kaplan, & Kelly, 2000), the Mississippi 
Scale for Combat-Related PTSD (Mississippi 
Scale; Keane, Caddell, & Taylor, 1988), and the PDS 
(Foa, 1995). Most of these scales were developed with 
specific populations, such as rape trauma survivors 
(e.g., PSS) or combat veterans (e.g., Mississippi Scale, 
PCL), and research on their validity with other populations 
in some cases is minimal. Thus, it is important for 
clinicians to think about their target population before 
adopting a measure. Moreover, as with any self-report 
measure, there are limitations to relying exclusively on 
questionnaires for diagnosis or symptom severity. Used 
in conjunction with structured interviews, however, 
they can be useful for screening purposes or for demonstrating 
changes over time as a result of a particular 
intervention. There is also evidence that self-report and 
clinician interview of PTSD symptoms are correlated 
over the course of treatment (Monson et al., 2008). 

The Impact of Event Scale—Revised (IES-R; Weiss 
& Marmar, 1997) and the Mississippi Scale (Keane 
et al., 1988, 1989) are two of the oldest self-report 
measures. The IES-R is useful for measuring trauma 
impact and maps onto DSM-IV criteria, including 
symptoms of avoidance, intrusion and arousal (Weiss 
& Marmar, 1997). The original 35-item Mississippi 
Scale assessed both diagnostic criteria and associated 
features of PTSD in combat veterans; a newer version 
has been created for use with civilians (Lauterbach, 
Vrana, King, & King, 1997). The PDS (Foa, 1995), a 
49-item scale designed to assess all five PTSD criteria, 
has strong psychometrics. Griffin, Uhlmansiek, Resick, 
and Mechanic (2004) found a strong correlation 
between the PDS and the CAPS. 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

Two measures of PTSD have been empirically derived 
from other scales. The Keane PTSD Scale (PK) 
of the Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory 
(MMPI) and MMPI-2 has been used successfully to 
discriminate between Vietnam combat veterans with 
and without PTSD (Keane, Malloy, & Fairbank, 1984; 
Weathers & Keane, 1999). The Symptom Checklist 
90—Revised (SCL-90-R; Derogatis, 1983) has also 
been examined by Saunders, Arata, and Kilpatrick 
(1990) and by Weathers and colleagues (1999), who 
developed PTSD subscales derived from different sets 
of items for female crime victims and combat veterans, 
respectively. 

The PCL is widely used in Department of Veterans 
Affairs (VA) and military settings with a Military Version 
(PCL-M) that refers specifically to military-related 
traumas. The Civilian Version of the scale (PCL-C) assesses 
civilian traumas, and the Specific Version (PCL-

S) allows the assessor to identify the specific trauma 
of reference. Like the PDS, the PCL reflects DSM-IV 
symptoms of PTSD and like the CAPS, the PCL has 
now been revised to reflect the DSM-5 and is undergoing 
testing (Weathers, Litz, et al., 2013). 
In response to a need to screen large numbers of 
people for PTSD after combat or disasters, or in medical 
settings when time is limited, a brief PTSD screen 
has been developed for use in primary care settings 
or for large-group administrations, such as those with 
military personnel following deployment (Prins et al., 
2004). The Primary Care PTSD Screen (PC-PTSD) 
was developed for such a purpose and is now being 
used routinely in the United States with anyone returning 
from military deployment or receiving any kind of 
treatment in the VA medical system (Hoge et al., 2006). 
This scale has four yes–no items that represent the four 
major symptom clusters found in most PTSD factoranalytic 
studies that separate effortful avoidance from 
numbing. These four items were found to be highly associated 
with PTSD as measured by the CAPS. In fact, 
the PC-PTSD outperformed the PCL with regard to 
sensitivity and specificity, as well as efficiency. A cutoff 
of 3 was recommended as an optimally efficient score 
for both men and women, and a cutoff of 2 was recommended 
for maximum sensitivity. 

Finally, it should be noted that only one traumarelated 
scale, the Trauma Symptom Inventory (TSI; 
Briere, 1995), includes scales to assess response bias. 
For forensic purposes, in which response bias may be 
of particular concern, the assessor may wish to include 
the TSI or administer the MMPI-2, which contains 

both the PK scale and Validity subscales. In addition to 
clinical scales, the TSI also includes subscales assessing 
tendencies to overendorse unusual or bizarre symptoms, 
to respond in an inconsistent or random manner, 
and to deny symptoms that others commonly endorse. 
In addition to PTSD-related subscales, such as Intrusive 
Experiences, Defensive Avoidance, and Anxious 
Arousal, it also includes subscales that measure frequently 
observed problems: Depression, Anger, Dissociation, 
Tension-Reduction Behaviors, and Disruptions 
in Self-Perception and Sexual Functioning. 

Psychophysiological Assessment 

The ideal assessment includes measurement in multiple 
response channels, including physiological responses. 
This is especially true in PTSD assessment because 
physiological reactivity to trauma cues is one of the criteria 
of the disorder. However, a psychophysiological 
test might not be feasible in clinical settings because 
the required technology and expertise are not always 
available. Despite this limitation, it is important to be 
aware of the research in this area and to be alert to obvious 
physiological symptoms in patients when talking 
about their trauma experiences (e.g., signs of agitation, 
sweating, flushing). Research has demonstrated 
consistent group differences in physiological reactivity 
between individuals with and without PTSD when 
exposed to trauma-related stimuli, such as through the 
use of individualized trauma scripts (for a systematic 
review of this body of research, see Orr, Metzger, Miller, 
& Kaloupek, 2004). Vietnam veterans with PTSD 
have consistently been found to be more reactive to 
combat imagery than combat veterans without PTSD, 
even when the comparison samples had other anxiety 
disorders or other psychological problems (Keane et 
al., 1998; Pitman, Orr, Forgue, & Altman, 1990; Pitman, 
Orr, Forgue, de Jong, & Claiborn, 1987). Similar 
results have been found in people with PTSD as a result 
of MVAs and child sexual abuse (Blanchard, Hickling, 
Buckley, & Taylor, 1996; Orr et al., 1998). 

The largest investigation of physiological reactivity 
was a multisite study of over 1,300 veterans (Keane et 
al., 1998). Using four psychophysiological measures, 
Keane and colleagues (1998) were able to classify correctly 
two-thirds of those who had PTSD. This indicates 
that whereas psychophysiological reactivity can 
help to distinguish between many members of PTSD 
and non-PTSD groups, it should not be used as a sole 
measure of diagnostic assessment. In fact, a number of 


Posttraumatic Stress Disorder 

factors may affect physiological reactivity, and these 
must be taken into account when assessing the validity 
of psychophysiological findings. For example, the 
presence of psychotropic drugs (i.e., benzodiazepines, 
beta-adrenergic blockers) can affect an individual’s 
response. In addition to people who do not respond 
physiologically, some people appear to have an alternative 
response to arousal. Griffin and colleagues (1997) 
studied psychophysiological reactivity in recent rape 
trauma survivors using a methodology that differed in 
two significant ways from prior studies. First, rather 
than listening to generated scripts, participants were 
asked to talk for 5 minutes on both a neutral recall topic 
and their rapes. These neutral and trauma phases were 
interspersed with baseline conditions. Second, instead 
of looking at the PTSD group as a whole, the researchers 
examined physiological reactivity by degree of 
“peritraumatic dissociation” (PD), which refers to the 
extent to which someone dissociated during the traumatic 
event. Griffin and colleagues found that a small 
group of women with high PD responded in a very different 
manner than other women with PTSD. Whereas 
skin conductance and heart rate of women with low PD 
scores increased as expected while they were talking 
about the rape, those with high PD scores showed a decrease 
in the physiological measures. When the participants’ 
subjective distress during each of the phases was 
examined, the high-PD group reported the same level 
of distress as the low-PD group. Therefore, despite experiencing 
distress, the physiological responses of the 
high-PD group were suppressed. Griffin and colleagues 
speculated that there may be a dissociative subtype of 
individuals with PTSD who physiologically respond 
quite differently than those with the more phobic type 
of PTSD. The addition of neuroimaging has demonstrated 
that instead of a strong amygdala response, individuals 
who are highly dissociative appear to have an 
overmodulated response and strong activation of the 
frontal lobes (Lanius et al., 2010). Research such as 
this supports the dissociative subtype found in DSM-5. 

In general, there are two major aims in assessment 
in clinical practice: diagnosis and treatment planning. 
Whether the primary purpose of assessment is diagnosis 
or treatment planning, a multidimensional, multiaxial 
approach is desirable. Because a cross-sectional 
view taken at a single point in time may fail to capture 
the full range and pattern of symptoms, a longitudinal 
approach to assessment has been advocated by Denny, 
Robinowitz, and Penk (1987), and Sutker, Uddo-Crane, 
and Allain (1991). Certainly for the purposes of treat


ment, ongoing assessment of symptom patterns and 
treatment effectiveness is essential. Even when measuring 
PTSD cross-sectionally, it has been suggested that 
multiple measures and methods be used, depending on 
the purpose of the assessment (Keane, Brief, Pratt, & 
Miller, 2007; Weathers & Keane, 1999). 

Some final notes regarding assessment are in order. 
First, given the empirical evidence linking PTSD with 
increased risk of suicide, suicide risk should always be 
carefully assessed and monitored. The National Women’s 
Study (Kilpatrick, Edmunds, & Seymour, 1992) 
found that 13% of rape survivors had made a suicide 
attempt compared with 1% of nonvictims. Additionally, 
33% of rape survivors, compared with 8% of nonvictims, 
stated that they had seriously considered suicide 
at some point. Furthermore, the presence of comorbid 
PTSD has been associated with a greater number of suicide 
attempts among individuals with major depressive 
disorder (Oquendo et al., 2003). These data highlight 
the need for careful monitoring of suicidal ideation and 
self-harm behavior among individuals being assessed 
or treated for PTSD. 

Second, a growing body of research suggests that 
individuals with PTSD are at increased risk of perpetrating 
physical aggression against others. McFall, 
Fontana, Raskind, and Rosenheck (1999) found that 
male Vietnam veteran inpatients with PTSD were 
more likely than inpatients without PTSD or a community 
sample of Vietnam veterans to perpetrate acts 
of violence toward objects or others. Results from the 
NVVRS indicated that 33% of Vietnam veterans with 
PTSD had assaulted their partner within the previous 
year (Jordan et al., 1992). Risk of violence is not limited 
to Vietnam veterans. There is evidence of increased 
risk of violence in other traumatized populations, including 
women (e.g., Miller et al., 2004). Given also 
that outbursts of anger are one of the DSM-5 symptoms 
of PTSD, it is important that history of aggressive acts 
(under criterion E), as well as current impulses toward 
aggression (e.g., angry mood in criterion D), be carefully 
assessed and addressed. 

treatMeNt 

Types of Therapy for PTSD 

There have been four predominant forms of therapy 
for PTSD: coping, skills-focused treatments; exposurebased 
treatments; cognitive therapy; combination 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

treatments; and eye movement desensitization and 
reprocessing (EMDR; which may be a combination 
treatment). Before reviewing the research on treatment 
outcome for PTSD, we describe some of the treatment 
protocols. 

Stress Inoculation Training 

The earliest comprehensive approach described specifically 
for use with rape survivors was stress inoculation 
training (SIT; Kilpatrick & Amick, 1985; Kilpatrick et 
al., 1982). Based on Meichenbaum’s (1985) approach 
to anxiety, its aim is to give clients a sense of mastery 
over their fears by teaching a variety of coping skills. 
The approach is tailored to the individual problems and 
needs of each client, so it is flexible and can be used in 
individual or group settings. SIT is approached in phases. 
The first phase, preparation for treatment, includes 
an educational element to provide an explanatory or 
conceptual framework from which the client can understand 
the nature and origin of his/her fear and anxiety, 
and make sense of the trauma and its aftermath. In 
SIT, a social learning theory explanation is used. Along 
with this, fear and anxiety reactions are explained as 
occurring along three channels (Lang, 1968): (1) the 
physical or autonomic channel; (2) the behavioral or 
motoric channel; and (3) the cognitive channel. Specific 
examples are given for each, and the patient identifies 
his/her own reactions within each channel. Interrelationships 
among the three channels are explained 
and discussed. The second phase of SIT is the training 
of coping skills directed at each of these channels of response. 
It includes, in sequence, a definition of the coping 
skill, a rationale, an explanation of the mechanism 
by which the skill works, a demonstration of the skill, 
application by the client of the skill to a problem area 
unrelated to the target behaviors, a review of how well 
the skill worked, and, finally, application and practice 
of the skill with one of the target fears. Skills taught 
most often for coping with fear in the physical channel 
are muscle relaxation and breathing control. 

For the behavioral channel, covert modeling and role 
playing are the coping skills usually taught. The client 
is taught to visualize a fear- or anxiety-provoking 
situation and to imagine him/herself confronting it successfully. 
For the cognitive channel, the client is taught 
guided self-dialogue. The client is taught to focus on his/ 
her internal dialogue and trained to label negative, irrational, 
and maladaptive self-statements. He/she is then 
taught to substitute more adaptive self-verbalizations. 

Self-dialogue is taught in four categories: preparation, 
confrontation and management, coping with feelings 
of being overwhelmed, and reinforcement. For each of 
these categories, a series of questions and/or statements 
is generated that encourages the client to assess the actual 
probability that the negative event will occur, to 
manage the overwhelming fear and avoidance behavior, 
to control self-criticism and self-devaluation, to 
engage in the feared behavior, and finally to reinforce 
him/herself for making the attempt and following the 
steps. 

Exposure Techniques 

Beginning in the early 1980s, forms of exposure therapy 
were investigated as a treatment for PTSD. Although 
systematic desensitization (SD) has been demonstrated 
to be effective for treating PTSD in a number of case 
study reports and controlled studies, it was not widely 
adopted as a preferred treatment (Bowen & Lambert, 
1986; Brom, Kleber, & Defares, 1989; Frank et al., 
1988; Frank & Stewart, 1983, 1984; Schindler, 1980; 
Shalev, Orr, & Pitman, 1992). Because people with 
PTSD may fear and avoid a wide range of traumarelated 
stimuli, SD may require a number of hierarchies 
that can be quite inefficient. 

Extended exposure to feared cues or to the trauma 
memory itself is a more efficient treatment and has been 
employed more widely. Known variously as direct therapeutic 
exposure (DTE), flooding, or prolonged exposure, 
these exposure techniques require clients to confront 
feared situations in vivo, to imagine themselves in 
a fear-producing situation, or to recall their particular 
trauma for extended periods of time. Rothbaum, Hodges, 
Ready, Graap, and Alarcon (2001) experimented 
with the use of virtual reality for treating veterans. The 
veteran with PTSD can take a virtual helicopter trip 
in Vietnam, complete with gunfire, or drive a vehicle 
in Middle Eastern streets, as well as experience other 
stimuli that may evoke memories of traumatic events. 

Foa and colleagues (1991; Rothbaum & Foa, 1992) 
were the first to focus extensively on the specific trauma 
memory rather than fear-producing stimuli. Prolonged 
exposure (PE) is conducted individually in 9–12 
weekly or biweekly 90-minute sessions. The first two 
sessions are for information gathering, treatment planning, 
and explanation of the treatment rationale. Clients 
are also taught breathing retraining. A hierarchical list 
of major stimuli that are feared and avoided is created. 
Clients are instructed to confront feared cues for at least 


Posttraumatic Stress Disorder 

45 minutes a day, starting with a moderately anxietyprovoking 
stimulus on the hierarchy. Beginning with 
Session 3, the trauma scene is relived in imagination, 
and the client is asked to describe it aloud in the present 
tense. The level of detail is left to the client for the first 
two exposures, but thereafter he/she is encouraged to 
include more and more detail about external cues and 
internal cues, such as thoughts, physiological responses, 
and feared consequences. Descriptions are repeated 
several times each session (for 60 minutes) and audiorecorded. 
Clients are assigned as homework listening 
to the recording and engaging in in vivo tasks. Care is 
taken in sessions to ensure that the client’s anxiety decreases 
before the session is terminated, aided by the 
therapist, if necessary (Foa & Rothbaum, 1998). 

Marks, Lovell, Noshirvani, Livanou, and Thrasher 
(1998) have conducted exposure therapy somewhat differently. 
Their version of the therapy includes five sessions 
of imaginal exposure, then five sessions of live 
exposure. During the imaginal exposure, clients are 
asked to relive aloud in the first person, present tense, 
the details of their experience, then to imagine and describe 
critical aspects of the event (rewind and hold). 
Clients listen to their therapy recordings daily between 
sessions. During the live exposure portion of therapy, 
clients (most often therapist-accompanied) progress 
through a hierarchy of feared, avoided, and disabling 
trauma-related stimuli. They are asked to practice the 
live exposure for an hour a day between sessions. 

Cognitive Interventions 

Cognitive therapy for PTSD has generally taken two 
forms. One form is more present-focused and typically 
uses daily diaries or monitoring forms to elicit current 
thoughts that the client has recorded during the week. 
These homework sheets form the basis of the cognitive 
interventions that occur during treatment through 
the use of teaching and Socratic questioning. Clients 
are taught to identify and to dispute their unrealistic 
or exaggerated thoughts about themselves, the world, 
and their futures with more probabilistic reasoning 
and evidence-based argument. Examples of researchers 
who have used this model of cognitive restructuring 
are Blanchard and colleagues (2003) and Foa and colleagues 
(2005). 

The other form of cognitive therapy is traumafocused 
and constructivist, focusing on the particular 
meanings that the traumatic event(s) has for the client 
and how those interpretations of the event contradict 

or seemingly confirm previously held beliefs about 
self and others. These distorted assumptions about the 
event (e.g., “I should have been able to stop the event, 
so it is my fault that it happened”) may maintain a belief 
in a just world or a sense of controllability, but at 
the cost of reduced self-esteem, shame, or guilt. The 
focus of treatment is on how clients may have distorted 
the event itself to maintain prior beliefs about justice 
or the role of others (assimilation), or conversely, how 
they may have changed their beliefs about themselves 
and the world too much (overaccommodation) in an 
attempt to regain a sense of control or safety in the 
present or the future (“I cannot trust other people at 
all any more”). Treatment includes Socratic questioning 
and using cognitive worksheets to teach clients to 
challenge their thinking about their traumatic events 
and the implications they have constructed. Examples 
of trauma-focused cognitive therapy are studies by Resick 
and colleagues (2002, 2008) and Tarrier and colleagues 
(1999). 

Cognitive processing therapy (CPT) initially was developed 
specifically to treat the specific symptoms of 
PTSD in sexual assault survivors (Resick & Schnicke, 
1992, 1993), but it has since been updated and applied 
to other populations (Resick et al., 2007). CPT, which 
can be delivered in either individual or group formats, 
is a 12-session, structured therapy program that is predominantly 
a cognitive therapy. After an introduction 
to PTSD symptoms and the therapy, clients are asked 
to write an Impact Statement, which is a description of 
how their most distressing traumatic event has affected 
them. Clients are asked to focus on any self-blame they 
experience regarding the trauma and the effects of the 
event on their beliefs about self and others. This statement 
is used to understand how they may have distorted 
the cause of the event or overgeneralized its meaning, 
such that their functioning has been compromised. For 
example, if someone thinks that he/she should have 
been able to stop the event, then the individual might 
feel guilt afterward. If a client has decided that the 
event means no one is to be trusted, then he/she will 
behave as though this is true. 

Before examining the trauma in depth, the client is 
taught to label emotions and recognize the connection 
among events, thoughts, and feelings, then is asked to 
write a detailed account of the index traumatic event 
and read it to him/herself every day. In sessions he/ 
she reads it to the therapist and is encouraged to feel 
whatever emotions emerge and to complete worksheets 
on identified stuck points about the trauma. The thera



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

pist begins to challenge problematic thinking about the 
traumatic event with Socratic dialogue. After writing 
and reading the account for a second time, the therapist 
focuses on teaching the client the skill of challenging 
thoughts and assumptions with Socratic questions for 
him/herself through a series of worksheets. The client 
is first taught to question a single thought, then look 
for patterns of problematic thinking, and, finally, to 
generate alternative, more balanced thoughts about the 
event itself, then overgeneralized assumptions about 
self and world. In the last five sessions, clients are provided 
modules to assist them in thinking about specific 
themes that are commonly disrupted following traumatic 
events: safety, trust, power and control, esteem, 
and intimacy. In an alternative version that is receiving 
increased research attention, the written account is 
omitted. This is discussed below in the research section. 


Combination Treatments/Additive Studies 

Some studies that we review below refer to the protocols 
as cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT; e.g., 
Blanchard et al., 2003). These therapy packages are 
typically combinations of various forms of exposure 
(imaginal, in vivo) and cognitive therapy, but they may 
also include relaxation or other coping skills. Some of 
these protocols were developed as a combination treatment 
at the outset or reflect additive studies in which 
a new component is added to an existing treatment to 
determine whether the extra component adds value to 
the existing therapy. An important distinction between 
these two types of protocols is that the combination 
treatments were designed to be a specific length to accommodate 
the components of the treatment. In other 
words, the therapy package was designed to achieve the 
optimal goals of the exposure or cognitive components. 
Additive studies must accommodate to the original 
protocol length; therefore, they may not be designed 
with the optimal amount of therapy needed to achieve 
the goals of the components. In additive studies, the 
amount of exposure, stress management, or cognitive 
therapy in combination is shortened to maintain the 
length of the original protocol being compared. 

STAIR/MPE 

Cloitre, Koenen, Cohen, and Han (2002) proposed that 
survivors of child sexual abuse trauma have problems 
of affect regulation and interpersonal effectiveness, in 

addition to their PTSD, that compromise their ability 
to profit from trauma-focused interventions. Thus, they 
developed a protocol called STAIR (i.e., skills training 
in affective and interpersonal regulation) that includes 
treatment for these problems prior to implementing a 
modification of prolonged exposure (MPE). This combination 
treatment first trains patients in emotion management 
and interpersonal skills for 8 weeks, followed 
by a second phase of treatment with imaginal exposure. 
The imaginal exposure phase also includes postexposure 
emotional management and cognitive therapy. 

Eye Movement Desensitization and Reprocessing 

Eye movement desensitization and reprocessing 
(EMDR) is a controversial therapy that evolved not from 
theory or application of effective techniques for other 
disorders, but from a personal observation. As originally 
developed by Shapiro (1989, 1995), EMDR was 
based on a chance observation that troubling thoughts 
were resolved when her eyes followed the waving of 
leaves during a walk in the park. Shapiro developed 
EMDR on the basis of this observation and argues that 
lateral eye movements facilitate cognitive processing 
of the trauma. Subsequently, EMDR has been conceptualized 
as a cognitive-behavioral treatment aimed at 
facilitating information processing of traumatic events 
and cognitive interventions for negative, trauma-related 
cognitions. In the early presentations, EMDR was 
touted as a one-session cure for a range of disorders. 
However, more recent studies are typically of traumarelated 
symptoms, with a course more similar to the 
other trauma therapies. EMDR is now described as an 
eight-phase treatment that includes history taking, client 
preparation, target assessment, desensitization, installation, 
body scan, closure, and reevaluation of treatment 
effects. EMDR includes exposure and cognitive 
components, as well as the lateral eye movements. 

In the basic EMDR protocol, clients are asked to 
identify and focus on a traumatic image or memory 
(target assessment phase). Next, the therapist elicits 
negative cognitions or belief statements about the 
memory. Clients are asked to assign a rating to the 
memory and negative cognitions on an 11-point scale 
of distress and to identify the physical location of the 
anxiety. The therapist helps clients generate positive 
cognitions that would be preferable to associate with 
the memory. These are rated on a 7-point scale of how 
much the clients believe the statement. Once the therapist 
has instructed a client in the basic EMDR proce



Posttraumatic Stress Disorder 

dure, he/she is asked to do four things simultaneously 
(desensitization phase): (1) visualize the memory; (2) 
rehearse the negative cognitions; (3) concentrate on 
the physical sensations of the anxiety; and (4) visually 
track the therapist’s index finger. While the client does 
this, the therapist rapidly moves his/her index finger 
back and forth from right to left, 30–35 centimeters 
from the client’s face, with two back-and-forth movements 
per second (there are now light bars available to 
do this). These are repeated 24 times. Then the client is 
asked to blank out the memory and take a deep breath. 
Subsequently, she or he brings back the memory and 
cognitions and rates the level of distress. Sets of eye 
movements (saccades) are repeated until the distress 
rating equals 0 or 1. At this point, the client is asked 
how she or he feels about the positive cognition and 
gives a rating for it (installation phase). 

Evidence for Treatment Efficacy 

CBT and EMDR have been established as efficacious 
treatments in multiple meta-analyses (e.g., Bradley, 
Greene, Russ, Dutra, & Westen, 2005; Powers, Halpern, 
Ferenschak, Gillihan, & Foa, 2010; van Etten & 
Taylor, 1998). They have also been recommended as 
first-line treatments in multiple treatment guidelines 
for PTSD (e.g., Foa, Keane, Friedman, & Cohen, 2008; 
National Institute of Clinical Excellence, 2005; U.S. 
Departments of Veterans Affairs and Defense, 2010). 

Randomized controlled trials have consistently 
shown CBT to be superior to waiting-list and treatmentas-
usual conditions (e.g., Chard, 2005; Foa et al., 1999; 
Monson et al., 2006; Resick et al., 2002), and generally 
better than therapies designed to control for the essential 
and nonspecific elements of efficacious psychotherapy 
(e.g., Blanchard et al., 2003; Neuner, Schauer, 
Klaschik, Karunakara, & Elbert, 2004; Schnurr et al., 
2007). Head-to-head trials have shown few differences 
between different CBT packages at posttreatment (e.g., 
Bryant, Moulds, Guthrie, Dang, & Nixon, 2003; Foa et 
al., 1999; Resick et al., 2002; Tarrier et al., 1999), and 
there have been equivocal results regarding differential 
efficacy at longer-term follow-up (i.e., ≥ 
5 years posttreatment; 
Resick et al., 2012; Tarrier & Sommerfield, 
2004). The addition or removal of different elements of 
CBT protocols have not generally affected the efficacy 
of these packages (e.g., Foa et al., 1999; Resick et al., 
2008). 

Randomized controlled trials show EMDR to be 
superior to waiting-list conditions (e.g., Rothbaum, 

Astin, & Marsteller, 2005). However, several studies 
have shown CBT to be more efficacious than EMDR 
(e.g., Devilly & Spence, 1999; Taylor et al., 2003), others 
have reported no difference (e.g., Ironson, Freund, 
Strauss, & Williams, 2002; Power et al., 2002; Rothbaum 
et al., 2005), and still others report EMDR to be 
superior to CBT for at least intrusive symptoms (Lee, 
Gavriel, Drummond, Richards, & Greenwald, 2002). 
Although Shapiro maintains that lateral eye movements 
are an essential therapeutic component of EMDR, dismantling 
studies examining this have yielded mixed 
results (e.g., Pitman, Orr, Altman, Longpre, Poire, & 
Macklin, 1996; Renfrey & Spates, 1994; Wilson, Silver, 
Covi, & Foster, 1996). 

In summary, different forms of CBT focused on 
skills development or trauma processing through cognitive 
or behavioral methods have been found to be efficacious 
in the treatment of PTSD and to have longterm, 
sustained effects. Studies have documented the 
efficacy of EMDR, although the evidence supporting 
lateral eye movements as an active treatment ingredient 
are equivocal. 

Therapist, Client, and Setting Variables 

Gender and Ethnicity 

According to the National Comorbidity Survey Replication 
study (Kessler, Berglund, et al., 2005) lifetime 
prevalence rates of PTSD are nearly three times higher 
in women (9.7%) than in with men (3.6%). Tolin and 
Foa’s (2006) meta-analysis of sex differences in the 
risk for exposure to potentially traumatic events and 
PTSD indicated that women are more likely than men 
to meet criteria for PTSD but less likely to have experienced 
potentially traumatic events. Women are more 
likely than men to experience sexual assault and child 
sexual abuse but less likely to experience accidents and 
nonsexual assaults; to witness death and injury; and to 
experience disaster, fire, and war-related trauma. Within 
specific types of traumatic events, women still exhibited 
greater PTSD, suggesting that risk of exposure 
to particular types of trauma only partially explains the 
differential PTSD risk in men and women. 

Because sexual assault is predominantly perpetrated 
by men, and is a highly personal and intimate crime, 
survivors of sexual assault often distrust men. Consequently, 
the issue of therapist sex can be relevant. Frequently, 
clients prefer or insist on a female therapist. 
The effectiveness of male therapists has not been stud



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

ied specifically, but they may be quite effective, if well 
trained (Resick, Jordan, Girelli, Hutter, & Marhoeder-
Dvorak, 1988). Issues for male therapists, discussed by 
Silverman (1977) and Koss and Harvey (1991), include 
the tendency for men to view rape more as a sexual 
crime than as a crime of violence (Burt, 1980), therefore 
focusing too much on sexual aspects of the experience 
and its aftermath. 

In treating survivors of sexual assault, regardless of 
therapist sex, it is essential that the therapist be knowledgeable 
about rape and PTSD. This includes the literature 
on reactions to rape, rape myths, and attitudes 
about rape. Therapists bring their culturally learned 
perceptions with them, as do clients, and these can interfere 
with their effectiveness if they adhere to any of 
the common misperceptions about rape (e.g., rape is 
primarily about sex, most rapists are strangers, it is not 
rape unless the woman actively resists). Sexual assault 
survivors are extremely sensitive to insinuations that 
they might have been to blame, for example, and many 
drop out of treatment if they sense that the therapist 
might harbor victim-blaming attributions. 

Similarly, combat veterans are often hesitant to start 
treatment with novice therapists who may not know 
particular war details or relevant history. It is important 
for therapists to acknowledge their level of familiarity 
and work with clients to understand more fully their 
trauma experiences and the context surrounding them. 

The role of ethnicity in CBT for PTSD has received 
little attention in outcome research. This limitation, 
unfortunately, is not restricted to PTSD treatment research; 
the minority-focused supplement of the Surgeon 
General’s report on mental health (U.S. Department 
of Health and Human Services, 2001) made clear 
that there is a paucity of empirical research on treatment 
for depression and anxiety in minorities. The few 
studies of prevalence rates among ethnic groups have 
shown mixed results that, in part, may reflect differential 
rates of trauma exposure (Breslau, Davis, & Andreski, 
1995; Norris, 1992). 

Two program evaluation studies compared African 
American and European American male veterans with 
PTSD. Rosenheck, Fontana, and Cottrol (1995) found 
less improvement among African American veterans 
on some measures. However, Rosenheck and Fontana’s 
(1996) study did not support this finding. Only a few 
studies to date have examined the efficacy of CBT with 
African American women with PTSD. Zoellner, Feeny, 
Fitzgibbons, and Foa (1999) compared African American 
and European American women who were survi


vors of either sexual or nonsexual assault. Treatment 
comprised PE, SIT, or a combination of the two. There 
were no ethnic group differences in treatment efficacy. 
These results were achieved in spite of an inability to 
match clients and therapists on ethnicity. Lester, Resick, 
Young-Xu, and Artz (2010) combined the datasets from 
both Resick and colleagues (2002, 2008) studies to examine 
the dropout and outcomes of treatment among 
94 African American and 214 European American 
female victims of interpersonal trauma. The dropout 
rate was significantly greater for African-American patients 
(45% vs. 73% completed all sessions). However, 
despite that, in the intention-to-treat analyses in which 
everyone was randomized, there were no differences 
between the racial groups in treatment outcome. The 
differences appeared to be due to the fact that African 
American patients who dropped out of therapy benefited 
more from treatment than the European American 
patients who dropped out. Although these results are 
encouraging, continued attention to racial, ethnic, and 
cultural issues in treatment is important (see McNair & 
Neville, 1996). 

Vicarious Traumatization 

Working with trauma victims can have negative effects 
on therapists that have been labeled “secondary” 
or “vicarious” traumatization by some. McCann and 
Pearlman (1990) discuss this impact as disruption of 
the therapist’s own cognitive schemas about self and 
the world. Hearing clients’ traumatic experiences may 
be shocking and lead to lasting alterations in assumptions 
and expectations, which in turn affect therapists’ 
feelings, behaviors, and relationships. Working with 
trauma victims may challenge therapists’ assumptions 
about personal invulnerability and safety, as well as 
beliefs that the world is a meaningful, orderly place 
filled with trustworthy people. According to McCann 
and Pearlman’s model, an individual therapist’s reaction 
depends on the degree of discrepancy between 
the survivor’s trauma and the therapist’s cognitive 
schemas. For example, if the therapist’s own complex 
experiences have led to the development of safety assumptions 
(schemas) as central to his/her well-being, 
working with trauma survivors may be distressing due 
to a heightened sense of vulnerability. In addition, the 
therapist’s memory system may be altered to incorporate 
traumatic imagery that can become intrusive. 

To counteract the negative effects of working with 
traumatized individuals, therapists should be prepared 


Posttraumatic Stress Disorder 

to recognize and acknowledge these effects and take 
steps to deal with them. McCann and Pearlman (1990) 
recommend the use of one’s professional network as a 
source of support and to prevent isolation. Talking to 
other professionals who work with trauma survivors is 
especially useful because they can help the therapist to 
recognize these effects and normalize these reactions. 
Other coping strategies suggested by McCann and 
Pearlman include balancing one’s caseload with trauma 
and nontrauma cases, engaging in other professional 
and personal activities, recognizing one’s own limitations, 
working for social change, and focusing on the 
positive personal impact of work with trauma survivors 
and ways it can enrich one’s life. 

“Resistance” 

Clients with PTSD can be difficult to engage and treat 
due to their ambivalence about therapy. They may want 
help, but they fear confronting their memories and 
have difficulty trusting others, including therapists. 
They may also have strong feelings of shame about the 
traumatic event that interfere with their willingness to 
disclose information that they feel may lead to rejection 
by others. Of course, it is important to remember 
that avoidance behaviors, including avoiding thoughts 
about the trauma, are part of the criteria for PTSD. 
Therefore, it is to be expected that avoidance will also 
occur in the context of treatment. No-shows are common, 
and both subtle and obvious avoidance behaviors 
are seen throughout the beginning stages of therapy. If 
possible, therapists should consider treatment as starting 
on the telephone prior to the first session. The noshow 
rate is likely to decrease if the therapist expresses 
understanding of the client’s hesitance to come in and 
encourages attendance. Early in therapy, the therapist 
should describe avoidance as a symptom of PTSD and 
an ineffective, though understandable, means of coping. 
Labeling this as “resistance” likely only increases 
judgmentalness toward the client and hinders therapist 
effectiveness. This and other challenges in working 
with rape trauma survivors are discussed by Koss and 
Harvey (1991) and Kilpatrick and Veronen (1983). Shay 
and Munroe (1999) discuss the challenges of working 
with combat veterans with complex PTSD. 

Multiply Traumatized Victims 

The treatment approaches presented here have been 
shown to produce significant improvement in civilian 

trauma victims within a brief time. The studies presented 
typically did not exclude anyone for his/her trauma 
history, and most had extensive trauma histories, even 
when there was an identified trauma that was the primary 
inclusion criterion (rape, combat). Moreover, in 
a secondary analysis of Resick and colleagues’ (2002) 
trial, Resick and colleagues (2003) showed that the 42% 
of patients with childhood sexual abuse (CSA) experiences 
in addition to their adult index trauma had significant 
improvements in their PTSD and did not differ 
from those without a CSA history. In recent years, there 
has been a surge in evidence of treatment success in 
individuals with more chronic or repeated trauma histories, 
such as domestic violence (Kubany et al., 2004), 
combat (Monson et al., 2006), and long-standing CSA 
(Chard, 2005; Cloitre, Stovall-McClough, Miranda, 
& Chemtob, 2004). This research points to the utility 
of evidence-based treatment for complex cases and 
debunks the myth that CBT only works for “simple” 
cases of a single trauma. That said, therapists should 
be aware of attending to special issues in working with 
these cases. For example, some research suggests that 
PTSD in sexual assault trauma survivors may play a 
role in repeat traumatization (e.g., Kilpatrick et al., 
1987), although this relationship appears to be complex 
(Wilson, Calhoun, & Bernat, 1999). Survivors of 
CSA may present additional challenges (Cloitre, 1998) 
because their traumatization may have interfered with 
processes of normal development. Given that the abuse 
often involves a relative or trusted adult, it represents 
a serious betrayal by someone on whom the child depended 
for basic safety and protection. They may need 
more help with skills development as well, especially 
interpersonal and emotion regulation skills. In some 
cases, sexual dysfunctions must be addressed. This can 
be added to an individual treatment program or the client 
may be referred to a sex therapy specialist, but only 
after the treatment for other trauma-related problems is 
complete. Veterans may present with issues specific to 
committing acts of violence or killing others, distrust 
of the government and authority figures, ethnic/racial 
stereotyping, and protracted grief reactions (Monson, 
Price, & Ranslow, 2005). 

Group Treatment 

The decision whether to use a group or an individual 
format for treatment is usually made on the basis of 
clinical judgment and practicality. There is scant research 
comparing the two formats. Some interventions 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

that have been used with trauma victims are adaptable 
for use in either format. Recent research has shown that 
standardized group treatments may be successful for 
combat veterans and CSA trauma survivors (Chard, 
2005; Creamer, Morris, Biddle, & Elliott, 1999). Recently 
Morland, Hynes, Macintosh, Resick, and Chard 
(2011) produced pilot data for an ongoing study in 
which group CPT was conducted through telehealth 
with a group on one of the Hawaiian islands while the 
therapist was on another island. Although the main 
randomized trial has not been completed yet, the findings 
appear promising that there will be equivalence 
between telehealth and in-person groups. 

Group treatment has several advantages that make it 
popular with both trauma survivors and professionals. 
Koss and Harvey (1991) discussed a number of these. 
Group treatment reduces the sense of isolation felt by 
most survivors, who withdraw from interactions and 
believe that others cannot understand their feelings. It 
provides social support that is unambiguous and nonblaming. 
It helps to validate and to normalize feelings 
and reactions to the trauma. Group treatment confirms 
the reality of the traumatic experience and allows sharing 
of coping strategies. It counteracts self-blame and 
promotes self-esteem. Because it is more egalitarian 
than individual therapy, group treatment can promote 
empowerment and decrease dependency. It provides a 
safe environment for developing attachment and intimacy 
with others, and an opportunity for sharing grief 
and loss. Finally, group treatment can help trauma survivors 
assign meaning to the event, promoting cognitive 
processing. 

Group approaches have drawbacks as well, and care 
should be taken to screen clients to assess their readiness 
for joining a group. McCann and Pearlman (1990) 
suggest that clients with severe PTSD should be in individual 
therapy simultaneously with group treatment because 
groups may elicit strong affect and memories that 
can overwhelm an unprepared client. For similar reasons, 
Resick and Markaway (1991) warn against having 
group members share their rape experiences during 
the first few sessions. Although important for recovery, 
the sharing of “war stories” should be done later 
in the group process or in individual sessions, to avoid 
frightening other group members or sensitizing them to 
other vulnerable situations. Poor candidates for group 
treatment, as suggested by Koss and Harvey (1991) and 
McCann and Pearlman, are suicidal clients; those with 
heavy substance abuse problems; self-mutilating or 

substance-abusing clients with a borderline personality 
disorder diagnosis; clients with very unstable, disorganized 
lives; and clients who have never before spoken 
about the trauma or whose memory of it is incomplete. 

case stuDy 

“Tom” is a 23-year-old, single, white male who presented 
for treatment approximately 1 year after a traumatic 
event that occurred during his military service in Iraq. 
Tom received CPT while on active duty in the Army. 

Background 

Tom was born the third of four children to his parents. 
He described his father as an alcoholic who was frequently 
absent from the home due to work travel prior 
to his parents’ divorce. Tom indicated that his father 
was always emotionally distant from the family, especially 
after the divorce. Tom had close relationships 
with his mother and siblings. He denied having any 
significant mental health or physical health problems 
in his childhood. However, he described two significant 
traumatic events in his adolescence. Specifically, 
he described witnessing his best friend commit suicide 
by gunshot to the head. Tom indicated that this event 
severely affected him, as well as his entire community. 
He went on to report that he still felt responsible for not 
preventing his friend’s suicide. The second traumatic 
event was the death of Tom’s brother in an automobile 
accident when Tom was 17 years old. Tom did not receive 
any mental health treatment during his childhood 
or after these events, though he indicated that he began 
using alcohol and illicit substances after these traumatic 
events in his youth. He admitted to using cannabis 
nearly daily during high school, as well as daily use of 
alcohol, drinking as much as a 24-pack of beer per day 
until he passed out. Tom reported that he decreased his 
alcohol consumption and ceased using cannabis after 
his enlistment. 

Tom served in the Infantry. He went to Basic Training, 
then attended an advanced training school prior 
to being deployed directly to Iraq. While in Iraq, Tom 
witnessed and experienced a number of traumatic incidents. 
He spoke about fellow soldiers who were 
killed and injured in service, as well as convoys that 
he witnessed being hit by improvised explosive devices 
(IEDs). However, the traumatic event that he identified 


Posttraumatic Stress Disorder 

as most distressing and anxiety-provoking was shooting 
a pregnant woman and child. 

Tom described this event as follows: Suicide bombers 
had detonated several bombs in the area where Tom 
served, and a control point had been set up to contain 
the area. During the last few days of his deployment, 
Tom was on patrol at this control point. It was dark outside. 
A car began approaching the checkpoint, and officers 
on the ground signaled for the car to stop. The car 
did not stop in spite of these warnings. It continued to 
approach the control point, entering the area where the 
next level of Infantrymen were guarding the entrance. 
Per protocol, Tom fired a warning shot to stop the approaching 
car, but the car continued toward the control 
point. About 25 yards from the control point gate, Tom 
and at least one other soldier fired upon the car several 
times. 

After a brief period of disorientation, a crying man 
with clothes soaked with blood emerged from the car 
with his hands in the air. The man quickly fell to his 
knees, with his hands and head resting on the road. 
Tom could hear the man sobbing. According to Tom, 
the sobs were guttural and full of despair. Tom looked 
over to find in the pedestrian seat a dead woman who 
was apparently pregnant. A small child in the backseat 
was also dead. Tom never confirmed this, but he and 
his fellow soldiers believed that the man crying on the 
road was the husband of the woman and the father of 
the child and fetus. 

Tom was immediately distressed by the event, and a 
Combat Stress Control unit in the field eventually had 
him sent back to a Forward Operating Base because 
of his increasing reexperiencing and hypervigilance 
symptoms. Tom was eventually brought to a major 
Army hospital and received individual CPT within this 
setting. 

Tom was administered the CAPS at pretreatment; 
his score was in the severe range, and he met diagnostic 
criteria for PTSD. He also completed the Beck Depression 
Inventory–II (BDI-II) and the State–Trait Anxiety 
Inventory (STAI). His depression and anxiety symptoms 
at pretreatment were in the severe range. Tom was 
provided feedback about his assessment results in a 
session focused on an overview of his psychological assessment 
results and on obtaining his informed consent 
for a course of CPT. After providing feedback about 
his assessment, the therapist gave Tom an overview of 
CPT, with an emphasis on its trauma-focused nature, 
expectation of out-of-session practice adherence, and 

the client’s active role in getting well. Tom signed a 
“CPT Treatment Contract” detailing this information 
and was provided a copy of the contract for his records. 
The CPT protocol began in the next session. 

Session 1 

Tom arrived 15 minutes prior to his first scheduled appointment 
of CPT. He sat down in the chair the therapist 
gestured that he sit in, but he was immediately restless 
and repositioned frequently. Tom quickly asked to move 
to a different chair in the room, so that his back was 
not facing the exterior door and his gaze could monitor 
both the door and the window. He asked the therapist 
how long his session would take and whether he would 
have to “feel anything.” The therapist responded that 
this session would last 50–60 minutes, and that, compared 
with other future sessions, she would be doing 
most of the talking. She added that, as discussed during 
the treatment contracting session, the focus would be 
on Tom’s feelings in reaction to the traumatic event but 
that the current session would focus less on this. The 
therapist also explained that she would have the treatment 
manual in her lap, and would refer to it throughout 
to make sure that she delivered the psychotherapy as it 
was prescribed. She encouraged Tom to ask any questions 
he might have as the session unfolded. 

The therapist explained that at the beginning of each 
session they would develop an agenda for the session. 
The purposes of the first therapy session were to (1) 
describe the symptoms of PTSD; (2) give Tom a framework 
for understanding why these symptoms had not 
remitted; (3) present an overview of treatment to help 
Tom understand why practice outside of session and 
therapy attendance were important to elicit cooperation 
and to explain the progressive nature of the therapy; (4) 
build rapport between Tom and the therapist; and (5) 
give the client an opportunity to talk briefly about his 
most distressing traumatic event or other issues. 

The therapist then proceeded to give didactic information 
about the symptoms of PTSD. She asked Tom 
to provide examples of the various clusters of PTSD 
symptoms that he was experiencing, emphasizing how 
reexperiencing symptoms are related to hyperarousal 
symptoms, and how hyperarousal symptoms elicit a 
desire to avoid or become numb. The paradoxical effect 
of avoidance and numbing in maintaining, or even 
increasing, PTSD symptoms was also discussed. Tom 
indicated that this was the first time someone had ex



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

plained the symptoms of PTSD in this way, putting 
them “in motion” by describing how they interact with 
one another. 

The therapist transitioned to a description of trauma 
aftereffects within an information-processing framework. 
She described in lay terms how traumas may be 
schema-discrepant events; traumatic events often do 
not fit with prior beliefs about oneself, others, or the 
world. To incorporate this event into one’s memory, 
the person may alter his/her perception of the event 
(assimilate the event into an existing belief system). 
Examples of assimilation include looking back on the 
event and believing that some other course of action 
should have been taken (“undoing” the event) or blaming 
oneself because it occurred. The therapist went 
on to explain that Tom could have also attempted to 
change his prior belief system radically to overaccommodate 
the event to his prior beliefs. “Overaccommodation” 
was described as changing beliefs too much as 
a result of the traumatic event (e.g., “I can’t trust myself 
about anything”). She explained that several areas of 
beliefs are often affected by trauma, including safety, 
trust, power/control, esteem, and intimacy. She further 
explained that these beliefs could be about the self and/ 
or others. The therapist also pointed out that if Tom had 
negative beliefs prior to the traumatic event relative to 
any of these topics, the event could serve to strengthen 
these preexisting negative beliefs. 

At this point, Tom described his childhood and adolescent 
experiences, and how they had contributed to 
his premilitary trauma beliefs. The therapist noted that 
Tom tended to blame himself and to internalize the bad 
things that had happened in his family and the suicide 
of his friend. She also noted his comment, “I wonder if 
my father drank to cope with me and my siblings.” In 
Tom’s case, it seemed likely that the traumatic experience 
served more to confirm his preexisting beliefs that 
he had caused or contributed to bad things happening 
around and to him. 

Tom then spent some time describing how drastically 
things had changed after his military traumas. 
Prior to his military experiences and, specifically, the 
shooting of the woman and child, Tom described himself 
as “proud of being a soldier” and “pulling his life 
together.” He indicated that the military structure had 
been very good for him in developing self-discipline 
and improving his self-esteem. He indicated that he 
felt good about “the mission to end terrorism” and was 
proud to serve his country. He felt camaraderie with his 
fellow soldiers and considered a career in the military. 

He denied any authority problems and in fact believed 
that his commanding officers had been role models 
of the type of leader he wished to be. Prior to his deployment 
to Iraq, Tom met and married his wife, and 
they appeared to have a stable, intimate relationship. 
After his return from Iraq, Tom indicated that he did 
not trust anyone, especially anyone associated with the 

U.S. government. Tom expressed his disillusionment 
with the war effort and distrust of the individuals who 
commanded his unit. He also articulated distrust of 
himself: “I always make bad decisions when the chips 
are down.” He stated that he felt completely unsafe in 
his environment. In his immediate postdeployment period, 
Tom had occasionally believed snipers on the base 
grounds had placed him in their crosshairs to kill him. 
He indicated that he minimally tolerated being close 
to his wife, including sexual contact between the two 
of them. 
The therapist introduced the notion of “stuck points,” 
or ways of making sense of the trauma or of thinking 
about himself, others, and the world, as getting in the 
way of Tom’s recovery from the traumatic events. The 
therapist noted that a large number of individuals are 
exposed to trauma. In fact, military personnel are 
among the most trauma-exposed individuals. However, 
most people recover from their trauma exposure. Thus, 
a primary goal of the therapy was to figure out what had 
prevented Tom from recovering (i.e., how his thinking 
had got him “stuck,” leading to the maintenance of his 
PTSD symptoms). 

The therapist then asked Tom to provide a 5-minute 
account of his index traumatic event. Tom immediately 
responded, “There were so many bad things over there. 
How could I pick one?” The therapist asked, “Which of 
those events do you have the most thoughts or images 
about? Which of those events do you dislike thinking 
about the most?” The therapist indicated that Tom did 
not need to provide a fine-grained description of the 
event, but rather a brief overview of what happened. 
Tom provided a quick account of the shooting of the 
woman and child. The therapist praised Tom for sharing 
about the event with her and asked about his feelings 
as a result of sharing the information. Tom said 
that he felt anxious and wanted the session to be over. 
The therapist used this as an opportunity to describe 
the differences between “natural” and “manufactured” 
emotions. 

The therapist first described “natural” emotions as 
those feelings that are commensurate reactions to experiences 
that have occurred. For example, if we perceive 


Posttraumatic Stress Disorder 

that someone has wronged us, it is natural to feel anger. 
If we encounter a threatening situation, it is natural to 
feel fear. Natural emotions have a self-limited and diminishing 
course. If we allow ourselves to feel these 
natural emotions, they will naturally dissipate. The 
therapist used the analogy of the energy contained in 
a bottle of carbonated soda to illustrate this concept. 
If the top of the bottle is removed, the pressure initially 
comes out with some force, but that force subsides 
and eventually has no energy forthcoming. On 
the other hand, there are “manufactured” emotions, 
or emotions that a person has a role in making. Our 
thoughts contribute to the nature and course of these 
emotions. The more that we “fuel” these emotions with 
our self-statements, the more we can increase the “pressure” 
of these emotions. For example, if a person tells 
himself over and over that he is a stupid person and 
reminds himself of more and more situations in which 
he perceived that he made mistakes, then he is likely to 
have more and more anger toward himself. The therapist 
reiterated that the goals of the therapy were (1) to 
allow Tom to feel the natural emotions he has “stuffed,” 
which keep him from recovering from his trauma; and 

(2) to figure out how Tom was manufacturing emotions 
that were unhelpful to him. 
The therapist summarized for Tom the three major 
goals of the therapy: (1) to remember and to accept 
what happened to him by not avoiding those memories 
and associated emotions; (2) to allow himself to feel his 
natural emotions and let them run their course, so the 
memory could be put away without such strong feelings 
still attached; and (3) to balance beliefs that had been 
disrupted or reinforced, so that Tom did not manufacture 
unhelpful emotions. 

The therapist made a strong pitch for the importance 
of out-of-session practice adherence before assigning 
Tom the first practice assignment. The therapist told 
Tom that there appeared to be no better predictor of 
response to the treatment than how much effort a patient 
puts into it. She pointed out that of the 168 hours 
in a week, Tom would be spending 1–2 hours of that 
week in psychotherapy sessions (Note. We have found 
it helpful to do twice-weekly sessions, at least in the 
initial portion of the therapy, to facilitate rapport building, 
to overcome avoidance, and to capitalize on early 
gains in the therapy.) If Tom only spent the time during 
psychotherapy sessions focused on these issues, he 
would be spending less than 1% of his week focused 
on his recovery. To get better, he would be using daily 
worksheets and other writing assignments to promote 

needed skills in his daily life and to decrease his avoidance. 
The therapist also pointed out that at the beginning 
of each session they would review the practice assignments 
that Tom had completed. The therapist asked 
Tom if this made sense, and he responded, “Sure. It 
makes sense that you get out of it what you put into it.” 

Tom’s first assignment was to write an Impact Statement 
about the meaning of the event to determine how 
he had made sense of the traumatic event, and to help 
him begin to determine what assimilation, accommodation, 
and overaccommodation had occurred since 
the event. Stuck points that get in the way of recovery 
are identified with this first assignment. Tom was instructed 
to start writing the assignment later that day 
to address directly any avoidance about completing the 
assignment. He was specifically reminded that this was 
not a trauma account (that would come later) and that 
this assignment was specifically designed to get at the 
meaning of the event in his life, and how it had impacted 
his belief systems. 

The specific assignment was as follows: 

Please write at least one page on what it means to 
you that you that this traumatic experience happened. 
Please consider the effects that the event has had on 
your beliefs about yourself, your beliefs about others, 
and your beliefs about the world. Also consider the following 
topics while writing your answer: safety, trust, 
power/competence, esteem, and intimacy. Bring this 
with you to the next session. 

Session 2 

The purposes of the second session are (1) to discuss 
the meaning of the event and (2) to help Tom begin to 
recognize thoughts, label emotions, and see the connection 
between what he says to himself and how he 
feels. Tom arrived with obvious anger and appeared 
defensive throughout most of the session. He stated 
that he had been feeling quite angry all week, and that 
he was “disgusted” with society and particularly politicians, 
who were “all self-interested or pandering to 
those with money.” He expressed a great deal of anger 
over the reports of alleged torture at Abu Ghraib prison, 
which was a major news item during his therapy. 
The therapist was interested in the thinking behind 
Tom’s anger about the events at Abu Ghraib. However, 
she first reviewed Tom’s practice assignment, writing 
the first Impact Statement, to reinforce the completion 
of this work and to maintain the session structure she 
had outlined in the first session. 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

The therapist asked Tom to read his Impact Statement 
aloud. Clients in individual CPT are always asked 
to read their practice assignments aloud. Should the 
therapist read them, the client could dissociate or otherwise 
avoid his/her own reactions to their material. 
Tom had written: 

The reason that this traumatic event happened is because 
I was friggin’ stupid and made a bad decision. 
I killed an innocent family, without thinking. I murdered 
a man’s wife and child. I can’t believe that I did 
it. I took that man’s wife and child, and oh, yeah, his 
unborn child, too. I feel like I don’t deserve to live, let 
alone have a wife and child on the way. Why should I be 
happy when that man was riddled with despair, and that 
innocent woman, child, and unborn child died? Now, I 
feel like I’m totally unsafe. I don’t feel safe even here 
on the hospital grounds, let alone in the city or back 
home with my family. I feel like someone is watching 
me and is going to snipe at me and my family because 
the terrorists had information about the situation and 
passed it on. I also don’t feel that people are safe around 
me. I might go off and hurt someone, and God forbid 
it be my own family. With my wife pregnant, I am really 
concerned that I might hurt her. I don’t trust anyone 
around me, and especially the government. I don’t 
even trust the military treating me. I also don’t trust 
myself. If I made a bad decision at that time, who is 
to say that I won’t make a bad decision again? About 
power and control, I feel completely out of control of 
myself, and like the military and my commanding officer 
have complete control over me. My self-esteem is 
in the toilet. Why wouldn’t it be given the crappy things 
that I have done? I don’t think there are many positive 
things that I’ve done with my life, and when the chips 
are down, I always fail and let others down. I’m not sure 
what other-esteem is, but I do like my wife. In fact, I 
don’t think she deserves to have to deal with me, and I 
think they would be better without me around. I don’t 
want to be close to my wife, or anyone else for that matter. 
It makes me want to crawl out of my skin when my 
wife touches me. I feel like I’ll never get over this. It 
wasn’t supposed to be like this. 

The therapist asked Tom what it was like to write and 
then read the Impact Statement aloud. Tom responded 
that it had been very difficult, and that he had avoided 
the assignment until the evening before his psychotherapy 
session. The therapist immediately reinforced 
Tom for his hard work in completing the assignment. 
She also used the opportunity to gently address the 
role of avoidance in maintaining PTSD symptoms. She 
asked specific Socratic questions aimed at elucidating 

the distress associated with anticipatory anxiety, and 
wondered aloud with Tom about what it would have 
been like to have completed the assignment earlier in 
the week. She also asked Socratic questions aimed at 
highlighting the fact that Tom felt better, not worse, 
after completing the assignment. 

Tom’s first Impact Statement and the information he 
shared in the first session made evident the stuck points 
that would have to be challenged. In CPT, areas of assimilation 
are prioritized as the first targets of treatment. 
Assimilation is targeted first because changes 
in the interpretation of the event itself are integrally 
related to the other, more generalized beliefs involved 
in overaccommodation. In Tom’s case, he was assimilating 
the event by blaming himself. He used the term 
“murderer” to describe his role in the event, disregarding 
important contextual factors that surrounded the 
event. These beliefs would be the first priority for challenging. 
Tom’s overaccommodation is evident in his 
general distrust of society and authority figures, and his 
belief that he will make bad decisions in difficult situations. 
His overaccommodation is also evident in his 
sense of threat in his environment (e.g., snipers), difficulty 
being emotionally and physically intimate with 
his wife, and low esteem for others and himself. 

The therapist returned to Tom’s anger about Abu 
Ghraib to get a better sense of possible stuck points, and 
also to experiment with Tom’s level of cognitive rigidity 
or openness to cognitive challenging. The following 
exchange ensued between Tom and the therapist: 

tHeraPist: Earlier you mentioned that you were feel


ing angry about the reports from Abu Ghraib. Can 

you tell me what makes you angry? 

tom: I can’t believe that they would do that to those 
prisoners. 

tHeraPist: What specifically upsets you about Abu 
Ghraib? 

tom: Haven’t you heard the reports? I can’t believe that 
they would humiliate and hurt them like that. Once 
again, the U.S. military’s use of force is unacceptable. 


tHeraPist: Do you think your use of force as a member 
of the U.S. military was unacceptable? 

tom: Yes. I murdered innocent civilians. I am no dif


ferent than those military people at Abu Ghraib. In 

fact, I’m worse because I murdered them. 

tHeraPist: “Murder.” That’s a strong word. 


Posttraumatic Stress Disorder 

tom: Yeah? 

tHeraPist: From what you’ve told me, it seems like 
you killed some people who may or may not have 
been “innocent.” Your shooting occurred in a very 
specific place and time, and under certain circumstances. 


tom: Yes, they died at my hands. 

tHeraPist: Yes, they died, and it seems, at least in 
part, because of your shooting. Does that make you 
a murderer? 

tom: Innocent people died and I pulled the trigger. I 
murdered them. That’s worse than what happened at 
Abu Ghraib. 

tHeraPist: (quietly) Really, you think it is worse? 

tom: Yes. In one case, people died, and in another they 
didn’t. Both are bad, and both were caused by soldiers, 
but I killed people and they didn’t. 

tHeraPist: The outcomes are different—that is true. 
I’m curious if you think how it happened matters? 

tom: Huh? 

tHeraPist: Does it matter what the soldiers’ intentions 
were in those situations, regardless of the outcome? 
tom: No. The bottom line is killing versus no killing. 

tHeraPist: (realizing that there was minimal flexibility 
at this point) I agree that there is no changing the 
fact that the woman and child died, and that your 
shooting had something to do with that. However, 
I think we might slightly disagree on the use of the 
term “murder.” It is clear that their deaths have been 
a very difficult thing for you to accept, and that you 
are trying to make sense of that. The sense that you 
appear to have made of their deaths is that you are a 
“murderer.” I think this is a good example of one of 
those stuck points that seem to have prevented you 
from recovering from this traumatic event. We’ll 
definitely be spending more time together on understanding 
your role in their deaths. 

In addition to testing Tom’s cognitive flexibility, 
the therapist also wanted to plant the seeds of a different 
interpretation of the event. She was careful not 
to push too far and retreated when it was clear that 
Tom was not amenable to an alternative interpretation 
at this point in the therapy. He was already defensive 
and somewhat angry, and she did not want to exacerbate 
his defensiveness or possibly contribute to dropout 
from the therapy. 

From there, the therapist described how important it 
was to be able to label emotions and to begin to identify 
what Tom was saying to himself. The therapist and 
Tom discussed how different interpretations of events 
can lead to very different emotional reactions. They 
generated several examples of how changes in thoughts 
result in different feelings. The therapist also reminded 
Tom that some interpretations and reactions follow 
naturally from situations and do not need to be altered. 
For example, Tom indicated that he was saddened by 
the death of the family; the therapist did not challenge 
that statement. She encouraged Tom to feel his sadness 
and to let it run its course. He recognized that he had 
lost something, and it was perfectly natural to feel sad 
as a result. At this point Tom responded, “I don’t like to 
feel sad. In fact, I don’t like to feel at all. I’m afraid I’ll 
go crazy.” The therapist gently challenged this belief. 
“Have you ever allowed yourself to feel sad?” Tom responded 
that he worked very hard to avoid any and all 
feelings. The therapist encouraged Tom, “Well, given 
that you don’t have much experience with feeling your 
feelings, we don’t know that you’re going to go crazy 
if you feel your feelings, right?” She also asked him 
whether he had noticed anyone in his life who had felt 
sad and had not gone crazy. He laughed. The therapist 
added, “Not feeling your feelings hasn’t been working 
for you so far. This is your opportunity to experiment 
with feeling these very natural feelings about the traumatic 
event to see whether it can help you recover now 
from what has happened.” 

Tom was given a number of A-B-C Sheets as practice 
assignments to begin to identify what he was telling 
himself and his resulting emotions. In the first column, 
under A, “Something happens,” Tom was instructed 
to write down an event. Under the middle column, B, 
“I tell myself something,” he was asked to record his 
thoughts about the event. Under column C, “I feel and/ 
or do something,” Tom was asked to write down his 
behavioral and emotional responses to the event. The 
therapist pointed out that if Tom says something to 
himself a lot, it becomes automatic. After a while, he 
does not need to think the thought consciously, he can 
go straight to the feeling. It is important to stop and recognize 
automatic thoughts to decide whether they either 
make sense or should be challenged and changed. 

Session 3 

Tom handed the therapist his practice assignments as 
soon as he arrived. The therapist went over the individ



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

ual A-B-C Sheets Tom had completed and emphasized 
that he had done a good job in identifying his feelings 
and recognizing his thoughts. Some of this work is 
shown in Figure 2.1. 

The purpose of reviewing this work at this point in 
the therapy is to identify thoughts and feelings, not to 
heavily challenge the content of those thoughts. The 
therapist did a minor correction of Tom’s identification 
of the thought “I feel like I’m a bad person” (bolded 
in Figure 2.1) as a feeling. She commented that feelings 
are almost always one word and what you feel in 
your “gut,” and that adding the stem “I feel . . . ” does 
not necessarily make it a feeling. The therapist noticed 
the pattern of thoughts that Tom tended to record (i.e., 
internalizing and self-blaming), as well as the characteristic 
emotions he reported. 

The therapist noted the themes of assimilation that 
again emerged (i.e., self-blame) and chose to focus on 
mildly challenging these related thoughts. She specifically 
chose to focus on Tom’s thoughts and feelings related 
to his wife’s pregnancy, which ultimately seemed 
to be related to his assimilation of the traumatic event. 

tHeraPist: You don’t think you deserve to have a family? 
Can you say more about that? 

tom: Why should I get to have a family when I took 
someone else’s away? 

tHeraPist: OK, so it sounds like this relates to the first 
thought that you wrote down on the A-B-C Sheet 
about being a murderer. When you say to yourself, “I 
took someone else’s family away,” how do you feel? 

tom: I feel bad. 

tHeraPist: Let’s see if we can be a bit more precise. 
What brand of bad do you feel? Remember how we 
talked about the primary colors of emotion? Which 
of those might you feel? 

tom: I feel so angry at myself for doing what I did. 

tHeraPist: OK. Let’s write that down—anger at self. 
So, I’m curious, Tom, do the other people you’ve told 
about this situation, or who were there at the time, 
think what you did was wrong? 

tom: No, but they weren’t the ones who did it, and they 
don’t care about the Iraqi people like I do. 

ACTIVATING 
EVENT 
BELIEF 
CONSEQUENCE 
A 
B 
C 
“Something 
happens” 
“I 
tell 
myself 
something” 
“I 
feel 
something” 


I 
killed 
an 
innocent 
family. 
“I 
am 
a 
murderer.” 
I 
feel 
like 
I’m 
a 
bad 
person. 
Avoid 
talking 
about 
it. 
My 
wife 
is 
pregnant. 
“I 
don’t 
deserve 
to 
have 
a 
family.” 
Guilty 
Abu 
Ghraib 
“The 
government 
sucks.” 
Angry 
Going 
to 
therapy 
“I’m 
weak. 
I 
shouldn’t 
have 
PTSD. 
Angry 
PTSD 
is 
only 
for 
the 
weak.” 


Are 
my 
thoughts 
in 
B 
realistic? 


Yes. 


What 
can 
you 
tell 
yourself 
on 
such 
occasions 
in 
the 
future? 


? 


figUre 2.1. A-B-C Sheet. 


Posttraumatic Stress Disorder 

tHeraPist: Hmm . . . that makes me think about something, 
Tom. In the combat zone in which you were 
involved in Iraq, how easy was it to determine who 
you were fighting? 

tom: Not always particularly easy. There were lots of 

insurgents who looked like everyday people. 
tHeraPist: Like civilians? Innocent civilians? (pause) 

tom: I see where you are going. I feel like it is still 
wrong because they died. 

tHeraPist: I believe you when you say that it feels that 
way. However, feeling a certain way doesn’t necessarily 
mean that it is based on the facts or the truth. 
We’re going to work together on seeing whether that 
feeling of guilt or wrongdoing makes sense when we 
look at the situation very carefully in our work together. 


Because the goal is for Tom to challenge and dismantle 
his own beliefs, the therapist probed and planted 
seeds for alternative interpretations of the traumatic 
event but did not pursue the matter too far. Although 
Tom did move some from his extreme stance within the 
session, the therapist was not expecting any dramatic 
changes. She focused mostly on helping Tom get the 
connections among thoughts, feelings, and behaviors, 
and developing a collaborative relationship in which 
cognitive interventions could be successfully delivered. 

The therapist praised Tom for his ability to recognize 
and label thoughts and feelings, and said that she 
wanted Tom to attend to both during the next assignment, 
which was writing about the index traumatic 
event. Tom was asked to write as his practice assignment 
a detailed account of the event, and to include 
as many sensory details as possible. He was asked to 
include his thoughts and feelings during the event. He 
was instructed to start as soon as possible on the assignment, 
preferably that day, and to pick a time and place 
where he would have privacy and could allow himself 
to experience his natural emotions. Wherever he had to 
stop writing his account of the event, he was asked to 
draw a line. (The place where the client stops is often 
the location of a stuck point in the event, where the client 
gave up fighting, where something particularly heinous 
occurred, etc.) Tom was also instructed to read 
the account to himself every day until his next session. 
The therapist predicted that Tom would want to avoid 
writing the account and procrastinate until as late as 
possible. She asked Tom why it would be important for 
him to do the assignment and do it as soon as possible. 

This was a technique to determine how much Tom 
was able to recount the rationale for the therapy, and 
to strengthen his resolve to overcome avoidance. Tom 
responded that he needed to stop avoiding, or he would 
remain scared of his memory. The therapist added that 
the assignment was to help Tom get his full memory 
back, to feel his emotions about it, and for therapist and 
client to begin to look for stuck points. She also reassured 
Tom that although doing so could be difficult for 
a relatively brief period of time, it would not continue 
to be so intense, and he would soon be over the hardest 
part of the therapy. 

Session 4 

During the settling-in portion of the session, Tom indicated 
that he had written the account of the event 
the evening before, although he had thought about and 
dreaded it every day prior to that. He admitted that he 
had been avoidant due to his anxiety. The therapist 
asked Tom to read his account aloud to her. Before 
starting, Tom asked why it was important to read it in 
the session. The therapist reminded Tom of what they 
had talked about the previous session, and added that 
the act of reading aloud would help him to access the 
whole memory and his feelings about it. Tom read what 
he wrote quickly, like a police report, and without much 
feeling: 

There were several of us who were assigned to guard a 
checkpoint south of Baghdad. We were there because 
insurgents were beginning to take over the particular 
area, and we were there to contain the area. I was 
placed on top of the checkpoint. It was dusk. It had been 
a fairly routine day, with people coming through the 
checkpoint like they were going through a toll booth. 
Off in the distance I noticed a small, dark car that was 
going faster than most cars. I could tell it was going 
faster because there was more sand smoke kicking up 
behind it. Men out in front of the checkpoint were motioning 
for the car to slow down, but it didn’t seem to be 
slowing down. Someone shot into the air to warn them, 
but they kept on coming. I could see two heads in the 
car coming toward us. We had been told to shoot at any 
vehicle that came within 25 yards of the gate to protect 
those around the gate, and the area beyond the gate. 
The car kept coming. I shot a bunch of rounds at the car. 

At least one other person shot, too. There was so 
much chaos after that. I remember feeling my gun in 
my hand as I stood there. After a few moments, I also 
remember my legs carrying me down to the car. I don’t 
really remember how I got there, but I did. Several men 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

had surrounded the car, and a man got out of it. The 
man was crying. No, sobbing. He was speaking fast 
while he cried. He turned toward the car, resisting the 
men who attempted to remove him from the scene. I 
turned to see what the man was looking at and saw 
them for the first time. I saw the woman first. 

There was blood everywhere, and her face had been 
shot. Then I saw the little girl in the backseat slumped 
over, holding a doll. There was blood all over her, too. 
I saw the gunshots through the car. I looked back at the 
woman, but avoided looking at her face. I saw a bump 
under her dress. She was pregnant. 

I don’t remember much else after that. I know I went 
back to camp and basically fell apart. They took me 
off duty for a couple of days, but eventually they sent 
me back to the Forward Operating Base because I was 
such a mess. 

After reading the account, Tom quickly placed it in 
his binder of materials and closed the binder as if to 
indicate that he was ready to move onto something else. 
The therapist asked Tom what he was feeling, and he 
indicated that he was feeling “nothing.” The therapist 
followed up, saying, “Nothing at all?” Tom reluctantly 
admitted that he was feeling anxious. The therapist 
then asked him to read the account again, but this time 
to slow down his reading rate, and allow himself to 
experience the emotions he had felt at the time of the 
event. 

After reading the account for the second time, the 
therapist sought to flush out details of the event that 
Tom had “glossed over” and to focus on what appeared 
to be the most difficult aspects of the situation. 

tHeraPist: What part of what you just read to me is 
the most difficult? 
tom: It is all difficult. The whole thing is horrible. 

tHeraPist: What is the worst of it, though? 

tom: I guess the worst of it is seeing that small girl in 
the backseat of the car. 

tHeraPist: What did she look like when you saw her? 

(Tom describes his memory of the girl when he arrived 
at the car.) 

tHeraPist: What are you feeling right now? 

tom: I feel sick to my stomach. I feel like I did at the 
time—that I want to throw up. I am also disgusted 
and sad. I killed an innocent child. There are so 
many things I could have done differently not to have 
taken her life. 

(The therapist is aware of the assimilation process in 
Tom’s use of hindsight bias. She stores that information 
away for future reference because she wants to make 
sure that Tom is feeling strongly as many of his natural 
emotions as possible about the traumatic event.) 

tHeraPist: Continue to feel those feelings. Don’t run 

away from them. Anything else that you’re feeling? 
tom: I feel mad at myself and guilty. 

tHeraPist: Were you feeling mad at yourself and 

guilty at the time? 
tom: No. I was horrified. 

tHeraPist: OK, let’s stay with that feeling. 

tom: (Pauses.) I don’t want to feel this anymore. 
tHeraPist: I know you don’t want to feel this anymore. 

You’re doing a great job of not avoiding your feelings 

here. In order to not feel like this for a long time, 

you need to feel these absolutely natural feelings. Let 

them run their course. They’ll decrease if you stay 

with them. 

After a period in which Tom experienced his feelings 
related to the situation and allowed them to dissipate, 
a discussion ensued regarding how hurtful it 
was to Tom to hear other people’s reaction to the war. 
He expressed specific frustration with the presidential 
administration and its policy on the war. The therapist 
gently redirected Tom’s more philosophical discussion 
of international policy to the effects of the trauma on 
him. Tom then told a story of how he had shared his 
traumatic experience with a high school friend. He felt 
that this person had a negative reaction to him as a result 
of sharing the story. Tom felt judged and unsupported 
by this friend. Since this experience with his friend, 
Tom had refrained from telling others about his combat 
experience. Using Socratic questioning, the therapist 
asked Tom if there might be any reason, outside of his 
actions, that someone might have a negative reaction 
to hearing about the shooting. Through this exchange, 
Tom was able to recognize that when others hear about 
traumatic events, they also are trying to make sense of 
these experiences in light of their existing belief systems. 
In other words, others around him might fall prey 
to the “just world” belief that bad things only happen 
to bad people. They also might not take into account 
the entire context in which Tom shot the passengers in 
the car. This recognition resulted in Tom feeling less 
angry at his friend for this perceived judgment. He was 
also somewhat willing to admit that his interpretation 


Posttraumatic Stress Disorder 

of his friend’s reaction might have been skewed by his 
own judgment of himself. In fact, later in the therapy, 
when Tom was able to ask his friend directly about the 
perceived reaction, the friend indicated that it had been 
hard for him to hear, but that he had not been judging 
Tom at all. In actuality, he was thinking about the terrible 
predicament Tom had endured at the time. 

The therapist asked Tom what stuck points he had 
identified in writing and reading his account. The following 
dialogue then occurred: 

tom: I’m not sure what the stuck points are, but from 
what you’ve been asking me, I guess you question 
whether or not I murdered this family. 

tHeraPist: That’s true. I think it is worthwhile for 
us to discuss the differences between blame and 
responsibility. Let’s start with responsibility. From 
your account, it sounds like you were responsible for 
shooting the family. It sounds like other people may 
have been responsible, too, given that you were not 
the only person who shot at them. 

(The therapist stores this fact in her mind to challenge 
Tom later about the appropriateness of his actions. 
This also provides a good opportunity to reinforce Tom 
for performing well in a stressful situation.) 

The bottom line is that responsibility is about your 
behavior causing a certain outcome. Blame has to do 
with your intentionality to cause harm. It has to do 
with your motivations at the time. In this case, did 
you go into the situation with the motivation and intention 
to kill a family? 

tom: No, but the outcome was that they were murdered. 

tHeraPist: Some died. From what you’ve shared, if 
we put ourselves back into the situation at the time, 
it was not at all your intention for them to die. They 
were coming down the road too fast, not responding 
to the very clear efforts to warn them to stop. Your 
own and others’ intentions were to get them to stop 
at the checkpoint. Your intention at the time did not 
seem to be to kill them. In fact, wasn’t your intention 
quite the opposite? 

tom: Yes. (Begins to cry.) 

tHeraPist: (Pauses until Tom’s crying subsides somewhat.) 
It doesn’t seem that your intention was to kill 
them at all. Thus, the word “blame” is not appropriate. 
Murder or considering yourself a murderer 
does not seem accurate in this situation. The reason 
I’ve questioned the term “murder” or “murderer” all 

along was because it doesn’t seem like your intention 
was to have to shoot them. 

tom: But why do I feel like I am to blame? 

tHeraPist: That’s a good question. What’s your best 
guess about why that is? 

tom: (Still crying) If someone dies, someone should 
take responsibility. 

tHeraPist: Do you think it is possible to take responsibility 
without being to blame? What would be a 
better word for a situation that is your responsibility, 
but that you didn’t intend to happen? If a person shot 
someone but didn’t intend to do that, what would we 
call that? 

tom: An accident, I guess. 

tHeraPist: That’s right. In fact, what would you call 
shooting a person when you are trying to protect 
something or someone? 

tom: Self-defense. 

tHeraPist: Yes, very good. Weren’t you responsible 
for guarding the checkpoint? 

tom: Yeah. 

tHeraPist: So, if you were responsible for guarding 
that checkpoint, and they continued through, 
wouldn’t that have put the area at risk? 

tom: Yes, but it was a family—not insurgents. 

tHeraPist: How did you know that at the time? 

tom: There was woman and child in the car. 

tHeraPist: But, did you know that at the time? 

tom: No. 

tHeraPist: So only in hindsight do you know that it 
was a family that might have had no bad intention. 
We actually don’t know the family’s intention, do 
we? They didn’t heed the several warnings, right? 

tom: Yes. (Pauses.) I hadn’t thought that they would 
be looking to do something bad with a woman and 
child in the car. 

tHeraPist: We don’t know, and won’t ever know, bottom 
line. However, what we do know is what you 
knew at the time. What you knew at the time is that 
they did not heed the warnings, that you were responsible 
for securing the checkpoint, and that you 
took action when you needed to take action to protect 
the post. Thinking about those facts of what happened 
and what you knew at the time, how do you 
feel? 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

tom: Hmm . . . I guess I’d feel less guilty. 

tHeraPist: You’d feel less guilty, or you feel less 
guilty? 
tom: When I think through it, I do feel less guilty. 

tHeraPist: There may be points when you start feeling 
guiltier again. It will be important for you to hold 
onto the facts of what happened versus going to your 
automatic interpretation that you’ve had for awhile 
now. Is there any part of it that makes you proud? 

tom: Proud? 

tHeraPist: Yes. It seems like you did exactly what you 
were supposed to do in a stressful situation. Didn’t 
you show courage under fire? 

tom: It’s hard for me to consider my killing them as 
courageous. 

tHeraPist: Sure. You haven’t been thinking about it 
in this way for a long time, but it is something to 
consider. 

The therapist’s Socratic dialogue was designed to 
help Tom consider the entire context in which he was 
operating. She also began to plant the seed that Tom 
not only did nothing wrong but he also did what he was 
supposed to do to protect the checkpoint. Whenever 
possible, pointing out acts of heroism or courage can be 
powerful interventions with trauma survivors. 

Prior to ending the session, the therapist checked 
Tom’s emotional state to make sure he was calmer than 
he had been during the session. She also inquired about 
his reaction to the therapy session. He commented that 
it had been very difficult, but that he felt better than he 
expected in going into the “nitty-gritty” of what happened. 
He also noted that there were things he had not 
considered about the event that were “food for thought.” 
The therapist praised Tom for doing a great job on the 
writing assignment and reinforced the importance of 
not quitting now. She commented that he had completed 
one of the hardest steps of the therapy, which would 
help him recover. 

The therapist took the first account of the trauma and 
gave Tom his next practice assignment: to write the entire 
account again. The therapist asked Tom to add any 
details he might have left out of the first account and 
to provide even more sensory details. She also asked 
him to record any thoughts and feelings he was having 
in the here-and-now in parentheses, along with his 
thoughts and feelings at the time of the event. 

Session 5 

Tom arrived at Session 5 looking brighter and making 
more eye contact with the therapist. He indicated that 
he had written the account again, right after the previous 
session. He commented that the writing was hard, 
but not as hard as the first time. The therapist used this 
as an opportunity to reinforce how natural emotions 
resolve naturally as they are allowed expression. Tom 
noted that he had talked with his wife more this week, 
avoiding her less. Their increased communication allowed 
Tom’s wife to express her concerns about Tom’s 
well-being. She shared that he seemed disinterested 
in her and in their unborn child. Tom had previously 
told his wife about the incident, but he had not shared 
the specific detail that the woman in the vehicle was 
pregnant. Tom perceived his wife as having a very good 
reaction to his disclosure about the pregnant woman. 
He noted that she asked him questions, and that her 
comments indicated that she did not blame him for his 
actions. For example, she asked, “How could you have 
known at the time that it was a family?” She also reportedly 
said, “It’s hard to know with terrorism if they 
were actually just a family traveling.” Tom laughed 
when he reported that their conversation sounded like 
his last psychotherapy session. 

The therapist asked Tom to read his second account 
out loud, with as many emotions as possible. Tom had 
written more about the event, and the therapist noted 
that he had included more information about what he 
and the other guards had done to warn the passengers 
in the car to slow down for the checkpoint. Tom read 
the second account more slowly and was not as tense as 
he had been the first time he read aloud. Tom’s second 
account included much more detail and focused more 
on the vehicle and its occupants after he had fired upon 
them. 

tHeraPist: I notice that you wrote more about the car 

and the family. What are you feeling about that right 

now? 
tom: I feel sad. 
tHeraPist: Do you feel as sad as you felt the first time 

you wrote about it? 
tom: I think I may feel sadder about it now. 
tHeraPist: Hmm . . . Why do you think that might be? 
tom: I think it’s like what I wrote in the parenthesis 

about what I’m thinking now. Now, instead of feeling 


Posttraumatic Stress Disorder 

so much guilt that I shot them, I think it’s sad that 
they didn’t heed the warnings. 

tHeraPist: You mentioned that you’re feeling less 
guilt now. Why is that? 

tom: I’m beginning to realize that I was not the only 
one there that was trying to stop them. Several of us 
were trying to get them to stop. There is still some 
guilt that I was the one who shot them. 

tHeraPist: If one of the other guards had shot them, 
would you blame him or her for the shooting? Would 
you expect him or her to feel guilty for their behavior? 


tom: (Laughs.) I started thinking about that this week. 
It made me wonder if it was really me who even shot 
them. As I was writing and thinking about it more, 
I realized that there is a possibility that another of 
the guards may have been shooting at the same time. 

tHeraPist: What would it mean if he or she was shooting 
at the same time? 

tom: If he was shooting at the same time, it means that 
he thought that shooting at them might be the right 
thing to do in that situation. 

tHeraPist: Might have been the right thing to do? 

tom: (smiling) Yeah, I still have questions that we 
might have been able to do something else. 

tHeraPist: It seems like you’re still trying to “undo” 
what happened. I’m curious, what else could you 
have done? 

tom: Not have shot at them. 

tHeraPist: Then what would have happened? 

tom: They might have stopped. (Pauses.) Or I guess 
they could have gone through the checkpoint and 
hurt other people past the checkpoint. I guess they 
could have also been equipped with a car bomb that 
could have hurt many other people. That seems hard 
to believe, though, because of the woman and child 
in the car. 

tHeraPist: It is impossible for us to know their intentions, 
as we discussed before. The bottom line is that 
you’ve tended to assume that doing something different, 
or doing nothing, would have led to a better 
outcome. 

tom: That is true. I still feel sad. 

tHeraPist: Sure you do—that’s natural. I take it as a 
good sign that you feel sad. Sadness seems like a very 

natural and appropriate reaction to what happened— 
much more consistent with what happened than the 
guilt and self-blame that you’ve been experiencing. 

Tom and the therapist discussed how the goal of the 
therapy was not to forget what had happened, but to 
have the memory without all of the anxiety, guilt, and 
other negative emotions attached to it. Tom indicated 
that he was becoming less afraid and more able to tolerate 
his feelings, even when they were intense. Tom 
acknowledged that reading his account, talking about 
his trauma, and coming to psychotherapy sessions were 
becoming easier and that his negative feelings were beginning 
to diminish. 

After discussing Tom’s reactions to his memories, 
with a focus on how he had attempted to assimilate the 
memory into his existing beliefs, the therapist began 
to discuss areas of overaccommodation. One area of 
overaccommodation was Tom’s beliefs about the U.S. 
military. He had entered the service with a very positive 
view of the military. Tom had a family history of 
military service and believed in service to country and 
the “rightfulness” of the military. 

Subsequent to his traumatic event and military service 
in Iraq, he developed a negative view of the military 
that had extended to the Federal government in 
general. The therapist used this content to introduce the 
first series of tools to help challenge Tom’s stuck points. 
She also emphasized how he would gradually be taking 
over as his own therapist, capable of challenging his 
own patterns of thinking that kept him “stuck.” 

tHeraPist: It seems that you have some very strong 
beliefs about the military and the U.S. government 
since your service. I’d like to use those beliefs to 
introduce some new material that will be helpful 
to you in starting to challenge stuck points on your 
own. You’ve done an outstanding job of considering 
the way that you think and feel about things. You’ve 
been very open to considering alternative interpretations 
of things. Starting in this session, I’m going to 
help you to become your own therapist and to attack 
your own stuck points directly. 

tom: OK. 
tHeraPist: Today we will cover the first set of skills. 
We’re going to be building your skills over the next 
few sessions. The first tool is a sheet called the Challenging 
Questions Sheet. Our first step is to identify 
a single belief you have that may be a stuck point. 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

As I mentioned before, I’d like us to use your beliefs 
about the Federal government now. So, if you were 
to boil down what you believe about the Federal government 
or the military, what is it? 

tom: I don’t know. I’m not sure. I guess I’d say that the 

U.S. military is extremely corrupt. 
tHeraPist: Good. That is very clear and to the point. 
So let’s go over these questions and answer them as 
they relate to this belief. The first question you ask 
yourself is, “What’s the evidence for and against this 
idea?” 
tom: The evidence for this is Abu Ghraib. Can you believe 
that they would do that? I would have also put 
my own shooting under the “for” list, but I’m beginning 
to question that. 
tHeraPist: What other evidence is there of corruption? 
tom: Oh, and these defense contractors . . . what a 
scam! That leads me to the current administration 
and its vested interests in going to war to make 
money on defense contracting. And, oh, of course, 
to make money on the oil coming out of these countries! 


tHeraPist: OK. Sounds like you have some “for” evidence. 
What about the “against” evidence? 

tom: Well, some of my fellow soldiers were very good. 
They were very committed in their service and to 
the mission. I also had mostly good leaders, although 
some of them were real pigs. Some were really 
power-hungry a—holes, frankly. 

tHeraPist: So, it sounds like you have some pros and 
cons that support your belief that the U.S. military is 
completely corrupt. In the process of changing, it is 
not uncommon to have thoughts on both sides. That 
is great news! It means that you are considering different 
alternatives, and are not “stuck” on one way of 
seeing things. Let’s take the next one. . . . 

The therapist spent the balance of the session going 
over the list of questions to make sure that Tom understood 
them. Although most of the questions focused 
on the issue of corruption in the military, other issues 
were also brought in to illustrate the meaning of the 
questions. For example, the therapist introduced the 
probability questions with the example from Tom’s life 
in which he believed that he was going to be shot by 
an insurgent sniper while back home. These questions 
are best illustrated with regard to issues of safety. The 

therapist pointed out that perhaps not all of the questions 
applied to the belief on which Tom was working. 
The question “Are you thinking in all-or-none terms?” 
seemed to resonate with Tom the most because it applied 
to his belief about the military. He commented 
that he was applying a few examples of what seemed to 
be corruption to the entire military. Tom also indicated 
that his description of the military as “extremely” corrupt 
was consistent with the question “Are you using 
words or phrases that are extreme or exaggerated?” Indicative 
of his grasp of the worksheet, Tom also noticed 
that the question “Are you taking selected examples out 
of context?” applied to his prior view of his behavior as 
a murder in the traumatic event. 

For his practice assignment prior to Session 6, Tom 
agreed to complete one Challenging Questions Sheet 
each day. He and the therapist brainstormed about potential 
stuck points prior to the end of the session to 
facilitate practice assignment completion. These stuck 
points included “I don’t deserve to have a family,” “I 
murdered an innocent family,” and “I am weak because 
I have PTSD.” 

###CUT###
Session 6 

Tom completed Challenging Questions Sheets about all 
of the stuck points he and the therapist had generated. 
The therapist reviewed these worksheets to determine 
whether Tom had used the questions as designed. She 
asked Tom which of the worksheets he had found least 
helpful. He responded that he had had the most difficulty 
completing the sheet about deserving to have a 
family. The therapist then reviewed this sheet in detail 
with Tom (see Figure 2.2). 

tHeraPist: So, I notice that in your answer about the 
evidence for and against this idea about deserving a 
family, you included as evidence that you took some 
other man’s family. I’m glad to see that you didn’t include 
the word “murder”—that’s progress. But, how 
is that evidence for you not deserving a family? 

tom: It is evidence because I feel like I took someone 
else’s; therefore, I don’t deserve one for myself. It 
seems fair. 

tHeraPist: Remind me to make sure and look what 
you put for item 9 about confusing feelings and facts. 
For now, though, help me understand the math of 
why you don’t deserve your family, and your happiness 
about your family, because of what happened? 


Posttraumatic Stress Disorder 

Challenging 
Questions 
Sheet 


Below 
is 
a 
list 
of 
questions 
to 
be 
used 
in 
helping 
you 
challenge 
your 
maladaptive 
or 
problematic 
beliefs. 
Not 
all 
questions 
will 
be 
appropriate 
for 
the 
belief 
you 
choose 
to 
challenge. 
Answer 
as 
many 
questions 
as 
you 
can 
for 
the 
belief 
you 
have 
chosen 
to 
challenge 
below. 


Belief: 
I 
don’t 
deserve 
to 
havea 
family. 


1. 
What 
is 
the 
evidence 
for 
and 
against 
this 
idea? 
FOR: 
I 
took 
some 
other 
man’s 
family. 
AGAINST: 
I 
didn’t 
want 
to 
have 
to 
shoot 
anyone. 
An 
“eye 
for 
an 
eye” 
does 
not 
apply 
here. 


2. 
Is 
your 
belief 
a 
habit 
or 
based 
on 
facts? 
It 
is 
a 
habit 
for 
me 
to 
think 
this 
way. 
The 
facts 
are 
that 
I 
didn’t 
do 
something 
wrong 
to 
deserve 
to 
be 
punished 
in 
this 
way. 
3. 
Are 
your 
interpretations 
of 
the 
situation 
too 
far 
removed 
from 
reality 
to 
be 
accurate? 
My 
interpretation 
of 
the 
original 
situation 
has 
been 
fairly 
unrealistic, 
which 
is 
where 
I 
get 
this 
belief. 
4. 
Are 
you 
thinking 
in 
all-or-none 
terms? 
N/A 
5. 
Are 
you 
using 
words 
or 
phrases 
that 
are 
extreme 
or 
exaggerated? 
(i.e., 
always, 
forever, 
never, 
need, 
should, 
must, 
can’t, 
and 
every 
time) 
I 
guess 
maybe 
“deserve” 
could 
be 
an 
extreme 
word. 
6. 
Are 
you 
taking 
the 
situation 
out 
of 
context 
and 
only 
focusing 
on 
one 
aspect 
of 
the 
event? 
Yes, 
like 
#3, 
I 
tend 
to 
forget 
what 
all 
was 
going 
on 
at 
the 
time 
of 
my 
shooting. 
7. 
Is 
the 
source 
of 
information 
reliable? 
No, 
I’m 
not 
very 
reliable 
these 
days. 
8. 
Are 
you 
confusing 
a 
low 
probability 
with 
a 
high 
probability? 
N/A 
9. 
Are 
your 
judgments 
based 
on 
feelings 
rather 
than 
facts? 
I’m 
feeling 
guilty 
like 
I 
did 
something 
wrong 
when 
the 
truth 
is 
that 
I 
did 
what 
I 
was 
supposed 
to 
do. 
10. 
Are 
you 
focused 
on 
irrelevant 
factors? 
Maybe 
my 
deserving 
a 
family 
has 
nothing 
to 
do 
with 
someone 
else 
losing 
theirs? 
figUre 2.2. Challenging Questions Sheet. 

tom: I don’t know—it just seems fair. shouldn’t have something good like a wife and child 
in my life. 

tHeraPist: Fair? That implies that you did something 
bad that requires you to be punished. tHeraPist: Maybe we should look at your response 

tom: As I’ve been thinking about it more, I don’t think to item 9 now. What did you put in response to the 
I did something wrong when I really look at it, but question “Are your judgments based on feelings 
it still feels like I did something wrong and that I rather than facts?” 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

tom: I wrote, “I’m feeling guilty, like I did something 
wrong when the truth is that I did what I was supposed 
to do.” I try to remember what we talked 
about, and what my wife also has said to me about 
them not responding to the warnings and my shooting 
them, which may have prevented something else 
that was bad. I still feel bad—not as bad as I did— 
but I still feel like I did something wrong. 

(The therapist uses this as an opportunity to talk about 
the need for practicing new alternative thoughts in 
order to elicit emotional change.) 

tHeraPist: You are well on your way, Tom, to getting 
unstuck and recovering. Your head is starting to get 
it, and your feelings need to catch up. You’ve been 
thinking about what happened and what you did 
in a certain way for awhile now. You blamed yourself 
over and over and over again, telling yourself 
that you did something wrong. You gave yourself a 
steady diet of that type of thinking, which resulted 
in you feeling guilty about what happened. It is like 
a well-worn rut of thinking in your brain that automatically 
leads you down the path of feeling guilty. 
What you need to do now is start a new road of more 
realistic and truthful thinking about the situation 
that will eventually be a well-worn path. What is the 
more realistic view of your role in this event? 

tom: (tearfully) I had to shoot at the car, and people 
died. 

tHeraPist: That’s right. And, let’s pretend for a second 
that you really do believe that thought. If so, what 
would you feel? 

tom: I’d feel so much lighter. I wouldn’t feel guilty. I’d 
continue to feel sad about this horrible situation, but 
I wouldn’t blame myself. 

tHeraPist: Let’s take it the next step. If you didn’t 
blame yourself and feel guilty, then would you believe 
that you deserve to be happy with your wife and 
the baby that will soon be here? 

tom: Sure. 

tHeraPist: So, Tom, your work is to practice, practice, 
practice this new and more accurate way of looking 
at what happened and your role in it. With practice, 
your feelings will start matching the truth about 
what happened and the fact that you are not to blame. 

tom: It is kind of like training to use a weapon. They 
made us do certain things with our guns over and 

over and over again, until it was automatic. It was 
very automatic after a while. 

tHeraPist: That’s right. There are other questions on 
this sheet that might be helpful in convincing you of 
the truth about this in your practice. What did you 
put for the question “Is your belief a habit or based 
on a fact?” 

This dialogue illustrates a common occurrence at 
this stage in the therapy. Tom was starting to experience 
cognitive change, but his emotional change was 
lagging. The therapist reinforced the need to practice 
the new ways of thinking to feel different. It is also 
important to highlight clients’ gains in changing their 
thinking, even if their feelings have not changed or are 
ambivalent. A change in thinking is framed as more 
than halfway to a change in feeling. In effect, changed 
thinking involves competing thoughts or learning, and 
with more repetitions of the new thought, the associated 
feelings follow and eventually win out. 

In the latter portion of this session the therapist introduced 
the Patterns of Problematic Thinking Sheet 
and provided an explanation of how this list was different 
from the Challenging Questions Sheet (see Figure 
2.3). More specifically, she indicated that the Patterns 
of Problematic Thinking Sheet pertains to more 
general patterns of thinking versus challenging individual 
thoughts that Tom might have. The Patterns of 
Problematic Thinking Sheet lists seven types of faulty 
thinking patterns (e.g., oversimplifying, overgeneralizing, 
emotional reasoning). 

Tom and the therapist went through the list and generated 
examples for each of the patterns. For example, 
for “Disregarding important aspects of a situation,” the 
therapist pointed out something that Tom had brought 
up several times during therapy. Initially Tom had not 
included the important information that he and the 
other guards had attempted to stop the car before shooting 
at it. She also pointed out that emotional reasoning 
was similar to confusing a feeling with a fact, which 
had been a primary focus of the session. 

When they got to the item “Overgeneralizing from 
a single incident,” Tom said that he had noticed he was 
beginning to change his thoughts about the government 
and its leaders. He commented that it had been very 
powerful for him to consider that, in a number of instances, 
his fellow soldiers had operated with integrity 
and were committed to the mission, and to the safety 
and protection of others. Tom said spontaneously, “I 


Posttraumatic Stress Disorder 

guess that is also kind of like drawing conclusions when 
evidence is lacking or even contradictory.” He said that 
he had started stereotyping after the traumatic event— 
applying negative attributes and opinions to everyone 
in the military and the government too broadly. Tom 
and the therapist discussed how the goal of the therapy 
was to have a balanced and realistic view of things 
versus the overly ideal version he had pretrauma or the 
overly pessimistic version he had posttrauma. In other 
words, the goal was to find shades of gray and balance 
in his thinking about the government, the military, and 
their leadership. Tom added an example of this thinking: 
“There are at least some people in government who 
want to do good for others.” 

Tom was given the practice assignment to read over 
the list in the Patterns of Problematic Thinking Sheet 
and to note examples of times he used each of the problematic 
thinking patterns. 

Session 7 

Tom began the session by stating that he was feeling 
better, and that his wife had also noted a difference in 
him and was feeling less concerned about the therapy 
making him worse rather than better. The therapist had 
given Tom the PCL and the BDI-II to complete while 
he was waiting for his appointment. She quickly scored 
these assessment measures and gave Tom feedback 

Patterns 
of 
Problematic 
Thinking 


Listed 
below 
are 
several 
types 
of 
patterns 
of 
problematic 
thinking 
that 
people 
use 
in 
different 
life 
situations. 
These 
patterns 
often 
become 
automatic, 
habitual 
thoughts 
that 
cause 
us 
to 
engage 
in 
selfdefeating 
behavior. 
Considering 
your 
own 
stuck 
points, 
find 
examples 
for 
each 
of 
these 
patterns. 
Write 
in 
the 
stuck 
point 
under 
the 
appropriate 
pattern 
and 
describe 
how 
it 
fits 
that 
pattern. 
Think 
about 
how 
that 
pattern 
affects 
you. 


1. 
Jumping 
to 
conclusions 
when 
the 
evidence 
is 
lacking 
or 
even 
contradictory. 
I 
tend 
to 
jump 
to 
the 
conclusion 
that 
I 
have 
done 
something 
wrong 
when 
bad 
things 
happen. 
I 
assume 
things 
are 
my 
fault. 
2. 
Exaggerating 
or 
minimizing 
a 
situation 
(blowing 
things 
way 
out 
of 
proportion 
or 
shrinking 
their 
importance 
inappropriately). 
I 
minimize 
the 
things 
that 
I 
have 
done 
well 
in 
the 
military. 
3. 
Disregarding 
important 
aspects 
of 
a 
situation. 
In 
the 
past 
I 
have 
tended 
to 
neglect 
the 
important 
aspect 
that 
several 
of 
us 
tried 
to 
stop 
the 
car 
from 
going 
through 
the 
checkpoint. 
4. 
Oversimplifying 
things 
as 
good–bad 
or 
right–wrong. 
I 
can 
sometimes 
think 
of 
all 
Iraqis 
as 
all 
bad. 
5. 
Overgeneralizing 
from 
a 
single 
incident 
(a 
negative 
event 
is 
seen 
asa 
never-ending 
pattern). 
I 
have 
assumed 
that 
because 
of 
my 
traumatic 
event, 
I 
could 
not 
be 
safe 
with 
my 
baby 
to 
be 
born. 
6. 
Mind 
reading 
(you 
assume 
people 
are 
thinking 
negatively 
of 
you 
when 
there 
is 
no 
definite 
evidence 
for 
this). 
I 
assume 
that 
everyone 
thinks 
I 
am 
a 
terrible 
person, 
a 
murderer, 
because 
of 
what 
I 
did. 
7. 
Emotional 
reasoning 
(you 
havea 
feeling 
and 
assume 
there 
must 
bea 
reason). 
This 
one 
is 
easy—I 
feel 
guilty, 
and 
therefore 
I 
must 
be. 
figUre 2.3. Patterns of Problematic Thinking Sheet. 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

about his scores at the beginning of this session. His 
PCL score had decreased from 68 to 39, which was a 
clear and clinically meaningful change in his PTSD 
symptomatology. She noticed that his avoidance and 
reexperiencing symptoms had decreased the most; his 
hyperarousal symptoms had also decreased, but less so. 
His score on the BDI-II had decreased from 28 to 14, 
clearly indicating a reduction in his depressive symptoms. 


The therapist asked whether Tom had completed 
his practice assignment, the Patterns of Problematic 
Thinking Sheet. He indicated that he had not, but that 
he had thought about it over the week. He also laughed 
and said that he had noticed the thinking patterns in his 
wife and others. The therapist asked Tom to complete 
some of the sheet in session. At this point in therapy, 
the therapist was sitting back more as Tom took on the 
role of challenging his own cognitions. The therapist 
provided both minimal clarification and additional examples 
that she had noticed in working with Tom. 

In this session, the therapist introduced the Challenging 
Beliefs Worksheet. She was careful to point out 
that the worksheet integrated all of the previous work 
Tom had done and added a few new elements. The 
following dialogue illustrates the introduction of this 
sheet (see Figure 2.4). 

tHeraPist: I want to show you the final worksheet that 

we’re going to be using for the rest of the therapy. 
tom: OK. Wow—that looks complicated! 

tHeraPist: Actually, you’ve done pretty much everything 
on this worksheet already. This worksheet 
brings together into one place everything that we’ve 
been working on. 

tom: I’ll take your word for it, Doc. 

tHeraPist: Remember the A-B-C Sheets from way 
back when? 

tom: Yes. 

tHeraPist: (pointing to first three columns on the 
Challenging Beliefs Worksheet) This is A, B, and 

C. You have in column A the situation, or “Activating 
Event” that you had on the A-B-C Sheet. In column 
B you have “Automatic Thoughts,” which is the 
“Belief” portion of the A-B-C Sheet. Last, column 
C, “Emotions,” is the “Consequence” portion of the 
A-B-C Sheet. 
tom: OK. So far, so good. 

tHeraPist: Column D is where you identify the “Challenging 
Questions” from that sheet that apply to the 
thought or stuck point that you’re working on. In column 
E, you identify the type of “Patterns of Problematic 
Thinking” that apply to the thought or stuck 
point that you’re working on. Make sense? 

tom: Yes. 

tHeraPist: So, only column F, “Alternative Thought,” 
is new. Here you identify alternative thoughts that 
you could have about the situation. In other words, 
we’re looking for alternative statements that you can 
tell yourself or different interpretations of the event. 
In columns G and H, you get to see how your belief 
in your original thoughts may change and how the 
new thoughts affect your feelings. 

tom: OK. 

tHeraPist: So, let’s pick a stuck point and start using 
this Challenging Beliefs Worksheet. We’re going to 
be talking about safety as one of the first topics of the 
next few sessions. Can you think of a stuck point that 
relates to your ability to keep yourself safe or to how 
safe others are around you? 

tom: Well, I still wonder if there are people out in the 
world who want to hurt me, even if I now realize that 
no sniper is going to take me out. 

tHeraPist: So, let’s pick a specific event—the more 
specific, the better. 

tom: I was in the grocery store, and I had my uniform 
on. There was this guy who seemed to have a chip 
on his shoulder about it—like he hated me or something. 


tHeraPist: So, write down the event in Column A. 
(Pauses.) What was your thought? You’ve already 
mentioned one of them. 

tom: This guy has a chip on his shoulder about me because 
I’m in the military. 

tHeraPist: Good. How strongly do you believe that 
thought? 

tom: 100%. 

tHeraPist: OK, let’s write that next to the thought. 
We are now rating how much you believe in your 
thoughts because you’re going to see at the end how 
much your thought has changed. What feeling or 
feelings are associated with that thought? 

tom: Definitely anger. 


A. 
Situation 
B. 
Thoughts 
D. 
Challenging 
Thoughts 
E. 
Problematic 
Patterns 
F. 
Alternative 
Thought 
Describe 
the 
event, 
thought, 
or 
belief 
leading 
to 
theunpleasantemotion(s)
. 
Write 
thought(s) 
related 
to 
Column 
A. 
Rate 
belief 
in 
each 
thought 
below 
from 
0–100%
. 
(How 
much 
do 
you 
believe 
this 
thought?
) 
Use 
Challengin 
g 
Questions 
to 
examine 
your 
automatic 
thoughts 
from 
Column 
B. 
Is 
the 
thought 
balanced 
and 
factual 
or 
extreme? 
Use 
the 
Problemati 
c 
Thinking 
Patterns 
sheet 
to 
decide 
if 
this 
is 
one 
of 
your 
problematic 
patterns 
of 
thinking. 
What 
else 
can 
say 
instead 
of 
Column 
B? 
How 
else 
can 
interpret 
the 
event 
instead 
of 
Column 
B? 
Rate 
belief 
in 
alternativethought(s) 
from 
0–100%
At 
store 
in 
uniform 
“This 
guy 
hasa 
chip 
on 
his 
shoulder 
because 
I 
am 
in 
the 
military.
” 
(100%
) 
Evidence?
Habi 
t 
o 
r 
F 
act? 
Habit 
to 
think 
everyone 
dislikes 
me 
because 
I 
was 
in 
Iraq. 
Interpretations 
not 
accurate? 
All 
or 
none?
Extreme 
or 
exaggerated? 
Out 
of 
context?
Sourc 
e 
unreliable? 
Me 
Low 
versus 
high 
probability? 
Based 
on 
feelings 
or 
facts? 
Irrelevant 
factors? 
Jumping 
to 
conclusionsExaggerating 
or 
minimizing 
Disregarding 
important 
aspects 
OversimplifyingOvergeneralizingMin 
d 
reading 
I 
am 
assuming 
that 
he 
is 
thinking 
the 
worst 
of 
me.
Emotional 
reasoning 
“
I 
don’t 
know 
if 
he 
has 
chip 
on 
his 
shoulder.”
(60%)
“If 
he 
does 
havea 
chip 
on 
his 
shoulder,
don’tknow 
what 
it 
is 
about 
maybe 
it 
isn’t 
even 
about 
me, 
let 
alone 
having 
served 
in 
Iraq.
(80%
G. 
Rerate 
Old 
Thoughts 
C. 
Emotion(s) 
Rerate 
how 
much 
you 
now 
believe 
the 
thought 
in 
Column 
from 
0–100%
35% 
Specify 
sad, 
angry, 
etc.
, 
and 
rate 
how 
strongly 
you 
feel 
each 
emotion 
from 
0– 
100%.
Anger 
(80%
) 
Fear 
(30%
) 
H. 
Emotion(s) 
Now 
what 
do 
you 
feel? 
0– 
100%
Anger 
(20%
Fear 
(15%


figUre 2.4. Challenging Beliefs Worksheet completed in session. 

97 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

tHeraPist: Makes sense, given your thought. How 
much anger from 0 to 100%, with 100% being as 
much anger as you could possibly imagine having? 

tom: Hmm . . . I’d say 80%. 

tHeraPist: Any other feelings? You can have more 
than one. 

tom: I guess when I stop and think about it, there is 
some fear there, too. 

tHeraPist: That makes sense, too. How much fear 
from 0 to 100%? 

tom: Oh, maybe 30%. It’s not the strongest feeling, but 
it’s there, because I’m wondering if he is going to say 
something or do something. 

tHeraPist: Nice job. Let’s move onto the next column 
that relates to the Challenging Questions Sheet 
you’ve already done. Take a look at this list. What 
questions might apply here? 

tom: I guess I might be confusing a habit with a fact. 
It seems like it is a habit for me to assume that everyone 
dislikes me because I was in Iraq. I really 
don’t know if that is why he seemed to have a chip 
on his shoulder. I guess I also don’t know for sure if 
he had a chip on his shoulder. He didn’t say anything 
to me. (Pauses.) I guess that is also an example of 
the source of information being unreliable, and that 
source is me! (Laughs.) 

tHeraPist: While you were talking, I was thinking 
that the same things applied. So you’d write those in 
this column. You can also pick out other challenging 
questions that might apply, but usually two or three 
will do the trick. In the next column, we’re going to 
refer to the Patterns of Problematic Thinking Sheet. 
What might fit here? 

tom: I guess one jumps out—mind reading. 

tHeraPist: How so? 

tom: I’m assuming that he is thinking the worst about 
me and about my having served my country in this 
war. I’m good at that. 

tHeraPist: Write that down. You can add others later 
if something seems to apply. The next column is very 
important. This is where you start coaching yourself 
to come up with alternative thoughts or perceptions 
about the situation. Based on having asked yourself 
these questions and noticing the problematic thinking 
patterns, what other ways might you think about 
this situation? 

tom: I guess one thing I could say to myself is, “I don’t 
know if he has chip on his shoulder.” I could also say, 
“If he does have a chip on his shoulder, I don’t know 
what it is about—maybe it isn’t even about me, let 
alone about my having served in Iraq.” 

tHeraPist: Wow! You’re doing great at this. Let’s get 
those written down. Let’s also add how much you 
believe those two new thoughts. Below those alternative 
thoughts is the column that asks you to reconsider 
how much you believe your original thoughts 
over here in column B. How much do you believe 
them after walking through this process? Before you 
said 100%. 

tom: Oh, I’d say now it is only about 35%. 

tHeraPist: That is a big change. You went from 100% 
certainty to 35% certainty that he had a chip on his 
shoulder because you fought in the war. 

tom: I’m a little surprised by that myself. 

tHeraPist: Let’s take it the final step. How about your 
feelings now? Let’s rerate those here. 

tom: My anger is way down—I’d say only about 20%. 
The anxiety is still there because I really wouldn’t 
want to have to protect myself, and he might have 
had a chip on his shoulder at me. It is down a little, 
though, because I realize I’m not 100% certain he 
was out to get me. I’d say maybe 15% on fear. 

tHeraPist: Do you have questions about what we just 
did here? 
tom: Not at the moment. I’ll get back to you. 

tHeraPist: I’m going to ask that you do one of these 
sheets on a stuck point per day until I see you again. 
I’m also going to give you some example sheets other 
patients have done that might be helpful to you. 

tom: OK. Should be interesting. . . . 

The therapist reminded Tom that he might find he 
is not using problematic thinking, and in that case, no 
change in feelings would be expected. She also cautioned 
Tom that he should not expect his beliefs and 
feelings always to change completely in the process of 
doing the sheet. The old thought would need to be completely 
dismantled and the new thought would need to 
become more habitual for him to see a more permanent 
change. The therapist suggested that Tom read the 
sheets he completed over to himself a number of times 
to facilitate the process. 


Posttraumatic Stress Disorder 

The Safety module was then introduced. Safety is 
the first of five modules (two- to three-page handouts) 
that also include Trust, Power/Control, Esteem, and Intimacy. 
The therapist oriented Tom to the format of the 
module, which included discussion about how beliefs 
about the self and others in this area can be disrupted 
or seemingly confirmed after a traumatic event, depending 
on one’s history prior to the traumatic event. 
The modules describe how these problematic beliefs 
are manifested emotionally and behaviorally (e.g., not 
leaving one’s home because of the belief that the world 
is unsafe). It also provides alternative self-statements 
that are more balanced and realistic in each area. 

Tom had felt safe with others before the traumatic 
event occurred, and this sense of safety about others 
had been disrupted, as evidenced by his sense that others 
around him were out to get him. Pretrauma, Tom 
had also felt as though he was not a danger to others. 
Posttrauma, he believed that he could not be safe with 
others, which specifically manifested in his concerns 
about being around his pregnant wife. The therapist 
suggested that Tom complete at least one worksheet on 
his stuck points about others being safe, as well as his 
being a possible danger to others. The therapist also reminded 
Tom that he needed to finish the Patterns of 
Problematic Thinking Sheet assignment from last session. 


Session 8 

Tom arrived at the session having completed the Patterns 
of Problematic Thinking Sheet, as well as two 
Challenging Beliefs Worksheets. The therapist spent 
a little time looking at his answers to the Patterns of 
Problematic Thinking Sheet because she did not want 
to send the message inadvertently that completing the 
assignments was unimportant. She asked Tom to read 
the patterns that he had completed at home, as opposed 
to those in their previous session. 

Tom completed two Challenging Beliefs Worksheets 
related to the topic of safety, as the therapist had instructed. 
He did one each on self and other safety beliefs. 
He did not seem to understand that he could use 
the Challenging Beliefs Worksheets on everyday events 
that were distressing or even positive for him. Thus, the 
therapist emphasized how Tom might use this process 
more generally in his day-to-day life, and highlighted 
how more practice would lead to more results. She 
noted that using the process on less emotionally dis


tressing topics could actually be very helpful in getting 
the process down. It is always easier to learn something 
when one is not dealing with the most challenging circumstances. 
She used a military analogy with Tom 
about learning to load and shoot a gun—best learned in 
a nonconflict situation, so that it is a more rote behavior 
when under fire. 

The therapist skimmed the two sheets Tom had completed 
and noticed that he had struggled most coming 
up with alternative statements about his own sense of 
dangerousness related to his wife’s impending delivery 
of their child. The following dialogue ensued (see Figure 
2.5): 

tHeraPist: I notice that you might have had the most 
trouble coming up with alternative thoughts about 
how safe you can be with your wife and your child 
who is about to be born. 

tom: Yeah, I don’t really like to talk about it. It freaks 
my wife out. I’m uncomfortable being around my 
wife, which makes her feel bad, but I’m just afraid 
I’m going to hurt her or the child. 

tHeraPist: Let’s take your first thought because it is 
kind of general. How is it that you think you’re going 
to hurt them? Are we talking physically or mentally? 

tom: Oh, physically is what I mean. I don’t know how 
exactly, but somehow, some way, I guess. 

tHeraPist: That makes it a bit more concrete. How 
do you physically think you’re going to hurt them? 
Do you think you’ll shoot them, given your trauma 
history? 

tom: No. Absolutely not. There are no firearms in my 
house, and I don’t go hunting or have friends or family 
who hunt—nothing that would make guns a part 
of our life. 

tHeraPist: So, what have you considered in your 
mind? 
tom: I guess I’m worried that, out of nowhere, I’ll get 
physically violent. 

tHeraPist: OK, now we’re cooking. Let’s write that 
down. “Out of nowhere I’ll get physically violent.” 
I noticed that in column C you didn’t mention anything 
about probabilities. Safety issues are almost 
always about gauging probabilities. The world is not 
a completely safe place, and every day we all make 
calculated risks about our safety based on the probability 
of bad things happening to us or to someone 


A. 
Situation 
B. 
Thoughts 
D. 
Challenging 
Thoughts 
E. 
Problematic 
Patterns 
F. 
Alternative 
Thought 
Describe 
the 
event, 
thought, 
or 
belief 
leading 
to 
theunpleasantemotion(s)
. 
Write 
thought(s) 
related 
to 
Column 
A. 
Rate 
belief 
in 
each 
thought 
below 
from 
0–100%
. 
(How 
much 
do 
you 
believe 
this 
thought?
) 
Use 
Challengin 
g 
Questions 
to 
examine 
your 
automatic 
thoughts 
from 
Column 
B. 
Is 
the 
thought 
balanced 
and 
factual 
or 
extreme? 
Use 
the 
Problemati 
c 
Thinking 
Patterns 
sheet 
to 
decide 
if 
this 
is 
one 
of 
your 
problematic 
patterns 
of 
thinking. 
What 
else 
can 
say 
instead 
of 
Column 
B? 
How 
else 
can 
interpret 
the 
event 
instead 
of 
Column 
B? 
Rate 
belief 
in 
alternativethought(s) 
from 
0–100%
Being 
around 
mywife 
and 
child 
“Out 
of 
nowhere, 
I’ll 
getphysically 
violent.”
(80%
) 
Evidence?
Habit 
or 
fact?
Interpretations 
not 
accurate? 
All 
or 
none?
Extreme 
or 
exaggerated? 
Out 
of 
context?
Source 
unreliable? 
Lo 
w 
versu 
s 
h 
ig 
h 
p 
robability?
Given 
my 
history, 
it 
is 
actually 
a 
low 
probability 
not 
high. 
Based 
on 
feelings 
or 
facts? 
Irrelevant 
factors? 
Jumping 
to 
conclusionsExaggeratin 
g 
o 
r 
minimizingI’m 
exaggerating 
the 
likelihood 
thatI’d 
be 
violent. 
Disregarding 
important 
aspects 
OversimplifyingOvergeneralizingI’m 
assuming 
because 
I 
shot 
once 
in 
a 
certain 
situation, 
I’ll 
be 
violent 
in 
general.
Mind 
readingEmotional 
reasoning 
“It 
is 
unlikely 
that 
I’ll 
hurt 
my 
family, 
and 
even 
more 
unlikely 
that 
it 
will 
be 
sudden 
andunexpected.”
(95%)
G. 
Rerate 
Old 
Thoughts 
C. 
Emotion(s) 
Rerate 
how 
much 
you 
now 
believe 
the 
thought 
in 
Column 
from 
0–100%
10% 
Specify 
sad, 
angry, 
etc.
, 
and 
rate 
how 
strongly 
you 
feel 
each 
emotion 
from 
0– 
100%.
Fear 
(85%
) 
H. 
Emotion(s) 
Now 
what 
do 
you 
feel? 
0– 
100%
Fear 
(
10%


figUre 2.5. Challenging Beliefs Worksheet regarding safety. 

100 


Posttraumatic Stress Disorder 

else. How do you think the probability questions 
might apply? 

tom: Are you getting at the idea that I’m confusing a 
low probability with a high probability? 

tHeraPist: Precisely. How do you think that applies 
here? 

tom: I’m convinced that “somehow, some way” I’m 
going to hurt my family, so I believe that it is a high 
probability that it will happen and not a low probability. 
I think you think that the probability I will do 
that is low. But, I’m still concerned about it. 

tHeraPist: Let’s talk about the actual probability. 
How often have you hurt your family physically? 

tom: Never. Are you kidding? 

tHeraPist: I thought as much, but you made it sound 
like it was very likely to happen. I guess that’s part 
of the problem, right? 

tom: You’re right. 

tHeraPist: How often have you been physically violent 
against anyone? 

tom: I haven’t, besides the shooting. And it surely 
hasn’t been unexpected. Now that we’re talking 
through it, it feels a little silly. 

tHeraPist: So, it sounds like figuring out the actual 
probability of this is right where we needed to go. 
Given what we’ve talked about, what is an alternative 
statement you can tell yourself and how much 
do you believe it? 

tom: It is unlikely that I’ll hurt my family, and even 
more unlikely that it will be sudden and unexpected 
given that it has never happened. 

tHeraPist: Let’s keep going to see how that might 
change how you feel. You wrote that you had 85% 
fear. What is that rating now? 

tom: Less than 10%. There is some fear now that I 
know I am capable of hurting a family, but like we’ve 
talked about before—and what I have to remember— 
is that it occurred in a certain situation and not in my 
everyday life now as a civilian in my family. 

This exchange between Tom and the therapist illustrates 
the hallmark role of probability in assessments 
and beliefs about safety. It is important to realize that 
there are some objectively unsafe situations or behaviors, 
and these should not be minimized or challenged. 
If there are unreasonable safety precautions or beliefs, 

the actual probability of harm should be carefully evaluated, 
keeping in mind that 100% safety is rarely, if 
ever, guaranteed. 

The therapist transitioned the session to introduce the 
Trust module. Tom noted that he had pretty good trust 
of himself and others prior to his best friend committing 
suicide when they were in high school. Tom said 
that after the experience, he sometimes did not trust his 
judgments about other people, and that he felt responsible 
for not anticipating his friend’s suicide. The military 
traumatic event served to confirm his belief that he 
could not trust his judgments about others’ intentions. 
Tom’s concerns about his ability to be safe with his 
wife and unborn child also dovetailed with the issue of 
trust. The therapist and Tom went over the information 
in the Trust module handout, and Tom seemed to resonate 
with all of the potential effects. He reported that 
he had really been trying to open up with his wife and 
not avoid her. He noted that they were communicating 
more, which made both of them more relaxed and comfortable 
in the final days of her pregnancy. 

The therapist closed the session by assigning daily 
Challenging Beliefs Worksheets, asking Tom to do at 
least one on the topic of trust. She reminded him that, 
like other areas, the goal is to develop balanced alternative 
thoughts. In the case of trust, she noted that stuck 
points about trust often revolve around making all-ornone 
judgments, either trusting or not. The goal is to 
consider trust as multidimensional, with different types 
of issues resulting in different levels of trust in different 
situations. 

Session 9 

Tom arrived at this session having completed a number 
of Challenging Beliefs Worksheets. Several of 
them were about trust, including his level of trust of 
the government and trust of himself in being a father. 
He had also used the worksheets on non-trust-related 
topics related to his daily life. He commented that the 
worksheets had been helpful in working out his thinking 
before he behaved impulsively or felt miserable. 

The therapist praised Tom for completing the worksheets 
so well, and asked him whether he felt he could 
use assistance with any of the worksheets. Tom quickly 
responded that he wanted to focus on the sheet about fatherhood 
because he was experiencing so much anxiety 
about his child’s impending birth. In turning their attention 
to this worksheet, the therapist immediately noticed 
that Tom had probably struggled with this work



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

sheet because he had listed so many different types of 
thoughts that were fueling his anxiety about becoming 
a father. She used this as an opportunity to fine-tune 
Tom’s use of the worksheets. The therapist’s choice in 
thoughts to challenge first also illustrates the prioritization 
of treatment targets in the therapy. She chose to 
go after the more directly trauma-related thoughts that 
contained remnants of assimilation. Tom’s thoughts 
about deserving to be happy about starting a family, 
given the death of the woman, fetus, and child, suggested 
that he had not fully accepted the traumatic 
event and the circumstances surrounding it. Thus, she 
addressed this thought first (see Figure 2.6). 

tHeraPist: Wow, you’ve got lots of thoughts going on 
in your head about becoming a father, don’t you? I’m 
going to suggest that we use a different worksheet for 
each of the clusters of thoughts you’re having on this 
topic. I think that will make your use of the Challenging 
Beliefs Worksheet better. It seems that some 
thoughts are directly related to your traumatic experience, 
others are specifically related to your wife’s 
labor and delivery, and still others are related more 
generally to being a parent. Let’s focus on those that 
are directly related to your trauma. You wrote that 
one of your feelings was guilt (85%), and I’m assuming 
that it is related to your thought that it isn’t right 
that you’re happy with a soon-to-be-born baby given 
what happened. 

tom: That’s right. If I’m really honest, I still feel guilty 
that the Iraqi woman was pregnant and getting ready 
to have a child, and the shooting deprived her of the 
ability to have that child and be happy, and I’m getting 
ready to have that happiness. 

tHeraPist: We’ve talked about this before, but we’ve 
been more focused on the man involved in the situation. 


tom: Yeah, I think the closer my wife gets to delivery, 
the more I think about the Iraqi woman. I’ve been 
imagining that she wasn’t part of a potential plot for 
terrorist activity and was more an innocent participant. 
Then, I go back and forth, thinking that she 
might have actually been involved and didn’t care 
that she was pregnant. Or maybe it was just an accident, 
and they truly didn’t understand that they 
needed to stop. Uggghhhh, it is exhausting. 

tHeraPist: And we’ll never know. If your friend were 
saying all of this to you, what would be your response 
to him? 

tom: I’d be telling him to quit beating himself up and 
feeling guilty. 

tHeraPist: Easier said than done. Anything else? 
Maybe it would help to look at the Challenging Questions 
and Patterns of Problematic Thinking Sheets. 
I’m wondering if you are focusing on irrelevant 
factors—item 10 on the Challenging Questions Sheet. 

tom: Hmm . . . what is irrelevant in this case? 

tHeraPist: How relevant are her intentions to deserving 
to be happy yourself about having a child? 

tom: (Pauses.) I’m going to have to think about that 
for a second. 

tHeraPist: Aren’t your intentions in that situation 
what is relevant? Were your intentions at that time 
to deprive her of the right to bear her child and live 
happily ever after? 

tom: No, not at all. 

tHeraPist: So, why the guilt? What did you do wrong 
that you should be punished about? 

tom: Oh, wow. I hadn’t thought of that. Her intentions 
are irrelevant. It only makes me crazy to try to get in 
her head. I guess that would be mind-reading, now 
wouldn’t it? 

tHeraPist: Very good—a different spin on mind reading. 
So what is the alternative, more balanced and 
realistic thought? 

tom: My intentions are what matter. I didn’t intend for 
her to lose her own or her baby’s life. 

tHeraPist: Go on . . . do you have a right to experience 
happiness? 

tom: I guess I do. It just feels weird. 

tHeraPist: Sure—it feels different. It is different than 
what you’ve been thinking about it for awhile. I’m 
curious—what would you feel if you said to yourself, 
“I did not intentionally do anything to deprive someone 
else of family happiness. I deserve to be happy 
in becoming a father.” 

tom: I’d feel less guilty for sure, and even happy. 

tHeraPist: Let’s get this all written down. Now you 
have the job of holding on to these new insights and 
practicing them. Read over this worksheet every day 
until you see me again. I’d also like you to take these 
other thoughts on your original Challenging Beliefs 
Worksheet about this topic and put them on separate 
worksheets and work through them. Can you commit 
to doing that? 


A. 
Situation 
B. 
Thoughts 
D. 
Challenging 
Thoughts 
E. 
Problematic 
Patterns 
F. 
Alternative 
Thought 
Describe 
the 
event, 
thought, 
or 
belief 
leading 
to 
theunpleasantemotion(s)
. 
Write 
thought(s) 
related 
to 
Column 
A. 
Rate 
belief 
in 
each 
thought 
below 
from 
0–100%
. 
(How 
much 
do 
you 
believe 
this 
thought?
) 
Use 
Challengin 
g 
Questions 
to 
examine 
your 
automatic 
thoughts 
from 
Column 
B. 
Is 
the 
thought 
balanced 
and 
factual 
or 
extreme? 
Use 
the 
Problemati 
c 
Thinking 
Patterns 
sheet 
to 
decide 
if 
this 
is 
one 
of 
your 
problematic 
patterns 
of 
thinking. 
What 
else 
can 
say 
instead 
of 
Column 
B? 
How 
else 
can 
interpret 
the 
event 
instead 
of 
Column 
B? 
Rate 
belief 
in 
alternativethought(s) 
from 
0–100%
Killing 
a 
pregnant 
Iraqi 
woman 
and 
her 
son. 
“It 
isn’t 
right 
that 
I’mhappy 
with 
a 
baby 
on 
the 
way, 
given 
whathappened.”
(80%)
“She 
might 
not 
have 
been 
part 
of 
a 
terrorist 
plot, 
but 
just 
a 
passenger.”
(50%
) 
Evidence?
Habit 
or 
fact?
Interpretations 
not 
accurate? 
All 
or 
none?
Extreme 
or 
exaggerated? 
Out 
of 
context?
Source 
unreliable? 
Low 
versus 
high 
probability? 
Based 
on 
feelings 
or 
facts? 
Irrelevan 
t 
f 
actors? 
Her 
intentions 
are 
not 
relevant. 
Mine 
are. 
Jumping 
to 
conclusionsExaggerating 
or 
minimizing 
Disregarding 
important 
aspects 
OversimplifyingOvergeneralizingMin 
d 
reading 
I’m 
trying 
to 
figure 
out 
what 
was 
in 
her 
head.
Emotional 
reasoning 
“My 
intentions 
are 
whatmatter.
didn’t 
intend 
todo 
anything 
to 
deprive 
someone 
else 
of 
family 
happiness.”
(85%)
G. 
Rerate 
Old 
Thoughts 
C. 
Emotion(s) 
Rerate 
how 
much 
you 
now 
believe 
the 
thought 
in 
Column 
from 
0–100%
15%
(2nd 
doesn’t 
matter) 
Specify 
sad, 
angry, 
etc.
, 
and 
rate 
how 
strongly 
you 
feel 
each 
emotion 
from 
0– 
100%.
Guilt 
(85%
) 
H. 
Emotion(s) 
Now 
what 
do 
you 
feel? 
0– 
100%
Guilt 
(5%)
Happy 
(10%


figUre 2.6. Challenging Beliefs Worksheet regarding trauma. 

103 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

tom: Yes, I already feel lighter. 
tHeraPist: This is an exciting time—you’ve got to 

continue to work on this, so that you can have the 

enjoyment you deserve! 

At this point, the therapist introduced the Power/ 
Control module. Tom admitted that prior to the traumatic 
event, he was someone who liked to be in control. 
He did not like unpredictability, and he noticed that this 
tendency had gotten especially bad after his friend’s 
suicide. The military lifestyle seemed to be congruent 
with this tendency. Tom indicated that he had not had 
authority issues prior to the traumatic event, but he had 
noticed himself questioning authority much more since 
his military trauma. As with previous sessions, Tom 
was given the practice assignment to complete Challenging 
Beliefs Worksheets every day prior to the next 
session, and at least one was assigned on power/control. 

Session 10 

Tom began the session by saying that his wife had gone 
to her obstetrician the previous day, and that her labor 
would be induced in 1 week if she did not naturally 
go into labor before then. Tom indicated that the last 
session had been very good in helping him to become 
happier about his child’s impending birth, and that he 
had read the Challenging Questions Worksheet about 
deserving to be happy several times since the last session. 
He believed it more and more. He stated that he 
was still having some anxiety about becoming a father, 
and about everything going OK with his wife’s labor 
and delivery. The therapist normalized some of Tom’s 
anxiety, stressing how it was very natural for a firsttime 
father, and Tom was able to recognize the typicality 
of this anxiety in others he had witnessed becoming 
parents. 

Tom stated that since reading the Power/Control 
module after the last session, he had started to realize 
that not everyone in authority over him had wielded his/ 
her authority malevolently. This was very important in 
light of Tom’s preexisting history of desiring to exert 
control; he had directly confronted his illusion of control. 
The therapist and Tom went over this worksheet. 

Tom went on to describe how his belief that he could 
and should have control over everything had resulted 
in low self-esteem. In general, when things did not go 
as he desired, Tom felt as though he was a failure for 
not controlling the outcome. This belief structure led 

him to think that he should have been able to control 
his friend and stop him from committing suicide. It 
also led him to believe that he should have been able 
to create a positive outcome in the military traumatic 
event. This discussion served as a natural segue to the 
next topic—esteem. Tom admitted that he had become 
someone who thrived too much on accomplishment. 
This had affected his self-esteem and was especially 
relevant to his belief that he had not accomplished his 
goal in the military because he had to be taken from the 
field after the traumatic event at the checkpoint. 

After reviewing the Esteem module, the therapist 
asked Tom to complete Challenging Beliefs Worksheets 
on his remaining stuck points, as well as any 
stuck points relating to esteem. He was also given two 
other assignments: to practice giving and receiving 
compliments every day, and to do one nice thing for 
himself every day that was not contingent on “achieving” 
something. These assignments were to help him 
with his self- and other-esteem. 

Session 11 

Tom completed a worksheet on self-esteem related to 
his belief that he had not achieved his goal within the 
military. The therapist and Tom went over this worksheet, 
and both noted that he had made significant 
progress by using the worksheet to change the way he 
thought and felt about himself. He asserted that he was 
beginning to see that people are much more than their 
professional accomplishments. They also have other 
activities and relationships with their families, friends, 
and themselves. 

The therapist inquired about the assignment of giving 
and receiving compliments. Tom replied that it had 
gone well, even though it felt a bit awkward and forced. 
He was even able to notice that when he gave compliments 
and was more positive toward other people, he 
seemed to get more positive responses back from them. 
The therapist noticed that several of the compliments 
were to his wife, and she pointed out that Tom seemed 
more connected to his wife. He said that he was actually 
beginning to feel glimmers of excitement about 
the birth of their child. He reported that he was still 
feeling some anxiety about becoming a father, and 
about how the labor and delivery would go, but that 
the anxiety was less and more manageable. When the 
therapist asked about Tom receiving compliments, he 
reported more difficulties. She asked what Tom typically 
did when he received compliments, and it became 


Posttraumatic Stress Disorder 

clear that he often deflected or minimized them. Correspondingly, 
Tom also said that he had only done one 
nice thing for himself since the last session, and that it 
had felt uncomfortable. This pattern seemed to fit with 
Tom’s overall schema of being unworthy and undeserving. 
The following dialogue ensued between the therapist 
and Tom: 

tHeraPist: It seems like you have a hard time letting 
someone be nice to you and being nice to yourself. 

tom: Yes. 

tHeraPist: Why do you think that is? 

tom: I don’t know. (Pauses.) I don’t like it. It feels like 
they shouldn’t be nice to me, and I shouldn’t be nice 
to me. 

tHeraPist: Hmm . . . I wonder if there is anything 
“off” about that thinking? What do you think? 

tom: As I hear myself say it, it sounds a little weird. 
It sounds like I don’t deserve to have nice things for 
me. Kind of like not deserving to have a family . . . 

tHeraPist: This seems like a larger tendency in your 
life—one of those problematic thinking patterns. 
What pattern do you hear in your thinking? Look at 
the worksheet if you want to. 

tom: Maybe emotional reasoning. I feel like I don’t deserve 
it; therefore, I must not deserve it. That seems 
like the best one. Maybe I’m also drawing a conclusion 
when the evidence is lacking. 

tHeraPist: I agree. Given how much you seem to follow 
this pattern of thinking, I’m betting it has been 
around for awhile—maybe even before the shooting 
occurred in Iraq. 

tom: It has. I think it had to do with my dad, his alcoholism, 
and not being close to me. As a kid, I always 
thought I had done something wrong, or that I was so 
bad that he didn’t want to be around me. 

tHeraPist: Now, with adult eyes, what do you think 
about your dad not being close to you? 

tom: I figure that he drank for a reason, and that it 
might have been me and my other brothers and sisters. 


tHeraPist: Why do you assume that he drank because 
of you kids? 
tom: I don’t know. I figure it was stressful having four 
kids. 

tHeraPist: It probably was at times, but as you hear 

yourself talk about this, what is amiss in how you’ve 
made sense of his drinking and being close to you? 

tom: I’ve known other people who had four kids and 
didn’t have drinking problems. There were a lot of 
big families where I grew up. Plus, I know that he 
and my mom had money problems when we were 
young, and that they fought a lot. 

tHeraPist: So, again, why then do you assume it was 
you who caused his drinking and alienation? 
tom: When we talk about it, I guess I see that it might 
not have been me alone. 

tHeraPist: Or not even you at all. Everybody has a 
choice about how they handle their stress, and it 
seems that he was distant from everyone, not just 
you. 

tom: True. It still feels that way. 

tHeraPist: There seems to be a well-worn path in your 
brain that when something goes wrong, you blame 
yourself. The next step is that you deserve to be punished, 
or at least you don’t deserve anything good. 
I don’t think this tendency is going to change overnight. 
You’re going to need to work hard at talking 
to yourself more rationally to change how you feel. 
For that new path to get worn, you’re going to have 
to walk down it a number of times. Pretty soon, the 
path will be more worn and automatic. It will take 
some effort, but you can change the way you automatically 
feel. I’d like you to do a Challenging Beliefs 
Worksheet about what we’ve just talked about. 
Once we get a good one about it, you can read and 
refer to it as part of forging that new path. Can you 
do that? 

tom: Yes. I think it would be good. 

This exchange regarding Tom’s dad dovetailed nicely 
with the final module, Intimacy. The therapist noted 
that people tend to think of intimacy as it relates to romantic 
relationships, and especially in terms of sexual 
intimacy. She stressed that there are all kinds of intimacy 
with different people. In essence, intimacy relates to 
how close and open we feel with other people. She went 
on to discuss the notion of self-intimacy, or how well 
we take care of, support, and soothe ourselves. In other 
words, it reflects how good a relationship we have with 
ourselves. Tom admitted that he struggled with being 
close to other people, which had most obviously manifested 
in the work he had done relative to his wife and 
unborn child. As noted earlier, Tom also struggled with 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

doing nice things and taking good care of himself. Both 
of these areas seemed to be affected by Tom’s underlying 
schema that he was undeserving and unworthy. 

The therapist assigned daily Challenging Beliefs 
Worksheets and requested that he do worksheets on 
being nice to himself and being close to his wife. In addition, 
she asked Tom to write a final Impact Statement, 
specifically about his understanding of the trauma now, 
after all the work he had done. The therapist asked him 
to write about his current thoughts/beliefs in the areas 
of safety, trust, power/control, esteem, and intimacy. 

Session 12 

The day after Session 11, Tom left a message indicating 
that his wife had delivered a healthy baby girl. He indicated 
in his voice mail message that he felt happy and 
relieved. He went on about how beautiful the baby was, 
how well his wife had done in labor and delivery, and 
how he had enjoyed holding his daughter in his arms 
the first time. The 12th session was delayed an extra 
week because of the baby’s arrival. 

Tom’s wife and new daughter accompanied him to 
the final session. The therapist spent some time admiring 
Tom’s new baby and congratulating his wife before 
starting the final session. Tom seemed genuinely proud 
and happy about his daughter, and noted that becoming 
a father had been more natural than he had anticipated. 
He commented that he had been worried that he would 
not want to hold the infant for fear of hurting her or because 
he would do something wrong. Instead, he found 
it almost “instinctual” to hold her, and that soothing 
her had come more naturally than he expected. Tom 
seemed surprised about how natural his role as a father 
had come. 

The therapist inquired about how the assignments 
had gone. Tom said that he had not done as much as 
he had hoped given the baby’s arrival, but that he had 
done worksheets about his father and about being close 
to his wife. The therapist looked over these worksheets, 
which Tom had done very well. She asked Tom about 
how helpful they had been, and he reported that they 
had been very helpful. He added that he was still struggling 
about his father, but that he was beginning to 
think that it was not all about him, which had made him 
feel better about himself and less guilty in general. He 
mentioned that he was considering writing a letter to 
his father about his daughter’s arrival, and that he was 
thinking about asking his father about why he drank 

and distanced himself from his family. The therapist 
reinforced Tom for considering this and for not blindly 
making assumptions about his role in his father’s 
drinking. However, she also attempted to inoculate 
Tom to the possibility that his father could blame him 
or his siblings for his alcoholism (given that she did 
not know his father or his history), and that this did not 
necessarily mean that it was true. She reminded him 
that he needed to consider the source of information, 
and that any good detective would get multiple reports. 
Tom seemed to like the idea of getting more information 
from others, mentioning that he and his siblings 
had never really talked about his belief that they were 
to blame for their father’s alcoholism. 

Tom also shared that he better understood the idea 
of having intimacy, without sex, in his relationship with 
his wife. He said that since the birth of their child, he 
felt closer to his wife and had generally been more open 
and present to her. The therapist asked him about doing 
nice things for himself, and Tom laughed and said that 
he was more open to that but was finding less time to 
do it with a new baby. 

The therapist then asked Tom to read the final Impact 
Statement about the meaning of the event for him 
after the work that he had done. He wrote: 

There is no doubt that this traumatic event has deeply 
impacted me. My thoughts about myself, others, and 
the world were changed. When I started therapy, I 
believed that I was a murderer. I blamed myself completely. 
Now, I believe that I shot a family, but I did not 
murder them. I realize that I and others around me had 
to do what we did at the time, and that we chose to shoot 
because we had to. I will never know what that man, 
or maybe even the family, was trying to do by going 
through that checkpoint, but I know now that I had no 
choice but to shoot to stop them. Regarding safety, I 
used to think that there were people out to get me, but 
now I realize that the probability of that is slim. I still 
feel a little anxious about me, my wife, and now my 
daughter, getting hurt, but not by a sniper. That seems 
unlikely. Now I worry about the stuff that everyone 
worries about—like crazy drivers, illness, or some accident. 
About safety, I used to worry that I was going 
to go “off” and hurt my family. I don’t believe that I 
will do that because I’ve never done that before and 
basically this trauma messed with my head about how 
likely I would be to hurt someone unless I had to. I’m 
trusting myself more in terms of the decisions I make, 
and I have some more faith and trust in my government 
now that I realize I really needed to shoot in that situation. 
I think I may always struggle with wanting to have 


Posttraumatic Stress Disorder 

power and control over things, but I’m working on not 
having control over everything. The fact is, I don’t have 
control, even though I like to think that I do. My selfesteem 
is improving. I have to remember that not every 
bad thing that happens is my fault, and that I deserve 
to be happy even if I don’t fully believe it yet. One of 
the biggest things that seems to be changing is that I’m 
enjoying being close to my wife and my new daughter. 
I used to avoid my wife because I thought I didn’t deserve 
to be happy and that I might hurt her. Slowly I’m 
realizing that it is not very likely that I’ll hurt my wife 
or my new daughter, or at least hurt them intentionally. 
My wife seems much happier now. I want to hold on 
to this time in my life and provide a good life for my 
daughter and wife. I’m happy to know that my daughter 
is not going to know someone who thought that snipers 
were out to get him, and who was anxious, avoiding 
everything and everyone. It sounds silly, but I’m kind of 
glad that I went through this because I think I’m going 
to be better dad and person because of it. 

Tom was a bit teary as he finished reading. The 
therapist asked Tom whether he remembered what he 
wrote the first time. Tom said no, so the therapist read 
to him his first Impact Statement. She pointed out that 
Tom had come a long way, and he agreed. The therapist 
and Tom reviewed the whole therapy process, what 
they had covered, and the “stuck points” that Tom had 
challenged. Tom said that he was going to continue 
using the worksheets because they had been so helpful 
in making him slow down to think about things instead 
of just reacting. They did some lapse planning, and the 
therapist asked Tom what he could do if he sensed that 
he was struggling with PTSD or depressive symptoms, 
or second-guessing his new ways of thinking. He mentioned 
that he was going to share the materials with 
his wife because she was very good at helping him to 
“get his head on straight.” He also included on his list 
a review of the materials he had completed during the 
course of therapy. The therapy session ended with a discussion 
of Tom’s goal to write his father a letter and to 
increase his contact with his siblings. He was planning 
to use these contacts to discover more about the reasons 
his father was alcoholic and had seemed to abandon the 
family. Tom also shared his goals about the type of father 
and husband he hoped to be, and what his professional 
future held as he left the military. The therapist 
congratulated Tom on his willingness to do the hard 
work to recover from what happened to him and wished 
him the best with his family and future. Tom expressed 
his appreciation for the therapy. 

referenCes 

American Psychiatric Association. (1994). Diagnostic and 
statistical manual of mental disorders (4th ed.). Washington, 
DC: Author. 

American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and 
statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.). Arlington, 
VA: Author. 

Astin, M. C., Layne, C. M., Camilleri, A. J., & Foy, D. W. 
(1994). Posttraumatic stress disorder in victimizationrelated 
traumata. In I. J. Briere (Ed.), Assessing and treating 
victims of violence: New directions for mental health 
services (pp. 39–51). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. 

Becker, J. V., Skinner, L. J., Abel, G. G., Axelrod, R., & 
Cichon, J. (1984). Sexual problems of sexual assault survivors. 
Women and Health, 9, 5–20. 

Beckham, J. C., Feldman, M. E., & Kirby, A. C. (1998). 
Atrocities exposure in Vietnam combat veterans with 
chronic posttraumatic stress disorder: Relationship to 
combat exposure, symptom severity, guilt, and interpersonal 
violence. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 11, 777–785. 

Blake, D. D., Weathers, F. W., Nagy, L. M., Kaloupek, D. G., 
Gusman, F. D., Charney, D. S., et al. (1995). The development 
of a Clinician-Administered PTSD Scale. Journal of 
Traumatic Stress, 8, 75–90. 

Blanchard, E. B., Hickling, E. J., Buckley, T. C., & Taylor, A. 

E. (1996). Psychophysiology of posttraumatic stress disorder 
related to motor vehicle accidents: Replication and 
extension. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 
64, 742–751. 
Blanchard, E. B., Hickling, E. J., Devinei, T., Veazey, C. H., 
Galovski, T. E., & Mundy, E. (2003). A controlled evaluation 
of cognitive behavioral therapy for posttraumatic 
stress in motor vehicle accident survivors. Behaviour Research 
and Therapy, 41, 79–96. 

Bowen, G. R., & Lambert, J. A. (1986). Systematic desensitization 
therapy with post-traumatic stress disorder cases. In 

C. R. Figley (Ed.), Trauma and its wake: Vol. II. Traumatic 
stress theory, research, and intervention (pp. 280–291). 
New York: Brunner/Mazel. 
Bradley, R., Greene, J., Russ, E., Dutra, L., & Westen, D. 
(2005). A multidimensional meta-analysis of psychotherapy 
for PTSD. American Journal of Psychiatry, 162, 
214–227. 

Breslau, N., Davis, G. C., & Andreski, P. (1995). Risk factors 
for PTSD-related traumatic events: A prospective analysis. 
American Journal of Psychiatry, 152, 529–535. 

Brewin, C. R., Dalgleish, T., & Joseph, S. (1996). A dual representation 
theory of posttraumatic stress disorder. Psychological 
Review, 103, 670–686. 

Briere, J. (1995). The Trauma Symptom Inventory (TSI): Professional 
manual. Odessa, FL: Psychological Assessment 
Resources. 

Brom, D., Kleber, R. J., & Defares, P. B. (1989). Brief psy



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

chotherapy for PTSD. Journal of Consulting and Clinical 
Psychology, 57, 607–612. 

Bryant, R. A., Moulds, M. L., Guthrie, R. M., Dang, S. T., & 
Nixon, R. D. V. (2003). Imaginal exposure alone and imaginal 
exposure with cognitive restructuring in treatment of 
posttraumatic stress disorder. Journal of Consulting and 
Clinical Psychology, 71, 706–712. 

Buckley, T. C., Blanchard, E. B., & Hickling, E. J. (1998). 
A confirmatory factor analysis of posttraumatic stress 
symptoms. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 36, 1091– 
1099. 

Burt, M. R. (1980). Cultural myths and supports for rape. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 38, 217– 
230. 

Chard, K. M. (2005). An evaluation of cognitive processing 
therapy for the treatment of posttraumatic stress disorder 
related to childhood sexual abuse. Journal of Consulting 
and Clinical Psychology, 73, 965–971. 

Chemtob, C., Roitblat, H. L., Hamada, R. S., Carlson, J. G., 
& Twentyman, C. T. (1988). A cognitive action theory of 
post-traumatic stress disorder. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 
2, 253–275. 

Cloitre, M. (1998). Sexual revictimization: Risk factors 
and prevention. In V. M. Follette, J. I. Ruzek, & F. R. 
Abueg (Eds.), Cognitive-behavioral therapies for trauma 
(pp. 278–304). New York: Guilford Press. 

Cloitre, M., Koenen, K. C., Cohen, L. R., & Han, H. (2002). 
Skills training in affective and interpersonal regulation 
followed by exposure: A phase-based treatment for PTSD 
related to childhood abuse. Journal of Consulting and 
Clinical Psychology, 70, 1067–1074. 

Cloitre, M., Petkova, E., Wang, J., & Lu Lassell, F. (2012). An 
examination of the influence of a sequential treatment on 
the course and impact of dissociation among women with 
PTSD related to childhood abuse. Depression and Anxiety, 
29, 707–717. 

Cloitre, M., Stovall-McClough, K. C., Miranda, R., & Chemtob, 
C. M. (2004). Therapeutic alliance, negative mood 
regulation, and treatment outcome in child abuse-related 
posttraumatic stress disorder. Journal of Consulting and 
Clinical Psychology, 72, 411–416. 

Cox, B. J., Clara, I. P., & Enns, M. W. (2002). Posttraumatic 
stress disorder and the structure of common mental disorders. 
Depression and Anxiety, 15, 168–171. 

Creamer, M., Burgess, P., & Pattison, P. (1992). Reactions to 
trauma: A cognitive processing model. Journal of Abnormal 
Psychology, 101, 452–459. 

Creamer, M., Morris, P., Biddle, D., & Elliott, P. (1999). 
Treatment outcome in Australian veterans with combatrelated 
posttraumatic stress disorder: A cause for cautious 
optimism? Journal of Traumatic Stress, 12, 545–558. 

Dalgleish, T. (2004). Cognitive approaches to posttraumatic 
stress disorder: The evolution of multirepresentational 
theorizing. Psychological Bulletin, 130, 228–260. 

Denny, N., Robinowitz, R., & Penk, W. (1987). Conduct


ing applied research on Vietnam combat-related posttraumatic 
stress disorder. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 
43, 56–66. 

Derogatis, L. R. (1983). SCL-90-R: Administration, scoring 
and procedures manual–II. Towson, MD: Clinical Psychometric 
Research. 

Devilly, G. J., & Spence, S. H. (1999). The relative efficacy 
and treatment distress of EMDR and a cognitive-behavior 
trauma treatment protocol in the amelioration of posttraumatic 
stress disorder. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 13, 
131–157. 

Dohrenwend, B. P., Turner, J. B., Turse, N. A., Adams, B. G., 
Koenen, K. C., & Marshall, R. (2006). The psychological 
risks of Vietnam for U.S. veterans: A revisit with new data 
and methods. Science, 313, 979–982. 

Ehlers, A., & Clark, D. M. (2000). A cognitive model of posttraumatic 
stress disorder. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 
38, 319–345. 

Ehlers, A., Clark, D. M., Hackmann, A., McManus, F., Fennell, 
M., Herbert, C., et al. (2003). A randomized controlled 
trial of cognitive therapy, a self-help booklet, and 
repeated assessments as early interventions for posttraumatic 
stress disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry, 60, 
1024-1032. 

Ehlers, A., Hackmann, A., Steil, R., Clohessy, S., Wenninger, 
K., & Winter, H. (2002). The nature of intrusive memories 
after trauma: The warning signal hypothesis. Behaviour 
Research and Therapy, 40, 995–1002. 

Falsetti, S. A., Resnick, H. S., Resick, P. A., & Kilpatrick, D. 

G. (1993). The Modified PTSD Symptom Scale: A brief 
self-report measure of posttraumatic stress disorder. Behavior 
Therapist, 16, 161–162. 
First, M. B., Spitzer, R. L., Williams, J. B. W., & Gibbon, 

M. (1995). Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV— 
Patient Edition (SCID-P). Washington, DC: American 
Psychiatric Press. 
Foa, E. B. (1995). Posttraumatic Stress Diagnostic Scale 
(manual). Minneapolis, MN: National Computer Systems. 

Foa, E. B., Dancu, C. V., Hembree, E. A., Jaycox, L. H., 
Meadows, E. A., & Street, G. P. (1999). A comparison 
of exposure therapy, stress inoculation training, and their 
combination for reducing posttraumatic stress disorder in 
female assault victims. Journal of Consulting and Clinical 
Psychology, 67, 194–200. 

Foa, E. B., Hembree, E. A., Cahill, S. E., Rauch, S. A. M., 
Riggs, D. S., Feeny, N. C., et al. (2005). Randomized trial 
of prolonged exposure for posttraumatic stress disorder 
with and without cognitive restructuring: Outcome at academic 
and community clinics. Journal of Consulting and 
Clinical Psychology, 73, 953–964. 

Foa, E. B., Keane, T. M., Friedman, M. J., & Cohen, J. A. 
(Eds.). (2008). Effective treatments for PTSD: Practice 
guidelines from the International Society for Traumatic 
Stress Studies (2nd ed.). New York: Guilford Press. 

Foa, E. B., Riggs, D. S., Dancu, C. V., & Rothbaum, B. O. 


Posttraumatic Stress Disorder 

(1993). Reliability and validity of a brief instrument for 
assessing post-traumatic stress disorder. Journal of Traumatic 
Stress, 6, 459–473. 

Foa, E. B., & Rothbaum, B. O. (1998). Treating the trauma of 
rape: Cognitive-behavioral therapy for PTSD. New York: 
Guilford Press. 

Foa, E. B., Rothbaum, B., Riggs, D., & Murdock, T. (1991). 
Treatment of posttraumatic stress disorder in rape victims: 
A comparison between cognitive-behavioral procedures 
and counseling. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 
59, 715–723. 

Foa, E. B., Steketee, G., & Rothbaum, B. O. (1989). Behavioral/
cognitive conceptualizations of post-traumatic stress 
disorder. Behavior Therapy, 20, 155–176. 

Frank, E., Anderson, B., Stewart, B. D., Dancu, C., Hughes, 
C., & West, D. (1988). Efficacy of cognitive behavior therapy 
and systematic desensitization in the treatment of rape 
trauma. Behavior Therapy, 19, 403–420. 

Frank, E., & Stewart, B. D. (1983). Treating depression in 
victims of rape. Clinical Psychologist, 36, 95–98. 

Frank, E., & Stewart, B. D. (1984). Depressive symptoms in 
rape victims: A revisit. Journal of Affective Disorders, 1, 
269–277. 

Green, B. L. (1996). Trauma History Questionnaire. In B. H. 
Stamm (Ed.), Measurement of stress, trauma, and adaptation 
(pp. 366–369). Lutherville, MD: Sidran. 

Griffin, M. G., Resick, P. A., & Mechanic, M. B. (1997). Objective 
assessment of peritraumatic dissociation: Psychophysiological 
indicators. American Journal of Psychiatry, 
154, 1081–1088. 

Griffin, M. G., Uhlmansiek, M. H., Resick, P. A., & Mechanic, 
M. B. (2004). Comparison of the Posttraumatic 
Stress Disorder Scale versus the Clinician-Administered 
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder Scale in domestic violence 
survivors. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 17, 497–504. 

Gutner, C., Rizvi, S. L., Monson, C. M., & Resick, P. A. 
(2006). Changes in coping strategies, relationship to the 
perpetrator, and posttraumatic stress disorder in female 
crime victims. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 19, 813–823. 

Hoge, C. W., Auchterlonie, J. L., & Milliken, C. S. (2006). 
Mental health problems, use of mental health services, 
and attrition from military service after returning from deployment 
to Iraq or Afghanistan. Journal of the American 
Medical Association, 295, 1023–1032. 

Hoge, C. W., Castro, C. A., Messer, S. C., McGurk, D., Cotting, 
D. I., & Koffman, R. L. (2004). Combat duty in Iraq 
and Afghanistan, mental health problems, and barriers to 
care. New England Journal of Medicine, 351, 13–22. 

Holmes, M. R., & St. Lawrence, J. S. (1983). Treatment of 
rape-induced trauma: Proposed behavioral conceptualization 
and review of the literature. Clinical Psychology Review, 
3, 417–433. 

Horowitz, M. J. (1986). Stress response syndromes (2nd ed.). 
New York: Aronson. 

Ironson, G., Freund, B., Strauss, J. L., & Williams, J. (2002). 

Comparison of two treatments for traumatic stress: A 
community-based study of EMDR and prolonged exposure. 
Journal of Clinical Psychology, 58, 113–128. 

Janoff-Bulman, R. (1985). The aftermath of victimization: 
Rebuilding shattered assumptions. In C. R. Figley (Ed.), 
Trauma and its wake: Vol. I. The study and treatment 
of posttraumatic stress disorder (pp. 15–35). New York: 
Brunner/Mazel. 

Janoff-Bulman, R. (1992). Shattered assumptions: Towards a 
new psychology of trauma. New York: Free Press. 

Jordan, B. K., Marmar, C. R., Fairbank, J. A., Schlenger, W. 
E., Kulka, R. A., Hough, R. L., et al. (1992). Problems 
in families of male Vietnam veterans with posttraumatic 
stress disorder. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 
60, 916–926. 

Keane, T. M., Brief, D. J., Pratt, E. M., & Miller, M. W. 
(2007). Assessment and its comorbidities in adults. In M. 

J. Friedman, T. M. Keane, & P. A. Resick (Eds.), Handbook 
of PTSD: Science and practice (pp. 279–305). New 
York: Guilford Press. 
Keane, T. M., Caddell, J. M., & Taylor, K. L. (1988). Mississippi 
Scale for Combat-Related Posttraumatic Stress Disorder: 
Three studies in reliability and validity. Journal of 
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 56, 85–90. 

Keane, T. M., Fairbank, J. A., Caddell, J. M., & Zimering, R. 

T. (1989). Implosive (flooding) therapy reduces symptoms 
of PTSD in Vietnam combat veterans. Behavior Therapy, 
20, 245–260. 
Keane, T. M., Kolb, L. C., Kaloupek, D. G., Orr, S. P., 
Blanchard, E. B., Thomas, R. G., et al. (1998). Utility of 
psychophysiology measurement in the diagnosis of posttraumatic 
stress disorder: Results from a Department of 
Veteran’s Affairs cooperative study. Journal of Consulting 
and Clinical Psychology, 66, 914–923. 

Keane, T. M., Malloy, P. F., & Fairbank, J. A. (1984). Empirical 
development of an MMPI subscale for the assessment 
of combat-related posttraumatic stress disorder. Journal of 
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 52, 888–891. 

Keane, T. M., Zimering, R. T., & Caddell, J. M. (1985). A 
behavioral formulation of posttraumatic stress disorder. 
Behavior Therapist, 8, 9–12. 

Kessler, R. C., Berglund, P., Demler, O., Jin, R., Merikangas, 

K. R., & Walters, E. E. (2005). Lifetime prevalence and 
age-of-onset distributions of DSM-IV disorders in the National 
Comorbidity Survey Replication. Archives of General 
Psychiatry, 62, 593–602. 
Kessler, R. C., Chiu, W. T., Demler, O., Merikangas, K. R., & 
Walters, E. E. (2005). Prevalence, severity, and comorbidity 
of 12-month DSM-IV disorders in the National Comorbidity 
Survey Replication. Archives of General Psychiatry, 
62, 617–627. 

Kessler, R. C., Sonnega, A., Bromet, E., Hughes, M., & Nelson, 
C. B. (1995). Posttraumatic stress disorder in the National 
Comorbidity Survey. Archives of General Psychiatry, 
52, 1048–1060. 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

Kilpatrick, D. G. (1983). Rape victims: Detection, assessment 
and treatment. Clinical Psychologist, 36, 92–95. 

Kilpatrick, D. G., & Amick, A. E. (1985). Rape trauma. In 

M. Hersen & C. Last (Eds.), Behavior therapy casebook 
(pp. 86–103). New York: Springer. 
Kilpatrick, D. G., Edmunds, C. N., & Seymour, A. K. (1992). 
Rape in America: A report to the nation. Arlington, VA: 
National Victim Center. 

Kilpatrick, D. G., Resnick, H. S., & Freedy, J. R. (1991). The 
Potential Stressful Events Interview. Unpublished instrument, 
National Crime Victims Research and Treatment 
Center, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston. 

Kilpatrick, D. G., Saunders, B. E., Veronen, L. J., Best, C. 
L., & Von, J. M. (1987). Criminal victimization: Lifetime 
prevalence, reporting to police, and psychological impact. 
Crime and Delinquency, 33, 479–489. 

Kilpatrick, D. G., & Veronen, L. J. (1983). Treatment for 
rape-related problems: Crisis intervention is not enough. 
In L. H. Cohen, W. L. Claiborn, & G. A. Specter (Eds.), 
Crisis intervention (pp. 165–185). New York: Human Sciences 
Press. 

Kilpatrick, D. G., Veronen, L. J., & Best, C. L. (1985). Factors 
predicting psychological distress among rape victims. In 

C. R. Figley (Ed.), Trauma and its wake: Vol. I. The study 
and treatment of posttraumatic stress disorder (pp. 114– 
141). New York: Brunner/Mazel. 
Kilpatrick, D. G., Veronen, L. J., & Resick, P. A. (1982). 
Psychological sequelae to rape: Assessment and treatment 
strategies. In D. M. Doleys, R. L. Meredith, & A. 

R. Ciminero (Eds.), Behavioral medicine: Assessment 
and treatment strategies (pp. 473–497). New York: Plenum 
Press. 
Koss, M. P., & Harvey, M. R. (1991). The rape victim: Clinical 
and community interventions (2nd ed.). Thousand 
Oaks, CA: Sage. 

Kubany, E. S., Haynes, S. N., Leisen, M. B., Owens, J. A., Kaplan, 
A. S., Watson, S. B., et al. (2000). Development and 
preliminary validation of a brief broad-spectrum measure 
of trauma exposure: The Traumatic Life Events Questionnaire. 
Psychological Assessment, 12, 210–224. 

Kubany, E. S., Hill, E. E., Owens, J. A., Iannce-Spencer, C., 
McCaig, M. A., & Tremayne, K. J. (2004). Cognitive trauma 
therapy for battered women with PTSD (CTT-BW). 
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 72, 3–18. 

Kubany, E. S., Leisen, M. B., Kaplan, A. S., & Kelly, M. P. 
(2000). Validation of a brief measure of posttraumatic 
stress disorder: The Distressing Event Questionnaire 
(DEQ). Psychological Assessment, 12, 197–209. 

Kulka, R. A., Schlenger, W. E., Fairbank, J. A., Hough, R. 
L., Jordan, B. K., Marmar, C. R., et al. (1990). Trauma 
and the Vietnam war generation: Report of findings from 
the National Vietnam Veterans Readjustment Study. New 
York: Brunner/Mazel. 

Lang, P. J. (1968). Fear reduction and fear behavior: Problems 
in treating a construct. In J. M. Schlien (Ed.), Research in 

psychotherapy (pp. 90–102). Washington, DC: American 
Psychological Association. 

Lang, P. J. (1977). Imagery in therapy: An information processing 
analysis of fear. Behavior Therapy, 8, 862–886. 

Lanius, R. A., Vermetten, E., Loewenstein, R. J., Brand, B., 
Schmahl, C., Bremner, J. D., et al. (2010). Emotion modulation 
in PTSD: Clinical and neurobiological evidence for 
a dissociative subtype. American Journal of Psychiatry, 
167(6), 640–647. 

Lauterbach, D., & Vrana, S. R. (1996). Three studies on the 
reliability and validity of a self-report measure of posttraumatic 
stress disorder. Assessment, 3, 17–25. 

Lauterbach, D., Vrana, S., King, D. W., & King, L. A. (1997). 
Psychometric properties of the civilian version of the Mississippi 
PTSD scale. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 10, 
499–513. 

Lee, C., Gavriel, H., Drummond, P., Richards, J., & Greenwald, 
R. (2002). Treatment of PTSD: Stress inoculation 
training with prolonged exposure compared to EMDR. 
Journal of Clinical Psychology, 58, 1071–1089. 

Lester, K. M., Resick, P. A., Young-Xu, Y., & Artz, C. E. 
(2010). Impact of ethnicity on early treatment termination 
and outcomes in PTSD treatment. Journal of Consulting 
and Clinical Psychology, 4, 480-489. 

Mahoney, M. J., & Lyddon, W. J. (1988). Recent developments 
in cognitive approaches to counseling and psychotherapy. 
Counseling Psychologist, 16, 190–234. 

Marks, I., Lovell, K., Noshirvani, H., Livanou, M., & Thrasher, 
S. (1998). Treatment of posttraumatic stress disorder 
by exposure and/or cognitive restructuring: A controlled 
study. Archives of General Psychiatry, 55, 317–325. 

McCann, I. L., & Pearlman, L. A. (1990). Vicarious traumatization: 
A framework for understanding the psychological 
effects of working with victims. Journal of Traumatic 
Stress, 3, 131–149. 

McFall, M., Fontana, A., Raskind, M., & Rosenheck, R. 
(1999). Analysis of violent behavior in Vietnam combat 
veteran psychiatric inpatients with posttraumatic stress 
disorder. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 12, 501–517. 

McNair, L. D., & Neville, H. A. (1996). African American 
women survivors of sexual assault: The intersection of 
race and class. In M. Hill & E. D. Rothblum (Eds.), Classism 
and feminist therapy: Counting costs (pp. 107–118). 
New York: Haworth. 

Meichenbaum, D. H. (1985). Stress inoculation training. 
Elmsford, NY: Pergamon. 

Miller, M. W., Greif, J. L., & Smith, A. A. (2003). Multidimensional 
Personality Questionnaire profiles of veterans 
with traumatic combat exposure: Externalizing and internalizing 
subtypes. Psychological Assessment, 15, 205–215. 

Miller, M. W., Kaloupek, D. G., Dillon, A. L., & Keane, T. 

M. (2004). Externalizing and internalizing subtypes of 
combat-related PTSD: A replication and extension using 
the PSY-5 scales. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 113, 
636–645. 

Posttraumatic Stress Disorder 

Miller, M. W., & Resick, P. A. (2007). Internalizing and externalizing 
subtypes in female sexual assault survivors: 
Implications for the understanding of complex PTSD. Behavior 
Therapy, 38, 58–71. 

Monson, C. M., Gradus, J. L., Young-Xu, Y., Schnurr, P. P., 
Price, J. A., Schumm, J. A. (2008). Change in posttraumatic 
stress disorder symptoms: Do clinicians and patients 
agree? Psychological Assessment, 20, 131–138. 

Monson, C. M., Price, J. L., & Ranslow, E. (2005, October). 
Treating combat PTSD through cognitive processing therapy. 
Federal Practitioner, 22(10), 75–83. 

Monson, C. M., Schnurr, P. P., Resick, P. A., Friedman, M. J., 
Young-Xu, Y., & Stevens, S. P. (2006). Cognitive processing 
therapy for veterans with military-related posttraumatic 
stress disorder. Journal of Consulting and Clinical 
Psychology, 74, 898–907. 

Morland, L. A., Hynes, A. K., Mackintosh, M., Resick, P. 
A., & Chard, K. M. (2011). Group cognitive processing 
therapy delivered to veterans via telehealth: A pilot cohort. 
Journal of Traumatic Stress, 24, 465–469. 

Mowrer, O. H. (1947). On the dual nature of learning—a reinterpretation 
of “conditioning” and “problem-solving.” 
Harvard Educational Review, 14, 102–148. 

National Institute of Clinical Excellence. (2005). Posttraumatic 
stress disorder (PTSD): The treatment of PTSD 
in adults and children. London: Author. 

Neuner, F., Schauer, M., Klaschik, C., Karunakara, U., & 
Elbert, T. (2004). A comparison of narrative exposure 
therapy, supportive counseling, and psychoeducation for 
treating posttraumatic stress disorder in an African refugee 
settlement. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 
72, 579–587. 

Norris, F. H. (1990). Screening for traumatic stress: A scale 
for use in the general population. Journal of Applied Social 
Psychology, 20, 1704–1718. 

Norris, F. H. (1992). Epidemiology of trauma: Frequency and 
impact of different potentially traumatic events on different 
demographic groups. Journal of Consulting and Clinical 
Psychology, 60, 409–418. 

Oquendo, M. A., Friend, J. M., Halberstam, B., Brodsky, B. 
S., Burke, A. K., Grunebaum, M. F., et al. (2003). Association 
of comorbid posttraumatic stress disorder and major 
depression with greater risk for suicidal behavior. American 
Journal of Psychiatry, 160, 580–582. 

Orr, S. P., Lasko, N. B., Metzger, L. J., Berry, N. J., Ahern, 

C. E., & Pitman, R. K. (1998). Psychophysiologic assessment 
of women with posttraumatic stress disorder resulting 
from childhood sexual abuse. Journal of Consulting 
and Clinical Psychology, 66, 906–913. 
Orr, S. P., Metzger, L. J., Miller, M. W., & Kaloupek, D. G. 
(2004). Psychophysiological assessment of PTSD. In J. 

P. Wilson & T. M. Keane (Eds.), Assessing psychological 
trauma and PTSD (2nd ed., pp. 289–343). New York: 
Guilford Press. 
Pitman, R. K., Orr, S. P., Altman, B., Longpre, R. E., Poire, R. 

E., & Macklin, M. L. (1996). Emotional processing during 
eye movement desensitization and reprocessing therapy of 
Vietnam veterans with chronic posttraumatic stress disorder. 
Comprehensive Psychiatry, 37, 419–429. 

Pitman, R. K., Orr, S. P., Forgue, D. F., & Altman, B. (1990). 
Psychophysiologic responses to combat imagery of Vietnam 
veterans with posttraumatic stress disorder versus 
other anxiety disorders. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 
99, 49–54. 

Pitman, R. K., Orr, S. P., Forgue, D. F., de Jong, J., & Claiborn, 
J. M. (1987). Psychophysiologic assessment of posttraumatic 
stress disorder imagery in Vietnam combat veterans. 
Archives of General Psychiatry, 44, 970–975. 

Power, K., McGoldrick, T., Brown, K., Buchanan, R., Sharp, 
D., & Swanson, V. (2002). A controlled comparison of 
eye movement desensitization and reprocessing versus exposure 
plus cognitive restructuring versus wait list in the 
treatment of posttraumatic stress disorder. Clinical Psychology 
and Psychotherapy, 9, 299–318. 

Powers, M. B., Halpern, J. M., Ferenschak, M. P., Gillihan, 

S. J., & Foa, E. B. (2010). A meta-analytic review of prolonged 
exposure for posttraumatic stress disorder. Clinical 
Psychology Review, 30, 635–641. 
Prins, A., Ouimette, P., Kimerling, R., Camerond, R. P., Hugelshofer, 
D. S., Shaw-Hegwer, J., et al. (2004). The Primary 
Care PTSD Screen (PC-PTSD): Development and 
operating characteristics. Primary Care Psychiatry, 9, 
9–14. 

Renfrey, G., & Spates, C. R. (1994). Eye movement desensitization: 
A partial dismantling study. Journal of Behavior 
Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry, 25, 231–239. 

Resick, P. A., Galovski, T. E., Uhlmansiek, M. O., Scher, C. 
D., Clum, G., & Young-Xu, Y. (2008). A randomized clinical 
trial to dismantle components of cognitive processing 
therapy for posttraumatic stress disorder in female victims 
of interpersonal violence. Journal of Consulting and Clinical 
Psychology, 76, 243–258. 

Resick, P. A., Jordan, C. G., Girelli, S. A., Hutter, C. K., & 
Marhoeder-Dvorak, S. (1988). A comparative outcome 
study of behavioral group therapy for sexual assault victims. 
Behavior Therapy, 19, 385–401. 

Resick, P. A., & Markaway, B. E. (1991). Clinical treatment of 
adult female victims of sexual assault. In C. R. Hollin & K. 
Howells (Eds.), Clinical approaches to sex offenders and 
their victims (pp. 261–284). London: Wiley. 

Resick, P. A., Monson, C. M., & Chard, K. M. (2007). Cognitive 
processing therapy: Veteran/military version. Washington, 
DC: Department of Veterans Affairs. 

Resick, P. A., Nishith, P., & Griffin, M. G. (2003). How well 
does cognitive-behavioral therapy treat symptoms of complex 
PTSD?: An examination of child sexual abuse survivors 
within a clinical trial. CNS Spectrums, 8, 340–355. 

Resick, P. A., Nishith, P., Weaver, T. L., Astin, M. C., & 
Feuer, C. A. (2002). A comparison of cognitive processing 
therapy, prolonged exposure and a waiting condition 


CLINICAL HANDBOOK OF PSYCHOLOGICAL DISORDERS 

for the treatment of posttraumatic stress disorder in female 
rape victims. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 
70, 867–879. 

Resick, P. A., & Schnicke, M. K. (1992). Cognitive processing 
therapy for sexual assault victims. Journal of Consulting 
and Clinical Psychology, 60, 748–756. 

Resick, P. A., & Schnicke, M. K. (1993). Cognitive processing 
therapy for rape victims: A treatment manual. Newbury 
Park, CA: Sage. 

Resick, P. A., Williams, L. F., Suvak, M. K., Monson, C. M., 
& Gradus, J. L. (2012). Long-term outcomes of cognitivebehavioral 
treatments for posttraumatic stress disorder 
among female rape survivors. Journal of Consulting and 
Clinical Psychology, 80, 201–210. 

Resnick, H. S., Kilpatrick, D. G., Dansky, B. S., Saunders, B. 
E., & Best, C. L. (1993). Prevalence of civilian trauma and 
posttraumatic stress disorder in a representative national 
sample of women. Journal of Consulting and Clinical 
Psychology, 61, 984–991. 

Resnick, H. S., Kilpatrick, D. G., & Lipovsky, J. A. (1991). 
Assessment of rape-related posttraumatic stress disorder: 
Stressor and symptom dimensions. Psychological Assessment, 
3, 561–572. 

Robins, L. N., Helzer, J. E., Croughan, J., & Ratcliff, K. S. 
(1981). National Institute of Mental Health Diagnostic Interview 
Schedule: Its history, characteristics, and validity. 
Archives of General Psychiatry, 38, 381–389. 

Rosenheck, R., & Fontana, A. (1996). PTSD and communitybased 
treatment: A commentary on “PTSD diagnosis and 
treatment for mental health clinicians.” Community Mental 
Health Journal, 32, 191–193. 

Rosenheck, R., Fontana, A., & Cottrol, C. (1995). Effect of 
clinician–veteran racial pairing in the treatment of posttraumatic 
stress disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 
152, 555–563. 

Rothbaum, B. O., Astin, M. C., & Marsteller, F. (2005). Prolonged 
exposure versus eye movement desensitization and 
reprocessing (EMDR) for PTSD rape victims. Journal of 
Traumatic Stress, 18, 607–616. 

Rothbaum, B. O., & Foa, E. B. (1992). Exposure therapy for 
rape victims with post-traumatic stress disorder. Behavior 
Therapist, 15, 219–222. 

Rothbaum, B. O., Hodges, L. F., Ready, D., Graap, K., & 
Alarcon, R. (2001). Virtual reality exposure therapy for 
Vietnam veterans with PTSD. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 
62, 617–622. 

Saunders, B. E., Arata, C. M., & Kilpatrick, D. G. (1990). Development 
of a crime-related posttraumatic stress disorder 
scale for women within the Symptom Checklist–90—Revised. 
Journal of Traumatic Stress, 3, 439–448. 

Schindler, F. E. (1980). Treatment by systematic desensitization 
of a recurring nightmare of a real life trauma. Journal 
of Behavior Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry, 11, 
53–54. 

Schnurr, P. P., Friedman, M. J., Engel, C. C., Foa, E. B., Shea, 

T., Chow, B. K., et al. (2007). Cognitive-behavioral therapy 
for posttraumatic stress disorder in women: A randomized 
controlled trial. Journal of the American Medical Association, 
297, 820–830. 

Shalev, A. Y., Orr, S. P., & Pitman, R. K. (1992). Psychophysiologic 
response during script-driven imagery as an 
outcome measure in posttraumatic stress disorder. Journal 
of Clinical Psychiatry, 53, 324–326. 

Shapiro, F. (1989). Eye movement desensitization: A new 
treatment for post-traumatic stress disorder. Journal of 
Behavior Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry, 20, 
211–217. 

Shapiro, F. (1995). Eye movement desensitization and reprocessing: 
Basic principles, protocols, and procedures. New 
York: Guilford Press. 

Shay, J., & Munroe, J. (1999). Group and milieu therapy for 
veterans with complex posttraumatic stress disorder. In 

P. A. Saigh & J. D. Bremner (Eds.), Posttraumatic stress 
disorder: A comprehensive text (pp. 391–413). Needham 
Heights, MA: Allyn & Bacon. 
Silverman, D. (1977). First do no more harm: Female rape 
victims and the male counselor. American Journal of Orthopsychiatry, 
47, 91–96. 

Street, A. E., Gradus, J. L., Vogt, D. S., Giasson, H. L., & 
Resick, P. A. (2013). Gender differences among veterans 
deployed in support of the wars in Afghanistan and 
Iraq. Journal of General Internal Medicine, 28(Suppl. 2), 
556–562. 

Sutker, P. B., Uddo-Crane, M., & Allain, A. N. (1991). Clinical 
and research assessment of posttraumatic stress disorder: 
A conceptual overview. Psychological Assessment, 3, 
520–530. 

Tarrier, N., Pilgrim, H., Sommerfield, C., Faragher, B., Reynolds, 
M., Graham, E., et al. (1999). A randomized trial of 
cognitive therapy and imaginal exposure in the treatment 
of chronic posttraumatic stress disorder. Journal of Consulting 
and Clinical Psychology, 67, 13–18. 

Tarrier, N., & Sommerfield, C. (2004). Treatment of chronic 
PTSD by cognitive therapy and exposure: 5-year followup. 
Behavior Therapy, 35, 231–246. 

Taylor, S., Kuch, K., Koch, W. J., Crockett, D. J., & Passey, G. 
(1998). The structure of posttraumatic stress symptoms. 
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 107, 154–160. 

Taylor, S., Thordarson, D. S., Maxfield, L., Fedoroff, I. C., 
Lovell, K., & Orgodniczuk, J. (2003). Comparative efficacy, 
speed, and adverse effects of three PTSD treatments: 
Exposure therapy, EMDR, and relaxation training. Journal 
of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 71, 330–338. 

Tolin, D. F., & Foa, E. B. (2006). Sex differences in trauma 
and posttraumatic stress disorder: A quantitative review 
of 25 years of research. Psychological Bulletin, 132, 959– 
992. 

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2001). 
Mental health: A report of the Surgeon General. Washington, 
DC: Author. 

Posttraumatic Stress Disorder 

U.S. Departments of Veterans Affairs and Defense. (2010). 
VA/DoD clinical practice guideline for the management 
of PTSD. Washington, DC: Author. 

van Etten, M. L., & Taylor, S. (1998). Comparative efficacy 
of treatments for post-traumatic stress disorder: A metaanalysis. 
Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy, 5, 
126–144. 

Vogt, D., Smith, B., Elwy, R., Martin, J., Schultz, M., Drainoni, 
M.-L., et al.(2011). Predeployment, deployment, and 
postdeployment risk factors for posttraumatic stress symptomatology 
in female and male OEF/OIF veterans. Journal 
of Abnormal Psychology, 120, 819–831. 

Vrana, S., & Lauterbach, D. (1994). Prevalence of traumatic 
events and post-traumatic psychological symptoms in a 
nonclinical sample of college students. Journal of Traumatic 
Stress, 7, 289–302. 

Weathers, F. W., Blake, D. D., Schnurr, P. P., Kaloupek, 

D. G., Marx, B. P., & Keane, T. M. (2013). Clinician-
Administered PTSD Scale for DSM-5. Washington, DC: 
U.S. Veterans Affairs National Center for Posttraumatic 
Stress Disorder. 
Weathers, F., Litz, B. T., Herman, D. S., Huska, J. A., & 
Keane, T. M. (1993, October). The PTSD Checklist (PCL): 
Reliability, validity, and diagnostic utility. Presentation at 
the International Society for Traumatic Stress Studies, San 
Antonio, TX. 

Weathers, F. W., & Keane, T. M. (1999). Psychological assessment 
of traumatized adults. In P. A. Saigh & J. D. 
Bremner (Eds.), Posttraumatic stress disorder: A comprehensive 
text (pp. 219–247). Boston: Allyn & Bacon. 

Weathers, F. W., Keane, T. M., & Davidson, J. R. (2001). 

Clinician-Administered PTSD Scale: A review of the first 
ten years of research. Depression and Anxiety, 13, 132– 
156. 

Weathers, F. W., Litz, B., Keane, K. M., Palmieri, P. A. 
, Marx, B., & Schnurr, P. P. (2013). PTSD Checklist–5. 
Washington, DC: U.S. Veterans Affairs National Center 
for Posttraumatic Stress Disorder. 

Weathers, F. W., Ruscio, A. M., & Keane, T. M. (1999). 
Psychometric properties of nine scoring rules for the 
Clinician-Administered Posttraumatic Stress Disorder 
Scale. Psychological Assessment, 11, 124–133. 

Weiss, D. S., & Marmar, C. R. (1997). The Impact of Event 
Scale—Revised. In J. P. Wilson & T. M. Keane (Eds.), Assessing 
psychological trauma and PTSD (pp. 399–411). 
New York: Guilford Press. 

Wilson, A. E., Calhoun, K. S., & Bernat, J. A. (1999). Risk 
recognition and trauma-related symptoms among sexually 
revictimized women. Journal of Consulting and Clinical 
Psychology, 67, 705–710. 

Wilson, D., Silver, S. M., Covi, W., & Foster, S. (1996). Eye 
movement desensitization and reprocessing: Effectiveness 
and automatic correlates. Journal of Behavior Therapy 
and Experimental Psychiatry, 27, 219–229. 

Wolf, E. J., Lunney, C. A., Miller, M. W., Resick, P. A., Friedman, 
M. J., & Schnurr, P. P. (2012). The dissociative subtype 
of PTSD: A replication and extension. Depression 
and Anxiety, 29, 679–688. 

Zoellner, L. A., Feeny, N. C., Fitzgibbons, L. A., & Foa, E. 

B. (1999). Response of African American and Caucasian 
women to cognitive behavioral therapy for PTSD. Behavior 
Therapy, 30, 581–595. 

CHaPter 3 

social Anxiety Disorder 

richarD G. heiMBerG 
leaNNe MaGee 

Many people are very shy and somewhat inhibited. for this reason, the suffering associated 
with social anxiety disorder is often minimized as a common trait in the population 
that does not require a heavy artillery of formalized treatment interventions (either drugs 
or psychological treatments). nothing could be further from the truth. for members 
of a very large segment of the population with debilitating social anxiety (over 12% 
and increasing), at some point in their lives, the seemingly simple process of interacting 
with people or forming relationships provokes overwhelming terror and is often avoided. 
The effects on career and quality of life can be devastating. This chapter examines 
the latest iteration of an established psychological treatment for social anxiety disorder. 
As is increasingly true of our new generation of psychological interventions, cognitive‑ 
behavioral therapy has proven to be significantly better than equally credible but less 
focused psychological interventions, and its effect is increasingly powerful over time. As 
such, this treatment is among the best of the new generation of psychological treatments 
characterized by power and specificity. The case of Josie, with a report of her progress at 
a 5‑year follow‑up that is new to this edition, also illustrates the maturity and clinical 
sophistication of this remarkable approach to social anxiety.—D. H. B. 

The National Comorbidity Survey Replication Study 
(NCS-R), which assessed over 9,000 noninstitutionalized 
individuals throughout the United States, found 
that 12.1% of people have social anxiety disorder at 
some point during their lives (Kessler et al., 2005). In 
this survey, social anxiety disorder (also known as social 
phobia; Liebowitz, Heimberg, Fresco, Travers, & 
Stein, 2000) was the fourth most common psychiatric 
disorder, with only major depressive disorder, alcohol 
abuse, and specific phobia being more prevalent. More 
conservative lifetime prevalence estimates suggest that 
clinically significant social anxiety affects a compelling 
but more modest 4% of the population (Narrow, 
Rae, Robins, & Regier, 2002). 

When social anxiety disorder was first included as 
a diagnostic category in the third edition of the Diagnostic 
and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders 
(DSM-III; American Psychiatric Association, 1980), it 
was thought to result in only minimal disruption in role 
functioning. Research has since revealed that social 
anxiety disorder can be quite incapacitating. The vast 
majority of individuals with social anxiety disorder report 
that their work, academic, and social functioning 
have been seriously impaired by their fears (Acarturk, 
de Graaf, van Straten, ten Have, & Cuijpers, 2008; 
Aderka et al., 2012; Katzelnick et al., 2001; Schneier 
et al., 1994). Compared to their nonanxious peers, 
individuals with social anxiety disorder report fewer 

114 


Social Anxiety Disorder 

friends and dating partners (Rodebaugh, 2009; Wenzel, 
2002), and they are less likely to marry, even in 
comparison to persons with other anxiety disorders. In 
one study, despite a mean age in the early 30s, 50% of 
individuals with social anxiety disorder had never married, 
compared to 36% of individuals with panic disorder 
and agoraphobia, and 18% of those with generalized 
anxiety disorder (Sanderson, Di Nardo, Rapee, & 
Barlow, 1990). In another study, individuals with social 
anxiety disorder were more likely than their nonanxious 
counterparts to work at a job below their level of 
educational attainment and to believe that their supervisors 
did not think that they fit into the work environment 
(Bruch, Fallon, & Heimberg, 2003). Symptoms 
of social anxiety are also associated with a low level of 
life satisfaction, even after taking into account the level 
of disability engendered by these symptoms (Hambrick, 
Turk, Heimberg, Schneier, & Liebowitz, 2003). 

Social anxiety disorder most commonly begins during 
early childhood or adolescence (Schneier, Johnson, 
Hornig, Liebowitz, & Weissman, 1992) and typically 
follows an unremitting course in clinical samples (Bruce 
et al., 2005). Nevertheless, most individuals with social 
anxiety disorder do not seek treatment unless they develop 
an additional disorder (Schneier et al., 1992). In 
contrast, rates of remission have been higher in epidemiological 
than in clinical samples (Blanco et al., 2011; 
Vriends, Becker, Meyer, Williams, et al., 2007). 

Approximately 70–80% of individuals with social 
anxiety disorder meet criteria for additional diagnoses, 
and, in most cases, social anxiety disorder predates the 
onset of the comorbid condition (W. J. Magee, Eaton, 
Wittchen, McGonagle, & Kessler, 1996; Schneier et 
al., 1992). In community samples, the most common 
additional diagnoses include specific phobia, agoraphobia, 
major depression, and alcohol use disorders (W. J. 
Magee et al., 1996; Schneier et al., 1992). Compared to 
individuals with uncomplicated social anxiety disorder, 
persons with social anxiety disorder and comorbid disorders 
have higher rates of suicide attempts, are more 
likely to report significant role impairment, and more 
often use medication to control their symptoms (W. J. 
Magee et al., 1996; Schneier et al., 1992). 

Comorbidity is also associated with more severe impairment 
before and after cognitive-behavioral therapy 
(CBT), although individuals with and without comorbid 
conditions make similar gains (Erwin, Heimberg, Juster, 
& Mindlin, 2002). Comorbid mood disorders appear 
to be more strongly associated with impairment than do 
comorbid anxiety disorders (Erwin et al., 2002). 

suBtyPes of social aNxiety DisorDer 
aND avoiDaNt PersoNality DisorDer 

Individuals with social anxiety are a heterogeneous 
group in terms of the pervasiveness and severity of 
their fears. Many individuals have a range of social 
fears, including social interaction fears (e.g., dating, 
joining an ongoing conversation, being assertive), performance 
fears (e.g., public speaking, playing a musical 
instrument in front of others), and observation fears 
(e.g., working in front of others, walking down the 
street). In previous editions of the DSM, this was labeled 
as a generalized subtype of social anxiety disorder, 
a term absent in DSM-5. Instead, DSM-5 includes 
a performance-only subtype, reflecting individuals for 
whom the fear is restricted to speaking or performing 
in public (American Psychiatric Association, 2013). 

Relative to the DSM-5 performance-only subtype, 
having social anxiety in many situations has been associated 
with earlier age of onset, decreased educational 
attainment, higher rates of unemployment, and a greater 
likelihood of being unmarried (Heimberg, Hope, 
Dodge, & Becker, 1990; Mannuzza et al., 1995). This 
group also experiences more depression, anxiety, avoidance, 
fear of negative evaluation, and functional impairment 
(e.g., Brown, Heimberg, & Juster, 1995; Herbert, 
Hope, & Bellack, 1992; Turner, Beidel, & Townsley, 
1992). Nevertheless, after CBT, clients who fear many 
social situations improve as much as those who only 
fear performance situations (Brown et al., 1995; Hope, 
Herbert, & White, 1995; Turner, Beidel, Wolff, Spaulding, 
& Jacob, 1996). However, because clients with multiple 
social fears begin treatment with greater impairment, 
they remain more impaired after receiving the 
same number of treatment sessions. Therefore, these 
individuals may require a longer course of treatment 
to achieve outcomes similar to those of clients with the 
performance-only subtype. However, it has not been 
clearly established that the DSM-5 subtyping scheme 
provides more information than a simple count of the 
number of feared social situations (Vriends, Becker, 
Meyer, Michael, & Margraf, 2007). 

With the exception of the performance-only subtype, 
social anxiety disorder has many features in common 
with avoidant personality disorder (APD). In the 
current diagnostic system, APD is characterized by a 
long-standing pattern “of social inhibition, feelings of 
inadequacy, and hypersensitivity to negative evaluation” 
(American Psychiatric Association, 2013, p. 672). 
Given the similarity between the descriptions of the two 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

disorders, it is not surprising that many individuals who 
meet criteria for social anxiety disorder also meet criteria 
for APD. In both clinical and community samples 
(Cox, Pagura, Stein, & Sareen, 2009; Huppert, Strunk, 
Ledley, Davidson, & Foa, 2008; Marques et al., 2012), 
individuals who met criteria for both social anxiety disorder 
and APD were more depressed and demonstrated 
greater functional impairment and reduced quality 
of life. However, in one study, these differences were 
no longer evident when severity of social anxiety was 
controlled (Chambless, Fydrich, & Rodebaugh, 2008). 
The most parsimonious description of the relationship 
between social anxiety disorder and APD may be that 
they are not different disorders and that individuals 
meeting criteria for both disorders are simply the most 
severely impaired persons with social anxiety disorder 
(Chambless et al., 2008; Heimberg, Holt, Schneier, 
Spitzer, & Liebowitz, 1993). With regard to treatment 
outcome, some studies have found that clients with and 
without comorbid APD make similar gains (Brown et 
al., 1995; Hofmann, Newman, Becker, Taylor, & Roth, 
1995; Hope, Herbert, et al., 1995), although others have 
found that comorbid APD is associated with poorer 
treatment response (Chambless, Tran, & Glass, 1997; 
Feske, Perry, Chambless, Renneberg, & Goldstein, 
1996), despite greater improvement early in the treatment 
process in one study (Huppert et al., 2008). As 
with individuals meeting criteria for social anxiety disorder, 
clients with APD may require prolonged treatment 
to achieve an optimal outcome. 

overview of the treatMeNt 
outcoMe literature 

Researchers have investigated the efficacy of a broad 
range of treatments for social anxiety disorder, including 
social skills training, cognitive therapy, relaxation 
training, exposure, interpersonal psychotherapy, dynamically 
oriented supportive psychotherapy, and 
various pharmacotherapies. This review examines only 
studies that have tested the efficacy of combined exposure 
and cognitive treatment. The combination of exposure 
and cognitive restructuring has been the most frequently 
studied form of psychosocial intervention for 
social anxiety disorder and represents the focus of the 
intervention described in this chapter (broader reviews 
of the treatment outcome literature are provided by 
Pontoski, Heimberg, Turk, & Coles, 2010, and Wong, 
Gordon, & Heimberg, 2012). 

Researchers have often sought to demonstrate that 
the efficacy of exposure is improved by the addition 
of cognitive restructuring. The results of these efforts 
have been mixed. A meta-analysis conducted by Powers, 
Sigmarsson, and Emmelkamp (2008) revealed no 
greater benefit from the addition of cognitive restructuring 
to exposure. However, a more recent metaanalysis 
by Ougrin (2011) demonstrated a significant 
difference in favor of this combination, assessed either 
immediately after treatment or at follow-up assessments. 
This difference was evident in the treatment of 
social anxiety disorder, but not in the treatment of other 
anxiety disorders. 

Heimberg, Dodge, and colleagues (1990) conducted 
the first controlled trial of his group treatment for social 
anxiety disorder, which comprised integrated exposure, 
cognitive restructuring, and homework assignments 
(i.e., cognitive-behavioral group therapy [CBGT]). 
This treatment was compared to an attention control 
treatment that comprised education about social anxiety 
disorder and nondirective supportive group therapy. 
CBGT participants reported less anxiety during an individualized 
behavioral test and were more likely than 
control participants to be rated as improved by a clinical 
assessor. A 5-year follow-up of a subset of participants 
from the original sample indicated that individuals who 
had received CBGT were more likely than comparable 
attention control participants to maintain their gains 
(Heimberg, Salzman, Holt, & Blendell, 1993). 

In a component analysis of CBGT, Hope, Heimberg, 
and Bruch (1995) reported that CBGT and exposure 
alone were both more effective than a waitinglist 
control. At posttest, there was some evidence that 
the exposure-alone condition was more effective than 
CBGT, but these differences disappeared at 6-month 
follow-up. 

In a two-site study, 133 clients were randomly assigned 
to receive CBGT, the monoamine oxidase inhibitor 
phenelzine, pill placebo, or the attention control 
psychotherapy developed by Heimberg, Dodge, and 
colleagues (1990; Heimberg et al., 1998). At posttest, 
independent assessors classified 21 of 28 CBGT completers 
(75%; 58% of the intent-to-treat [ITT] sample) 
and 20 of 26 phenelzine completers (77%; 65% of the 
ITT sample) as treatment responders. The response 
rates for phenelzine and CBGT clients were significantly 
better than those for clients receiving pill placebo or 
the attention control psychotherapy. In the second phase 
of this study, clients who responded to CBGT or phenelzine 
were continued through an additional 6 months 


Social Anxiety Disorder 

of maintenance treatment and a 6-month follow-up period 
(Liebowitz et al., 1999). At study’s end, 50% of 
previously responding clients who received phenelzine 
relapsed, compared to only 17% of clients who received 
CBGT. 

Another study examined the efficacy of CBGT alone, 
versus phenelzine, and in combination with phenelzine 
(Blanco et al., 2010). Response rates at posttest suggested 
that combined treatment was superior to placebo, 
but that CBGT and phenelzine alone did not differ 
from each other, from combined treatment, or from 
placebo. However, additional examination suggested 
that phenelzine was often superior to CBGT in these 
short-term analyses, not inconsistent with the findings 
of Heimberg and colleagues (1998). 

Two studies compared CBGT to mindfulness and 
acceptance-based treatments. Koszyski, Benger, Shilk, 
and Bradwejn (2007) compared CBGT to mindfulnessbased 
stress reduction (MBSR; Kabat-Zinn, 1990). In 
this study, MBSR comprised eight 2.5-hour group sessions 
and one full-day meditation retreat. Both treatments 
produced improvements in mood, functioning, 
and quality of life; however, CBGT was associated with 
significantly greater reductions in self- and clinicianrated 
social anxiety, as well as higher rates of response 
and remission. Piet, Hougaard, Hecksher, and 
Rosenberg (2010) compared CBGT to mindfulnessbased 
cognitive therapy (MBCT; Segal, Williams, & 
Teasdale, 2002) in socially anxious young adults ages 
18–25. Using a crossover design, participants were 
randomly assigned to eight 2-hour group sessions of 
MBCT and twelve 2-hour sessions of CBGT. MBCT 
produced moderate effects (d = 0.78), which were lower 
but not significantly different from those produced by 
CBGT (d = 1.15), and participants continued to improve 
during the 6-month follow-up period. 

A waiting-list controlled study of the individually 
administered version of this treatment was recently 
completed (Ledley et al., 2009). The individual 
cognitive-behavioral treatment consistently 
outperformed the waiting list on both self-report and 
clinician-administered measures of social anxiety. Effect 
sizes were large, and little dropout occurred. These 
positive findings were essentially replicated by Goldin 
and colleagues (2012) in an independent sample. 

Controlled trials of Clark’s cognitive therapy (CT) 
for social anxiety disorder have also yielded large effect 
sizes and appear promising. CT includes exposure 
and cognitive restructuring, with emphasis on identifying 
and eliminating safety behaviors. In CT, the 

therapist and patient create a personalized conceptualization 
of the factors serving to maintain the patient’s 
social anxiety (e.g., patient’s idiosyncratic thoughts, 
images, safety behaviors, and attentional strategies). 
Throughout therapy, the patient’s negatively distorted 
self-representations are modified using video feedback, 
in which predicted performance is compared to actual 
performance. Additionally, the therapist encourages 
direction of attention away from aversive internal experiences 
(i.e., symptoms of anxiety), toward the task 
at hand. CT has demonstrated efficacy for individuals 
with social anxiety disorder (Clark et al., 2003; 2006), 
as well as superiority to interpersonal therapy (Stangier, 
Schramm, Heidenreich, Berger, & Clark, 2011). 
Gains made during CT were maintained when assessed 
after 5 years (Mörtberg, Clark, & Bejerot, 2011). 

In summary, it appears that a combined package of 
exposure and cognitive restructuring is an effective 
intervention for social anxiety disorder. Whether it is 
more effective than exposure alone is more difficult 
to determine given the limited number of studies and 
mixed results. However, more important to practitioners 
is the mounting evidence that three out of four 
clients with social anxiety disorder are likely to realize 
clinically significant change after a reasonably intensive 
trial of combined exposure and cognitive restructuring. 


aN iNteGrateD coGNitive‑Behavioral 
MoDel of social aNxiety DisorDer 

Rapee and Heimberg’s (1997) development of an integrated 
cognitive-behavioral model that describes how 
individuals with social anxiety disorder process information 
when confronted with a situation that holds the 
potential for negative evaluation has been recently updated 
by Heimberg, Brozovich, and Rapee (2010). The 
process begins when the socially anxious individual is 
in the presence of an audience. The term “audience” 
captures the sense that socially anxious individuals 
have of being “on stage” in the presence of others, 
whether the situation is a speech, social interaction, or 
another situation in which the person may be observed 
by others. Socially anxious persons perceive this audience 
as inherently critical (e.g., Leary, Kowalski, & 
Campbell, 1988) and as having standards that they are 
unlikely to meet (e.g., Wallace & Alden, 1991). 

In the presence of an audience, socially anxious individuals 
construct a mental representation of how they 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

appear to other people. This mental representation of 
the self comprises negative and distorted images in 
which the self is viewed from an observer perspective 
(Hackmann, Surawy, & Clark, 1998). These images 
have been found to be related to memories of early adverse 
social events, such as being bullied (Hackmann, 
Clark, & McManus, 2000). For example, one client 
described being mercilessly teased by her peers as a 
young adolescent for being tall and skinny. Although 
at the time of treatment she was an attractive adult, she 
still described her appearance as “gangly,” “awkward,” 
and “ugly.” Research has also shown that socially anxious 
individuals rate their own social behavior more 
harshly than do objective observers (Rapee & Lim, 
1992; Stopa & Clark, 1993) and overestimate the visibility 
of their anxiety relative to ratings by objective 
observers (Bruch, Gorsky, Collins, & Berger, 1989; 
Norton & Hope, 2001). Undoubtedly, these beliefs 
negatively impact their image of how they are coming 
across to others. The image of the self is further influenced 
by internal cues (e.g., somatic sensations of perspiration 
may produce images of sweat dripping down 
one’s face) and external cues such as others’ reactions 
(e.g., someone glancing at one’s clothing and frowning 
might lead to images of appearing disheveled). 

Beliefs that they are unacceptable to other people, 
that other people are inherently critical, and that the 
evaluation of others is extremely important motivate 
individuals with social anxiety disorder to be hypervigilant 
for early indications of disapproval from others 
(e.g., frowns, yawns) and aspects of their own behavior 
or appearance that might elicit negative evaluation 
from others (e.g., making an inane comment, not being 
dressed appropriately, visibly shaking). The division 
of attentional resources among external social threats, 
the (distorted) mental representation of the self as seen 
by others, and the demands of the current social task 
may result in actual performance deficits, which may 
then elicit actual negative social feedback. In effect, 
socially anxious persons operate within the equivalent 
of a multiple-task paradigm, which increases the probability 
of disrupted social performance (MacLeod & 
Mathews, 1991). Therefore, complex social tasks are 
more likely than less complex tasks to result in poorer 
performance, due to limited processing resources. 

Persons with social anxiety disorder also attempt to 
predict the standards that the audience holds for them 
in the situation. Characteristics of the audience (e.g., 
importance, attractiveness) and features of the situation 
(e.g., whether it is formal or informal) influence the 

projected standards of the audience. Individuals with 
social anxiety disorder then attempt to judge the extent 
to which their current mental representation of their appearance 
and behavior matches the predicted standards 
of the audience. Of course, given the negative bias present 
in their mental self-representation, they are likely to 
conclude that they are falling short of the audience’s expectations, 
and painful outcomes such as loss of social 
status and rejection are likely follow. Negative predictions 
result in cognitive, behavioral, and physiological 
symptoms of anxiety that eventually feed back into the 
negatively biased mental representation of the self as 
seen by others and perpetuate the cycle of anxiety. 

A significant recent change to the model addresses 
what is thought to be the core fear in social anxiety 
disorder, typically characterized as a fear of negative 
evaluation. However, recent research suggests that socially 
anxious individuals fear any evaluation, whether 
it is negative or positive (e.g., Weeks, Heimberg, Rodebaugh, 
& Norton, 2008). Fear of positive evaluation 
(FPE) may arise when successful social performance 
activates the belief that others will expect continued 
success in future social interactions, but the person 
doubts his/her ability to meet these increased expectations. 
However, the construct of FPE is derived from 
an evolutionary model of social anxiety disorder, which 
posits that socially anxious individuals work to maintain 
their (low) social status by not drawing attention 
to themselves (Gilbert, 2001). In this way, they neither 
risk losing status nor have to engage in conflict with 
more powerful others to defend any elevated social status 
they may have achieved. The update to the Rapee– 
Heimberg model reflects this line of thinking, and the 
model now posits that socially anxious persons fear and 
attend to cues of evaluation, regardless of valence. The 
model as updated by Heimberg and colleagues (2010) is 
presented in Figure 3.1. See the chapter in that book for 
a fuller explication of revisions to the original model. 

treatMeNt ratioNale froM 
a coGNitive‑Behavioral PersPective 

The heart of our approach to treatment is the integration 
of exposure and cognitive restructuring (Heimberg 
& Becker, 2002; Hope, Heimberg, & Turk, 2010a, 
2010b). Exposure is beneficial for several reasons that 
are communicated to the client. One of the most important 
aspects of exposure is the opportunity to test dysfunctional 
beliefs (e.g., “I will get too anxious to finish 


Social Anxiety Disorder 

Preferential Allocation of 
Attentional Resources 
Perceived 
Internal Cues 
Cognitive 
Symptoms 
of Anxiety 
Physical 
Symptoms 
of Anxiety 
Behavioral 
Symptoms 
of Anxiety 
Judgment of Probability andConsequence of Evaluation 
from Audience 
Comparison of Mental 
Representation of Self as Seen 
by Audience with Appraisal of 
Audience's Expected Standard 
Mental Representation of Self 
as Seen by Audience 
PERCEIVED AUDIENCE 
Observation / Image of Self 
and Audience Behavior 
External Indicators 
of Evaluation 
figUre 3.1. An updated cognitive-behavioral model of social anxiety disorder. From Heimberg, Brozovich, and Rapee 
(2010, Figure 15.2, p. 416). Copyright 2010 by Elsevier Limited. Reprinted by permission. 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

the speech”) and to generate more realistic ways of understanding 
the self and others (e.g., “I can continue the 
speech even if I am anxious”). Exposure also allows 
clients to experience the natural anxiety reduction that 
comes with staying in a feared situation for a prolonged 
period of time on several occasions (i.e., habituation). 
Last, exposure allows clients to practice long-avoided 
behavioral skills (e.g., asking someone for a date, being 
assertive) and to engage in behaviors consistent with 
their personal goals (e.g., engaging in small talk with 
new people that may lead to friendships in the future). 

Cognitive restructuring is also important for several 
reasons communicated to clients. Clients learn to 
treat their anxiety-provoking thoughts and beliefs as 
hypotheses and to explore whether there are more helpful 
or realistic ways of viewing the situation, the self, 
and others. As clients come to view social situations as 
less threatening, they are often more willing to confront 
those situations in exposures. Furthermore, addressing 
dysfunctional cognitions often frees up attentional resources 
that can be used to increase focus on the social 
task at hand and potentially improve performance. Additionally, 
cognitive restructuring may help clients to 
take credit for successes and cope with disappointments 
after exposures. The use of cognitive skills to diffuse 
postevent processing may be especially important given 
that rumination following one anxiety-provoking event 
is associated with greater initial anxiety prior to confronting 
another anxiety-provoking event (for a review, 
see Brozovich & Heimberg, 2008). Last, as clients’ 
cognitive assessments of the danger inherent in social 
situations become more realistic, their physiological 
symptoms of anxiety often diminish as well. 

In-session exposures, with cognitive restructuring 
occurring before, during, and after each exposure, are 
particularly crucial. With the gentle encouragement 
and emotional support of the therapist, clients are often 
willing to engage in behaviors in session that they have 
avoided outside of session for many years. Successful 
in-session exposures can provide clients with the confidence 
and motivation to try out these behaviors in the 
real world. In-session exposures may also be more easily 
graduated than in vivo exposures. For example, a 
client who is terrified of formal public speaking might 
do an initial in-session exposure that comprises reading 
an article aloud from a magazine while sitting down. 
The next exposure might involve standing up while 
reading the article aloud, then taking questions from a 
small audience. In-session exposures also provide the 
therapist with the opportunity to teach clients about the 

principles of effective exposure, such as staying in a 
feared social situation for a prolonged period of time 
without avoiding, even if anxiety escalates. In-session 
exposures also allow the therapist to see firsthand any 
subtle avoidance behaviors (i.e., safety behaviors) that 
the client may employ to manage anxiety. For example, 
a client who fears that other people might reject him if 
they got to know him personally may assail a conversation 
partner with questions and not reveal any personal 
information. A client who is afraid of the reaction 
of others to her speech might never look up from her 
notes, so that she never has to see any bored or critical 
faces (and, of course, also never has a chance to see 
any interested or approving faces). As noted by Clark 
and Wells (1995), such safety behaviors are essentially 
attempts to avoid feared outcomes, but they may have 
the unintended effect of making individuals appear socially 
awkward and increase the likelihood of negative 
reactions from others. Furthermore, clients do not learn 
that they might have managed the social situation as 
well, if not better, without engaging in safety behaviors. 
In-session exposures provide the therapist with the opportunity 
to point out these behaviors and to set goals 
for the next exposure that involve fully confronting the 
feared situation (e.g., looking at the audience during the 
speech, revealing personal information during a conversation). 
In-session exposures also provide the opportunity 
for clients to receive direct feedback on their 
social performance in a way that is often not possible 
in real life. For example, a client who believes that she 
trembles so much during public speaking that others 
pity her can ask her exposure audience how noticeable 
the trembling was and what they thought of her (rarely 
will an audience reply that an anxious person was pitied). 
Last, in-session exposures provide the opportunity 
for the therapist to assist clients in applying cognitive 
restructuring skills to an actual anxiety-provoking 
situation. Once in-session exposures begin, homework 
involves confronting similar situations outside of session. 
As with in-session exposures, clients are asked to 
engage in cognitive restructuring activities before, during, 
and after each in vivo exposure. 

treatMeNt‑relateD variaBles 

Group versus Individual Treatment 

Treatment of social anxiety disorder has often been 
conducted in a group format (e.g., Blanco et al., 2010; 


Social Anxiety Disorder 

Heimberg, Dodge, et al., 1990; Heimberg et al., 1998), 
which has been conceptualized as having a number of 
advantages over the individual format. It provides opportunities 
for vicarious learning, support from others 
with similar problems, the availability of multiple roleplay 
partners, informal exposure stemming from group 
participation, and a range of people to provide evidence 
to counter distorted thinking (Heimberg & Becker, 
2002; Sank & Shaffer, 1984). Nevertheless, the group 
format has a number of potential disadvantages as well. 
Treatment cannot begin until a group of approximately 
six clients has been assembled, which means that the 
first few individuals joining the group may have to wait 
for an extended period before starting treatment. Some 
of these individuals lose motivation and drop out before 
the group begins. Group treatment also provides 
less flexibility in making up missed sessions. Although 
group treatment provides opportunities for vicarious 
learning, this benefit may be offset by the reduced time 
available for the idiosyncratic needs of each client. 
Clinically, some clients appear to get discouraged and 
lose motivation when they see other group members 
progressing at a more rapid pace than themselves. Additionally, 
even when efforts are made to screen potential 
group members, a group may include a client who is 
domineering, aggressive, or otherwise difficult to manage, 
and may have a negative impact on the group. Last, 
some individuals never fully habituate to the group setting, 
and their anxiety may interfere with their ability 
to process information during sessions. 

Little available data speak to the issue of whether individual 
or group therapy provides better outcomes. In 
their meta-analysis, Powers and colleagues (2008) reported 
that group and individual cognitive-behavioral 
interventions for social anxiety disorder produced 
similar effect sizes, but another meta-analysis based on 
a small sample of studies (Aderka, 2009) suggested a 
modest advantage for individual treatment. Group and 
individual formats have rarely been compared within 
the same study. Scholing and Emmelkamp (1993) examined 
various combinations of exposure and cognitive 
restructuring delivered in group or individual 
formats and found no clear advantage for either treatment 
modality. Similarly, Wlazlo, Schroeder-Hartwig, 
Hand, Kaiser, and Münchau (1990) found no differences 
in outcome between group and individual exposure 
treatment. One study did find that an individual version 
of CBT for social anxiety disorder was superior to the 
group version, and that both formats were superior to a 
waiting list (Stangier, Heidenreich, Peitz, Lauterbach, 

& Clark, 2003). However, the data do not suggest a 
clear advantage for either modality in the treatment of 
social anxiety disorder. 

Heimberg and Becker (2002) provide a description 
of CBGT for social anxiety disorder. This chapter 
provides a description of the individual version of this 
treatment, which has been the focus of our attention in 
recent years (see also Hope et al., 2010a; 2010b). 

Appropriate Clients 

In treatment studies to date, social anxiety disorder has 
been the primary diagnosis of the participants. As previously 
discussed, social anxiety disorder is often comorbid 
with other disorders (W. J. Magee et al., 1996; 
Schneier et al., 1992). In such cases, the clinician and 
client need to reach a joint decision that social anxiety 
will be the focus of treatment for a specified period of 
time (e.g., 16 weeks). Clinically, it is important to clarify 
this issue prior to beginning treatment because some 
clients may express a desire to switch the focus of treatment 
to another problem area when it is time to begin 
exposures. In general, our policy is to remind the client 
of the original treatment contract and goals, and to encourage 
him/her to “avoid avoidance.” In some cases, 
the best clinical decision is to change the focus of treatment 
due to changes in the client’s life circumstances 
or symptoms. Nevertheless, we are especially wary of 
altering the treatment plan when the client’s desire to 
change the focus of treatment coincides with the initiation 
of exposures. Therapists without a strong background 
in CBT or exposure therapy may be at risk for 
changing the focus of treatment too readily, partially 
due to their own discomfort with conducting in-session 
exposures. Sometimes a compromise can be reached in 
which exposures remain in the treatment plan but some 
session time is set aside to deal with other issues. 

Appropriate Therapists 

The ideal therapist has a strong background in the theoretical 
underpinnings of CBT for anxiety disorders, 
experience conducting exposures, good basic therapy 
skills, and experience with social anxiety in particular. 
Little is known about the effectiveness of manualized 
treatments when implemented by clinicians without 
extensive training in the manual’s theoretical underpinnings 
and procedures (Chambless & Ollendick, 
2001), although data are accumulating to suggest that 
the treatments described here or similar ones retain 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

their efficacy when implemented in community settings 
(Gaston, Abbott, Rapee, & Neary, 2006; Lincoln 
et al., 2003; McEvoy, 2007; McEvoy, Nathan, Rapee, 
& Campbell, 2012). Our clinical experience suggests 
that with good supervision, this treatment can be successfully 
implemented by novice therapists seeing their 
very first clients (in fact, the client presented later was 
treated by L. Magee, who at the time was a novice 
therapist) and experienced therapists with a theoretical 
orientation other than a cognitive-behavioral one. Experienced 
clinicians with a good cognitive-behavioral 
background are likely to do quite well working independently 
with this manualized treatment. Moreover, 
our client workbook (Hope et al., 2010a) and therapist 
guide (Hope et al., 2010b) were designed with the intention 
of being sufficiently detailed to allow therapists 
with a wide variety of backgrounds to provide this 
treatment, although supervision and/or consultation 
with an experienced cognitive-behavioral therapist on 
the first few cases and the more complex cases would 
be beneficial. 

Medication and CBT for Social 
Anxiety Disorder 

Many clients are already taking psychotropic medications 
when they present for therapy. Some take medication 
to control their social anxiety, whereas others take 
medication for comorbid conditions. We do not require 
clients to discontinue medications prior to starting CBT 
(unless dictated by a specific research protocol). However, 
we do ask clients to stabilize their dosage before 
starting treatment and to refrain from changing their 
dosage or trying any new medications during treatment. 
Clinically, we want clients to attribute positive changes 
in their symptoms to the work they are doing in therapy 
rather than to changes in their medication regimen. Individuals 
who take medication on an as-needed basis 
are asked to refrain from doing so before sessions or 
exposure homework assignments. The same request is 
made of individuals who use nonprescription drugs, alcohol, 
or other substances to control their anxiety. 

PretreatMeNt assessMeNt 
aND PreParatioN for treatMeNt 

Assessment should play an integral part in diagnosis, 
case conceptualization, treatment planning, and termination 
decisions. Although administering all of the 

measures presented here is not practical in most clinical 
settings, we highly recommend administering a 
subset of the self-report and clinician-rated instruments 
described below, and a behavioral assessment, if at all 
possible (for a more thorough review of assessment of 
social anxiety disorder, see Heimberg & Turk, 2002). 

Clinical Interview 

The Anxiety Disorders Interview Schedule for DSM-
IV (ADIS-IV; Brown, Di Nardo, & Barlow, 1994), 
the ADIS-IV—Lifetime Version (ADIS-IV-L; Di 
Nardo, Brown, & Barlow, 1994), as well as the ADIS 
for DSM-5 (ADIS-5-L; Brown, Di Nardo, & Barlow, 
2013), provide a thorough diagnostic assessment of 
the anxiety disorders and include modules for mood 
disorders, substance use disorders, and disorders that 
overlap with anxiety disorders in clinical presentation 
(e.g., hypochondriasis, somatization disorder). There 
are screening questions for other major disorders (e.g., 
psychosis). A 0- to 8-point clinician’s severity rating 
(CSR) designates the degree of distress and interference 
associated with each diagnosis. A CSR of 4 or 
higher suggests that the client meets diagnostic criteria. 
When multiple disorders receive a CSR of 4 or higher, 
the disorder receiving the highest CSR is designated 
as the principal diagnosis and the other disorders are 
designated as additional. In a major reliability study of 
the ADIS-IV-L, 362 individuals seeking treatment at 
an anxiety specialty clinic received two independent 
administrations of the ADIS-IV (Brown, Di Nardo, 
Lehman, & Campbell, 2001). Social anxiety disorder 
evidenced good reliability as a principal diagnosis 
(kappa = .77), as a clinical (principal or additional) diagnosis 
(kappa = .77), and as a past (lifetime) diagnosis 
(kappa = .72). The CSR for social anxiety disorder (r = 
.80) also evidenced good interrater reliability. 

We routinely administer the ADIS during the first 
client visit. Semistructured interviews such as the 
ADIS assist with differential diagnosis and in providing 
systematic assessment for a broad range of comorbid 
conditions that may affect the course of treatment. 
Nevertheless, diagnostic interviews may be costly and 
time-consuming. Regardless of whether a semistructured 
or unstructured clinical interview is conducted, 
devoting time to a thorough and accurate diagnostic 
evaluation is crucial to appropriate treatment planning. 
Clients whose symptoms are better accounted for by 
another diagnosis may experience, among other things, 
little improvement with treatment targeting social anxi



Social Anxiety Disorder 

ety, unnecessarily prolonged suffering as they go without 
the appropriate treatment, increased hopelessness, 
and financial hardship. 

Self‑Report Instruments 

Self-report instruments are an important complement 
to the diagnostic interview. Clients may experience 
feelings of shame and embarrassment during a clinical 
interview and give descriptions of their problems 
that do not fully reflect the severity or pervasiveness of 
their social fear or avoidance. Furthermore, normative 
data on questionnaires allow the clinician to evaluate 
the severity of a client’s symptoms relative to meaningful 
reference points. Importantly, pretreatment scores 
provide a baseline against which treatment progress 
can be assessed. 

Measures of Social Anxiety 

A number of questionnaires are available to assess 
social anxiety and avoidance. The Social Interaction 
Anxiety Scale (SIAS) and Social Phobia Scale (SPS) 
are commonly used companion measures designed 
specifically for the assessment of social anxiety disorder 
(Mattick & Clarke, 1998). The SIAS assesses 
fear of interacting in dyads and groups, and the SPS 
assesses fear of being observed by others (e.g., eating 
in front of others). In most published studies, the SIAS 
and SPS contain 20 items each. For each instrument, 
respondents rate how characteristic each statement is 
of them on a 5-point Likert-type scale (0, Not at all; 4, 
Extremely). Multiple studies suggest that the SIAS and 
SPS are reliable and valid measures, and sensitive to 
the effects of CBT (e.g., Brown et al., 1997; Cox, Ross, 
Swinson, & Direnfeld, 1998; Heimberg, Mueller, Holt, 
Hope, & Liebowitz, 1992; Ries et al., 1998). However, 
recent research suggests that the 17 straightforwardly 
worded items of the SIAS are more sensitive to the construct 
of social anxiety than the three reverse-scored 
items, which seem more related to the construct of extraversion 
(Rodebaugh, Woods, & Heimberg, 2007). A 
number of studies now support the use of the 17-item 
scale (e.g., Rodebaugh et al., 2011). Recently, even 
shorter forms of both instruments have been developed 
(Fergus, Valentiner, McGrath, Gier-Lonsway, & Kim, 
2012; Kupper & Denollet, 2012; Peters, Sunderland, 
Andrews, Rapee, & Mattick, 2012), as has a brief instrument 
derived from a factor analysis of the pooled 
item set (Social Interaction Phobia Scale; Carleton et 

al., 2009). However, it is premature at this time to suggest 
that it is time to set the originals aside in favor of 
recent variants. 

Another commonly used instrument developed to 
assess social anxiety disorder, the Social Phobia and 
Anxiety Inventory (SPAI; Turner, Beidel, Dancu, & 
Stanley, 1989), comprises a Social Phobia subscale, 
an Agoraphobia subscale, and a derived Difference 
(or Total) score (i.e., Social Phobia–Agoraphobia subscales). 
The SPAI contains 45 items, 21 of which require 
multiple responses. For example, for the item that 
begins “I attempt to avoid social situations where there 
are .. . ,” the client separately rates how frequently he/ 
she avoids situations involving strangers, authority figures, 
the opposite sex, and people in general. The client 
gives a total of 109 responses, making the administration 
and scoring of the SPAI relatively time-consuming. 
Despite the disadvantages imposed by the length of the 
scale, the quantity and specificity of information that 
it elicits can be quite helpful in case formulation and 
treatment planning. 

The Social Phobia subscale assesses somatic, cognitive, 
and behavioral responses to a variety of interaction, 
performance, and observation situations. The 
Agoraphobia subscale assesses anxiety in situations 
commonly feared by individuals with panic disorder 
with agoraphobia (e.g., waiting in line). Respondents 
rate how frequently they feel anxious in each situation 
using a 7-point Likert-type scale (1, Never; 7, Always). 
The Difference score is intended to provide an index of 
social anxiety and avoidance distinct from the sometimes 
similar concerns of clients with agoraphobia. 
However, the very high correlation between the Difference 
score and the score of the Social Phobia subscale 
(r = .91) (Ries et al., 1998) suggests that there may be 
little benefit to this strategy. Multiple studies suggest 
that the SPAI is a reliable and valid instrument (e.g., 
Beidel, Turner, Stanley, & Dancu, 1989; Herbert, Bellack, 
& Hope, 1991; Turner et al., 1989), and sensitive 
to treatment-related change (e.g., Cox et al., 1998; Ries 
et al., 1998; Taylor, Woody, McLean, & Koch, 1997). 

Another scale that may prove to be quite useful is 
the 17-item Social Phobia Inventory, also known as the 
SPIN (Antony, Coons, McCabe, Ashbaugh, & Swinson, 
2006; Connor et al., 2000), which has demonstrated 
good reliability, significant correlations with related 
measures, and the ability to discriminate between clients 
with social anxiety disorder and those with other 
anxiety disorders. A three-item version of the SPIN, 
the Mini-SPIN, has also shown substantial utility as 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

a screening device for social anxiety disorder in both 
general health care (Connor, Kobak, Churchill, Katzelnick, 
& Davidson, 2001) and anxiety specialty clinic 
(Weeks, Spokas, & Heimberg, 2007) settings. 

Although developed and validated with college students 
prior to the inclusion of social anxiety disorder 
in the DSM, the original Fear of Negative Evaluation 
scale (FNE; Watson & Friend, 1969) and the brief version 
of the scale (BFNE; Leary, 1983) continue to be 
widely used because they target a core construct of the 
disorder. The FNE comprises 30 items and employs a 
true–false format. In treatment studies, changes on the 
FNE have been found to predict end-state functioning 
(e.g., Mattick & Peters, 1988). The FNE appears to be 
sensitive to the effects of treatment, although changes 
are typically small in magnitude (Heimberg, 1994). 
The BFNE contains 12 items, uses a 5-point Likerttype 
format (1, Not at all characteristic of me; 5, Extremely 
characteristic of me), and correlates highly 
with the original scale (r = .96) (Leary, 1983). In a recent 
study by Rodebaugh and colleagues (2004) that 
utilized a large sample of undergraduates, the BFNE 
was more sensitive than the FNE to differing degrees 
of fear of negative evaluation. A study by Weeks and 
colleagues (2005) that utilized a large sample of clients 
with social anxiety disorder found that the BFNE had 
high internal consistency, correlated with measures of 
social anxiety, showed good discriminant validity, and 
was sensitive to the effects of CBT. Both of these studies 
suggest quite compellingly that, similar to the SIAS, 
the reverse-scored items of the BFNE may detract from 
its validity, and we now score only the straightforwardly 
worded items. Others have taken a similar approach 
by rewording the reverse-scored items to be consistent 
with the straightforwardly worded items (e.g., Collins, 
Westra, Dozois, & Stewart, 2005). 

The Social Anxiety Session Change Index (SASCI; 
Hayes, Miller, Hope, Heimberg, & Juster, 2008) was 
developed for the assessment of session-by-session 
change in the treatment of social anxiety disorder. 
Clients use a 7-point Likert-type scale to indicate how 
much they have changed since the beginning of therapy 
on four dimensions: anxiety, avoidance, concern about 
humiliation and embarrassment, and interference. A 
total score of 16 indicates no change since the beginning 
of treatment. Scores of 4–15 indicate improvement, 
whereas scores of 17–28 indicate deterioration. 
The internal consistency of the SASCI across sessions 
ranged from .84 to .94 across sessions (M = .89) in the 
study by Hayes and colleagues (2008). Change on the 

SASCI was related to change in fear of negative evaluation 
and to clinician-rated improvement, but not to ratings 
of anxiety sensitivity or depression. The use of the 
SASCI and the BFNE as session-by-session measures 
is demonstrated in the case study reported later in this 
chapter. 

Other Self-Report Measures 

In addition to measures targeting social anxiety, we 
administer questionnaires assessing other constructs 
relevant to case conceptualization and treatment outcome. 
We routinely administer the Beck Depression 
Inventory–II (BDI-II; A. T. Beck, Steer, & Brown, 
1996), which assesses symptoms of depression, including 
the affective, cognitive, behavioral, somatic, and 
motivational components, as well as suicidal wishes. 
We also use the Liebowitz Self-Rated Disability Scale 
(Schneier et al., 1994), which assesses impairment 
across 11 domains (e.g., school, work, alcohol abuse), 
and the Quality of Life Inventory (Frisch, 1994), which 
assesses the client’s overall sense of well-being and satisfaction 
with life. 

Feedback and Treatment Contract Interview 

At the session following the intake session, the interviewer 
reviews assessment data with the client, explains 
diagnoses, answers questions, and offers treatment recommendations. 
For clients with comorbid diagnoses, 
the benefits of initially making social anxiety the primary 
focus of treatment for 12–16 weekly sessions is 
discussed, as noted earlier. Last, clients are assured that 
the severity of their social anxiety symptoms and any 
comorbid conditions will be reassessed following this 
initial course of treatment and, if necessary, additional 
treatment recommendations will be made at that time. 
Additional assessments may be conducted at this visit, 
or clients may be scheduled for one additional session 
to conduct further assessments before treatment formally 
begins. The additional assessments may include 
clinician-administered measures of social anxiety and 
behavior tests. 

Clinician‑Administered Measures 
of Social Anxiety 

The two most commonly used clinician-administered 
measures of social anxiety are the Liebowitz Social 
Anxiety Scale (LSAS; Liebowitz, 1987) and the Brief 


Social Anxiety Disorder 

Social Phobia Scale (BSPS; Davidson et al., 1991, 
1997). We routinely utilize the LSAS, so we describe 
it here. This measure is completed at the second clinic 
visit largely to avoid making the initial intake session 
unduly lengthy. The LSAS separately evaluates Fear 
and Avoidance of 11 interaction (e.g., talking to people 
in authority) and 13 performance (e.g., working while 
being observed) situations using 4-point Likert-type 
scales. 

Summing the Fear and Avoidance ratings for all 24 
items yields an index of overall severity. The LSAS has 
been shown to have good reliability and convergent/ 
discriminant validity (e.g., Cox et al., 1998; Heimberg 
et al., 1999). It discriminates well between clients with 
social anxiety disorder and those with generalized anxiety 
disorder (Heimberg & Holaway, 2007). It has also 
demonstrated sensitivity to cognitive-behavioral and 
pharmacological treatment of social anxiety disorder 
(e.g., Blanco et al., 2010; Heimberg et al., 1998). When 
the LSAS is accompanied by detailed instructions, it 
appears that it also has good reliability and validity as 
a self-report instrument (Fresco et al., 2001; Rytwinski 
et al., 2009). 

Behavioral Assessment 

Behavior tests, or role plays of social situations relevant 
to the client, can be a very useful addition to the selfreport 
and clinician-administered measures described 
here. Although these tests may be quite anxietyprovoking 
for the client, the information obtained during 
a behavior test is unique and important in several 
ways. Individuals with social anxiety disorder are likely 
to describe their social behavior as inadequate (e.g., 
Rapee & Lim, 1992; Stopa & Clark, 1993) and their 
anxiety as highly visible to others (e.g., Norton & Hope, 
2001). However, behavior tests often demonstrate that 
these reports are largely inaccurate and are essentially 
examples of distorted beliefs. Furthermore, level of 
anxiety and quality of performance exhibited by a client 
during behavior tests may be used to calibrate the 
difficulty of exposures and increase the likelihood that 
the therapist creates a first exposure that provides both 
a challenge and a successful experience for the client. 

During behavior tests, the clinician may ask for anxiety 
ratings before, at several points during, and after the 
role play. Other assessments, such as asking clients to 
rate the quality of their performance or list the thoughts 
they had during the role play, are easily incorporated. 
Affordable ambulatory physiological assessment de


vices, such as pulse monitors, are available and add a 
useful dimension. The clinician can choose to test the 
limits of a client’s ability to perform when anxious by 
asking him/her to remain in the situation for a certain 
period of time (typically 4–5 minutes). On the other 
hand, the clinician may give the client explicit permission 
to stop (e.g., Ries et al., 1998) when the anxiety is 
excessive, and latency to escape the situation becomes 
a measure of avoidance. 

Behavior tests may either be standardized or individualized. 
Standardized role plays allow for the observation 
of differences across patients for a particular task. 
Commonly used tasks include a conversation with a 
same-sex stranger, a conversation with an opposite-sex 
stranger, a conversation with two or more people, and a 
speech to a small audience. In contrast, the advantage 
of individualized behavior tests is that they may be designed 
more precisely to target idiosyncratic fears. For 
example, a client with a fear of displaying a hand tremor 
when eating in front of others may experience little 
anxiety during a one-on-one conversation. However, if 
that client is asked to engage in a one-on-one conversation 
while eating a bowl of soup, his or her anxiety is 
more likely to be activated. 

iNDiviDual cBt for social 
aNxiety DisorDer 

Principles and Logistics 

For our studies on individual treatment of social anxiety 
disorder, we have established guidelines to which 
our therapists must adhere (Hope et al., 2010b). One 
issue facing manualized treatments is that it is unclear 
to what extent one may take liberties with how the 
treatment is carried out and still expect outcomes similar 
to those obtained during efficacy studies. Therefore, 
although we recognize that this treatment may be applied 
more flexibly in clinical settings, we present these 
guidelines to help therapists understand the treatment 
as it has been most thoroughly studied. 

The treatment comprises 16 weekly 1-hour sessions 
within a period of 16–20 weeks. Although completing 
16 sessions within 16 weeks might be ideal, up to 20 
weeks are allowed to take into consideration sessions 
missed due to illness, vacations, holidays, and so forth. 
Taking longer than 20 weeks to complete 16 sessions 
may compromise the momentum of therapy. The two 
to three pretreatment sessions described earlier, as well 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

as posttreatment assessment and feedback sessions, are 
not counted as part of the 16-session treatment phase. 

Our individual treatment requires that the client use 
a workbook (Hope et al., 2010a) as he/she works with 
the therapist during each session and for homework assignments. 
This workbook comprises 13 chapters, but 
the treatment program does not follow a one-chapterper-
session format. Rather, treatment is divided into 
five segments, described below, and the therapist has 
flexibility in terms of the pace and, to some extent, the 
content of these segments. We ask clients to read assigned 
chapters before coming to the session. 

Clients are asked to bring their workbook to every 
session. Therapists typically bring their own copy of 
the workbook and/or a copy of the therapist guide to 
session as well. The therapist also makes sure that 
there is something to write on that therapist and client 
can look at together during the session. In our clinic, 
a newsprint easel or a dry-erase board mounted to the 
wall is typically used (for ease, we refer to the use of an 
easel hereafter). However, at times, we have also just 
pulled two chairs side by side, so that both therapist and 
client can write on and view the same piece of paper 
on a clipboard. Importantly, every session introduces 
key concepts that are written down (e.g., a therapist 
may draw a continuum of anxiety in Session 1; client 
automatic thoughts and rational responses are always 
recorded). Writing things down during session helps 
clients better to track and process the information being 
covered and is a required component of the treatment. 

The therapeutic relationship is actively fostered 
throughout treatment. As Kendall, Chu, Gifford, 
Hayes, and Nauta (1998) have pointed out, some critics 
assume that the therapeutic relationship is not considered 
relevant when a manual is utilized (see also Kendall, 
Gosch, Furr, & Sood, 2008). To the contrary, our 
therapist adherence manual (Hope, Van Dyke, Heimberg, 
Turk, & Fresco, 2002) includes explicit ratings 
of the therapeutic relationship within each segment of 
treatment. Therapists are rated on how well they engage 
in active listening, respond to verbal and nonverbal 
cues, facilitate the client’s investment in treatment, 
and communicate support of and investment in the client. 
Additionally, therapists are expected to help clients 
to experience and deepen affect as appropriate to the 
situation at hand. For example, a therapist would be expected 
to help a client both to be open to the experience 
of anxiety during exposures and to process and grieve 
losses that are a consequence of many years of social 
avoidance. In other situations, the therapist would be 

expected to help the client use uncomfortable feelings 
as cues for additional cognitive coping practice. For 
example, the therapist would help a client who experiences 
a deep sense of shame after making a small 
social mistake (e.g., spilling a drink, calling someone 
by the wrong name) to engage in cognitive restructuring 
to change the meaning of the event eliciting such 
emotions. Therapists are actively supervised on these 
aspects of treatment, and not attending to the therapeutic 
relationship or appropriately responding to what is 
going on in session is considered a serious failure to 
follow protocol. 

Recent data suggest that the therapeutic relationship 
is indeed related to successful outcomes in our protocol 
(Hayes, Hope, Van Dyke, & Heimberg, 2007). Clients’ 
ratings of the therapeutic alliance were positively related 
to their perceptions of session helpfulness. Interestingly, 
the relationship between the therapeutic alliance 
and anxiety reduction during in-session exposures was 
curvilinear; that is, when ratings of the alliance were 
higher or lower, clients showed less anxiety reduction 
than when the ratings of the alliance were moderate. 
The effect for low ratings of the alliance may not require 
explanation, but we have conjectured that if the 
client feels too comfortable with the therapist, then this 
may possibly interfere with anxiety evocation during 
exposures and thereby, emotional processing. Maintaining 
the “right” therapeutic alliance is important in 
CBT for social anxiety disorder (Hayes et al., 2007). 

Therapists are also expected to engage in efficient 
time management. Our therapist adherence manual 
rates therapists’ ability to cover required topics flexibly, 
without rushing or boring the client by belaboring various 
points (Hope et al., 2002). Two types of problems 
that tend to crop up with regard to time management 
may in turn negatively impact the therapeutic relationship. 
Some therapists fall into the trap of turning each 
session into a psychoeducational lecture, and this tendency 
may be aggravated if the therapist is working 
with a client who is very quiet in the early sessions. 
The primary recommendation in this situation is to ask 
open-ended questions that prompt the client to relate 
his/her personal experiences to the material. The client’s 
verbalizations in response to these questions are 
then reinforced through the use of active listening 
skills, which elicit more client verbalizations. The other 
trap into which some therapists fall is allowing the client 
to dominate the session with long, detailed stories 
about experiences with social anxiety. In some cases, 
the therapist may have inadvertently taught the client to 


Social Anxiety Disorder 

lead the session in this way, by indiscriminately using 
active listening skills and nonverbal cues, even when 
the client is discussing tangential or repetitive material. 
In other cases, clients may be accustomed to dominating 
sessions through prior experiences with traditional 
talk therapy, or they may even intentionally attempt to 
dominate the session to avoid difficult material, particularly 
in-session exposures. In this situation, gentle 
verbal redirection is required. In some cases, a straightforward 
discussion of time management issues and negotiation 
of session time may be beneficial. 

Last, we want to emphasize our belief that manualized 
treatments such as this one do not represent an 
inflexible set of procedures applied indiscriminately 
to all clients. Rather, we expect therapists to develop 
an individualized conceptualization of each client’s 
particular presenting problem, which is continually refined 
over the course of treatment and incorporates the 
unique characteristics of the client (e.g., cultural group, 
sex, educational background). Treatment procedures 
are then tailored to address the unique aspects of each 
case. 

Segment 1: Psychoeducation 

Segment 1 covers the material in Chapters 1–4 of the 
client workbook (Hope et al., 2010a). Establishing 
a good working relationship is a critical goal for this 
segment of therapy. If the therapist was not also the 
initial interviewer, three to four sessions are typically 
needed for the psychoeducation segment to allow adequate 
attention to building rapport. If a good working 
alliance has been established during the course of the 
initial assessment and if the client is especially bright 
and motivated, it may be possible to cover two chapters 
per session, finishing this portion of treatment in 
as little as 2 weeks. Therapists should not assign more 
than two chapters per week at any point in therapy because 
clients are unlikely to process the material fully 
and make the most of the associated exercises and selfmonitoring 
homework. 

One or two chapters are assigned as homework at the 
end of each session. Each chapter includes a variety of 
forms that the client attempts to complete as well. At 
the beginning of the next session, the therapist asks the 
client for reactions to and questions about the readings, 
and therapist and client review corresponding forms 
completed by the client. If the client has not made an 
attempt to complete a form, it is completed at the beginning 
of the session during homework review. 

Therapists are required to review certain topics from 
each chapter in the client workbook in session; other 
topics are optional depending on the needs of the individual 
client. For Chapter 1, the therapist must review 
two topics: (1) normal versus problematic social anxiety, 
and (2) the investment that treatment will require. 
The discussion of normal and problematic social anxiety 
conveys to the client that social anxiety exists along 
a continuum, with some people rarely experiencing any 
social anxiety, other people frequently experiencing 
intense social anxiety, and most people falling somewhere 
between these extremes. People who fall in the 
middle of the continuum experience social anxiety in 
some situations, such as a first date or a job interview, 
but the anxiety is typically manageable and decreases as 
the person remains in the situation. Factors such as intensity 
and duration of anxiety before and during social 
situations, the number of situations eliciting anxiety, 
and the degree of life impairment differentiate between 
normal social anxiety and problematic social anxiety 
for which a diagnosis may be assigned. By asking what 
types of situations elicit social anxiety for many people 
and what purpose social anxiety might serve, the 
therapist can engage the client in illustrating the notion 
that social anxiety has an adaptive value (e.g., caring 
about what other people think might cause anxiety, but 
it also helps people to treat each other more kindly). A 
therapist typically uses this opportunity to discuss what 
the client should expect in terms of treatment outcome. 
First, the therapist points out that social anxiety is part 
of the human condition; thus, it is impossible to remove 
it completely, even if this were a desirable goal. Total 
freedom from social anxiety is not a reasonable expectation 
for treatment. However, it is reasonable to expect 
to move down the continuum from problematic levels 
of social anxiety to a level of social anxiety that is more 
typical of most people. Not all clients are willing to accept 
that social anxiety exists on a continuum or that it 
can have an adaptive value this early in treatment. This 
first session is merely an introduction to these concepts, 
and arguing with a client about these issues is likely to 
be unproductive. Rather, the therapist empathizes with 
the client’s current worldview (e.g., “You feel you are 
either calm or extremely anxious, and that no middle 
ground is possible for you”) but does not agree with it. 

The discussion of the required investment in treatment 
involves instilling hope in the client that he/she 
will be able to make significant changes and conveying 
the time, effort, and emotional energy that treatment activities 
require. Research has shown that positive expec



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

tancies are associated with more favorable outcomes in 
CBT for social anxiety (Chambless et al., 1997; Safren, 
Heimberg, & Juster, 1997). The therapist shares with 
the client that in studies of individuals who completed 
CBT, approximately 75–80% were rated by independent 
clinical interviewers as having experienced meaningful 
reductions in their social anxiety (e.g., Heimberg 
et al., 1998). The therapist also emphasizes that attending 
sessions regularly, doing homework, being willing 
to experience anxiety during exposures, and being open 
to new ways of looking at the world, other people, and 
oneself are factors that substantially influence whether 
someone becomes a treatment responder, and that these 
factors are largely under the client’s control. During 
this time, clients are encouraged to speak about their 
fears regarding treatment and their goals for a better 
life after treatment. Included is a motivational exercise 
in which the client is asked to generate pros and cons 
for working on his/her social anxiety and a similar list 
for not doing so as a means to increase commitment to 
the treatment process. 

Next, the therapist reviews with the client the three 
components of anxiety presented in Chapter 2 of the 
client workbook (Hope et al., 2010a). Each of the three 
components of anxiety is described: (1) The physiological 
component comprises bodily reactions, such as a 
pounding heart; (2) the cognitive component comprises 
what a person thinks, such as “I look foolish”; and (3) 
the behavioral component comprises what a person 
does when he/she is anxious, such as avoiding eye contact. 
When presenting the behavioral component, the 
therapist emphasizes how escape and avoidance behaviors 
may reduce anxiety in the short term but lead to 
missed opportunities, a less satisfying life, and other 
negative feelings, such as guilt and shame, in the long 
term. 

The therapist then helps the client to practice identifying 
each of these components with a hypothetical 
example. Over the years, we have found that initially 
using a hypothetical example is much more conducive 
to learning than starting with an example from the client’s 
own experience. Issues such as fear of negative 
evaluation, defensiveness, anxiety, and lack of objectivity 
can result in a client having difficulty identifying 
the three components from a personal experience this 
early in treatment (e.g., “I wasn’t thinking anything”). 
The default option for the therapist is simply to review 
the hypothetical examples from the workbook that illustrate 
the three components, but we generally recommend 
using a different hypothetical example in session 

to give the client more practice. Alternatively, we use 
the example from the group treatment version (Heimberg 
& Becker, 2002), in which the client is asked to 
imagine a person waiting in the lobby to interview for 
a job that is extremely attractive in terms of responsibilities, 
pay, and hours. The client is told that the person 
is feeling anxious about the interview and then is 
asked what that person might be experiencing as he/she 
anxiously waits to be called in to the office. Using the 
easel, the therapist writes the client’s responses under 
the appropriate heading (e.g., “feeling nauseous” is 
written under “Physiological Component”). After classifying 
the client’s spontaneous responses, the therapist 
then asks questions to elicit several examples of each 
of the three components (e.g., “Might the person have 
any thoughts relating to her sweaty palms? What might 
she say to herself about that?”). The therapist makes 
an effort to draw out how each of the three components 
interacts with the others, resulting in an escalating 
spiral of anxiety (e.g., sweaty palms might lead to 
the thought “The interviewer will think I am anxious,” 
which might lead to a behavior of wiping sweaty hands 
on one’s suit). The therapist concludes that treatment 
involves learning ways to disrupt this spiral of anxiety. 
Assuming that the client does reasonably well with this 
exercise, the therapist then helps the client to repeat the 
exercise with a recent, personal experience of social 
anxiety. At this point in therapy, the therapist makes no 
effort to help the client to challenge anxiety-provoking 
cognitions, only to identify the three components of 
anxiety and to understand how they interact with each 
other. In addition to readings from the workbook, the 
client is given the homework assignment of identifying 
all three components of anxiety experienced in a social 
situation during the week. 

Referring to the material covered in Chapter 3 of 
the client workbook, the therapist teaches the client 
how to use the Subjective Units of Discomfort Scale 
(SUDS; Wolpe & Lazarus, 1966) and construct a fear 
and avoidance hierarchy. The assignment from the previous 
week is repeated here and again over the next few 
sessions to solidify learning in this important domain, 
and weekly assessment of progress using the SASCI is 
initiated. 

Next, the therapist describes for the client factors 
that are thought to be related to the development 
of problematic social anxiety, which are presented in 
Chapter 4 of the workbook. The therapist tells the client 
that research suggests that genetics plays a role in the 
etiology of social anxiety disorder. The therapist em



Social Anxiety Disorder 

phasizes that what is inherited is probably a tendency 
to be a sensitive and emotionally reactive individual 
rather than a gene that inevitably results in social anxiety 
(Barlow, 2002). This inherited sensitivity might not 
be at all problematic, and it may even be a good thing. 
For example, the person might be especially empathic 
toward others and have a greater capacity to experience 
joy, as well as anxiety. However, if a biologically sensitive 
individual is exposed to important social experiences 
during development and learns that others are 
threatening and hurtful, then the biological vulnerability 
may contribute to the development of problematic 
social anxiety. The therapist might inquire whether 
other family members seem to have problems with 
social anxiety or other types of anxiety, suggesting a 
genetic predisposition. The therapist then presents experiences 
within the family as another potential factor 
contributing to social anxiety. For example, a socially 
anxious mother might teach a child that the opinions 
of others are extremely important and that negative 
evaluation is to be avoided at all cost. Alternatively, a 
verbally abusive father might provide experiences that 
teach the child that other people are dangerous, and that 
avoidance is a good strategy for self-protection. Again, 
the therapist asks the client whether this information 
fits with his/her personal experiences. Last, the therapist 
describes how experiences outside of the family 
can similarly teach a person that others are a source of 
threat. For example, teasing by peers seems to be related 
to later social anxiety (Roth, Coles, & Heimberg, 
2002). This discussion is facilitated by a homework assignment 
completed in advance of the session, in which 
the client answers a series of questions relevant to his/ 
her own personal experiences of social anxiety and 
how they map onto these three major sources of input, 
and completes a pie chart indicating his/her belief in 
the relative importance of each. Throughout the discussion, 
the therapist emphasizes the idea that because 
social anxiety is largely learned through experience, it 
can be changed through experience. 

This discussion of the etiology of social anxiety 
leads into a discussion of dysfunctional thoughts. 
Therapists might ask clients what lessons they learned 
about themselves and other people through a negative 
early-life social experience, such as being teased (e.g., 
“I learned that I don’t fit in”). In this way, therapists 
educate clients about the origins of many of their automatic 
thoughts, which is important given that many 
clients view their tendency to have negative cognitions 
as a sign of inherent personal flaws rather than a logical 

consequence of their experiences. They then ask clients 
to think about how these dysfunctional ways of thinking 
color the kinds of thoughts and reactions they now 
have when confronting social situations (e.g., thoughts 
of not fitting in at parties, expecting to be made fun 
of by coworkers). At this point in therapy, clients are 
asked simply to consider the possibility that changing 
some of these automatic thinking biases might change 
the experience of anxiety. Therapists then set forth the 
rationale for primary interventions of cognitive restructuring, 
exposures, and homework. 

Segment 2: Training 
in Cognitive Restructuring 

Training in cognitive restructuring typically requires 
two to three sessions. The material is presented in 
Chapters 5 and 6 of the client workbook (Hope et al., 
2010a). After three sessions, a small minority of clients 
may still be struggling to master the cognitive concepts 
due to factors such as low educational attainment and/ 
or poor abstract thinking skills. Our experience suggests 
that rather than forcing the issue with such clients, 
it is better simply to move on to the next segment 
of treatment after three sessions. In this circumstance, 
Heimberg and Becker (2002) recommend that, for the 
remainder of therapy, the cognitive portion of treatment 
be deemphasized in favor of relying more heavily on 
repeated exposure. Additionally, such clients may be 
able to generate realistic self-statements (e.g., “I have 
done this before”) or self-instructions (e.g., “Start by 
introducing myself”) informally, with help from the 
therapist, for use in anxiety-provoking situations rather 
than relying on more formal cognitive restructuring. 

As in the previous segment, each session begins 
with a homework review and ends with homework assignment. 
Homework assignments include readings 
from the client workbook, associated forms, and selfmonitoring 
exercises. Some clients begin to attempt in 
vivo exposures spontaneously at this point in treatment, 
without being specifically assigned to do so. If these exposures 
go well, then they may be beneficial to the client. 
However, therapists should not actively encourage 
exposures as homework until completion of training in 
cognitive restructuring and one in-session exposure. At 
this point in treatment, clients still have few adaptive 
strategies for managing anxiety or coping with social 
situations that have disappointing outcomes. They are 
also likely to escape a situation at the first sign of trouble. 
Therefore, the possibility of a less than positive ex



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

posure experience at this phase of treatment could lead 
to resistance to attempting future exposures. 

In this segment of treatment, clients are explicitly introduced 
to the basic tenet of the cognitive-behavioral 
model, which proposes that emotional reactions occur 
as a result of interpretations of situations, not situations 
themselves. “Automatic thoughts” are defined as negative, 
distorted, or irrational thoughts about oneself, the 
world, or the future that lead to or increase the experience 
of problematic anxiety. These concepts are first 
demonstrated with a hypothetical example rather than 
an emotionally charged example from the client’s own 
life. The client workbook describes the very different 
thoughts of two young men after meeting a woman. 
Negative thoughts lead one man to give up any attempts 
to get to know the woman better and to experience several 
more unpleasant thoughts and emotions. The more 
neutral and realistic thoughts of the other man facilitate 
his continued efforts at making conversation. Additional 
examples are provided for therapist and client to 
examine whether the client appears to need further instruction 
on the concept of automatic thoughts. Clients 
are then asked to examine their own thoughts, first related 
to a hypothetical social situation, then as recorded 
on previously completed homework forms. 

“Thinking errors” are defined as common categories 
into which automatic thoughts may fall. Clients 
often find that they are particularly prone to engage 
in certain types of distorted thinking (e.g., mind reading, 
fortune-telling, disqualifying the positive), and 
identifying these habitual thinking errors can assist in 
challenging automatic thoughts (e.g., “There I go, mind 
reading again. I have no reason to assume that they are 
thinking the worst”). Clients are introduced to an adaptation 
of the list of thinking errors outlined by Judith 
Beck (1995) in the first edition of her book Cognitive 
Therapy: Basics and Beyond. Ideally, the client has reviewed 
this list in the course of doing the readings for 
homework, and therapist and client can briefly discuss 
which thinking errors the client personally found most 
relevant. If the client has not done the homework, each 
thinking error is briefly reviewed by therapist and client 
in session. The therapist and client can practice identifying 
both the thinking errors in workbook examples 
and the client’s automatic thoughts recorded as part of 
previous homework assignments, and further examine 
automatic thoughts the client might have about upcoming 
situations. For homework, clients monitor their automatic 
thoughts, their belief in the automatic thoughts 
(on a 0- to 100-point scale), the thinking errors they 

contain, and the emotions they cause in one or two naturally 
occurring situations during the week. 

The next steps in cognitive restructuring are to challenge 
the automatic thoughts and develop rational responses 
to them. The process of challenging automatic 
thoughts is begun with the assistance of disputing questions, 
originally adapted from the work of Sank and 
Shaffer (1984). These generic questions can be brought 
to bear on automatic thoughts (e.g., “Do I know for certain 
that ?”; “What evidence do I have 
that ?; What evidence do I have that the 
opposite is true?”; “What is the worst that could happen? 
How bad is that? How can I cope with that?”; “What 
does mean? Does really 
mean that I am a(n) ?”). Before having 
the client apply these questions to his/her own thoughts, 
however, the therapist and client review a hypothetical 
example from the client workbook. Thereafter, 
the therapist addresses the client’s automatic thoughts 
examined in the earlier discussion of thinking errors. 
Together client and therapist question the automatic 
thoughts using the disputing questions to arrive at alternative, 
more realistic ways of viewing the situation. 
It is typically the case that the answers to disputing 
questions themselves include automatic thoughts, and 
these must be further disputed. This process, which we 
have labeled the Anxious Self/Coping Self Dialogue, 
ultimately helps the client arrive at answers to the original 
disputing questions that are more believable and 
acceptable to him/her. The output of this dialogue is 
then summarized into one or two statements that serve 
as rational responses. A rational response provides a 
realistic and balanced view of the situation that is typically 
more positive than that provided by the automatic 
thoughts. For the next homework assignment, the clients 
record their automatic thoughts from an anxietyprovoking 
situation during the week, rate their belief 
in the automatic thoughts, identify the thinking errors 
they contain, dispute the automatic thoughts, develop a 
rational response, and rate their belief in that rational 
response. As can be seen, these homework assignments 
build on previous ones, becoming increasingly complex 
but increasingly empowering. 

Toward the end of the final session in this segment, 
the therapist informs the client that exposures will 
begin the following week. To the extent that beginning 
exposures cause the client to feel anxious, the client 
is encouraged to “avoid avoidance” by coming to the 
next session and to identify automatic thoughts related 
to the exposure, challenge them, and arrive at a ratio


###CUT###
Social Anxiety Disorder 

nal response. The therapist reassures the client that a 
challenging, but not overwhelming, situation will be 
used for the first exposure. More experienced therapists 
often discuss a few possibilities for the first exposure 
during this session. Therapists new to this treatment 
approach often discuss details of the exposure with the 
client the following week, after the therapist has had 
supervision. 

Segment 3: Exposures 

Exposures should begin as early as Session 5 but no 
later than Session 8, depending on the rate at which the 
earlier material was covered. Chapter 7 from the client 
workbook reviews the rationale for exposures and 
introduces the concept of setting achievable behavioral 
goals. The content of Chapter 7 is briefly touched upon; 
many of these concepts have been covered earlier (e.g., 
why exposures are important), and the new material 
is demonstrated during the exposure itself. Similarly, 
therapists rarely devote an entire session to discussing 
Chapter 8 (Ongoing Exposures) or the specific 
topic chapters (Chapter 9, Interaction Fears; Chapter 
10, Observational Fears; Chapter 11, Public Speaking 
Fears) assigned during this segment. Rather, the content 
is only briefly addressed during the homework review 
and an in-session exposure is conducted. During 
this phase of treatment, therapists strive to complete an 
exposure almost every session. To follow protocol in 
our research studies, a minimum of four in-session exposures 
must be completed. More commonly, at least 
six in-session exposures are completed, and the more 
the better. Therefore, although the protocol allows the 
therapist the freedom to a use a couple of sessions during 
this segment to do cognitive restructuring alone or 
to review a topic chapter in detail, our belief is that the 
time is best devoted to repeated in-session exposures 
integrating cognitive restructuring. 

All exposure sessions follow the same basic format 
(see Table 3.1). The session begins with a homework 
review and ends with a homework assignment. The 
homework assignment typically comprises in vivo exposure 
tasks and associated cognitive restructuring that 
logically build upon the in-session exposure. The first 
in-session exposure typically includes a role play with 
the therapist of a situation that the client assigned a 
SUDS rating of at least 50. The rule of thumb is that clients 
should perceive exposures as challenging but not 
overwhelming or beyond their ability to use cognitive 
coping skills. Therapists make exposures as realistic 

table 3.1. outline of exposure sessions 

1. Review homework from previous week. 
2. Complete in-session exposure. 
a. Exposure preprocessing 
•• 
Briefly negotiate details of exposure 
•• 
Elicit automatic thoughts 
•• 
Client rates belief in automatic thoughts 
•• 
Client labels thinking errors in automatic thoughts 
•• 
Client disputes one or two automatic thoughts 
•• 
Client develops rational response(s) and rates belief 
in rational response(s) 
•• 
Client sets nonperfectionistic, behavioral goals 

b. Conduct role play for approximately 10 minutes 
•• 
Request SUDS and the rational response every 
minute 
•• 
Client uses disputing questions and rational 
responses as automatic thoughts occur 
•• 
Track client’s progress on behavioral goals 

c. Exposure post-processing 
•• 
Review whether goals were attained 
•• 
Review occurrence of automatic thoughts 
•• 
Review use of rational response(s) 
•• 
Discuss any unexpected or new automatic thoughts 
•• 
Client, therapist, and role players react to client’s 
performance 
•• 
Graph and interpret SUDS ratings pattern 
•• 
Examine evidence in relation to automatic thoughts 

and rational response(s) 
•• 
Client re-rates belief in automatic thoughts and 
rational response(s) 
•• 
Client summarizes what was learned from the 
exposure experience 

3. Assignment of homework 
a. Related in vivo exposures with associated cognitive 
restructuring 
b. Other assignments as appropriate 
as possible by rearranging furniture, using props, and 
instructing role-play partners (i.e., therapist assistants 
brought into session to assist with exposures) to behave 
in particular ways. A bit of effort in making the situation 
more realistic may mean the difference between 
an exposure that elicits significant anxiety and one that 
is too artificial to be relevant. Commonly used props 
include food or drink for individuals with fears of eating, 
drinking, or serving food in front of others, and 
client-prepared notes for presentations. Careful attention 
should be paid to aspects that make the situation 
more or less anxiety-provoking. For example, a client 
who fears eating in front of others may be more anxious 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

when eating something that is easy to spill (e.g., soup) 
than when eating finger foods. 

The essence of the treatment is the coordination 
between the cognitive restructuring work and the exposure 
(see Table 3.1). The therapist begins the exposure 
preprocessing by briefly describing an exposure 
situation. The client may suggest modifications or alternatives. 
However, the therapist needs to balance approaching 
the exposure task collaboratively with being 
highly vigilant for overly detailed discussions that 
largely serve to avoid getting started with the exposure. 
The therapist then elicits the client’s automatic thoughts 
regarding the chosen situation and records the thoughts 
on the easel. The therapist picks one or two automatic 
thoughts to dispute rather than attempting to help the 
client to dispute all automatic thoughts. The client rates 
his/her belief in the automatic thought and identifies 
the thinking errors it contains. To the extent possible, 
the client takes the lead in challenging the thoughts 
with disputing questions and developing a rational response. 
The therapist only assists as needed. The rational 
response is written on a fresh sheet of paper, so that 
the client may refer to it during the exposure, without 
being distracted by automatic thoughts listed on the 
same page. 

Next, behavioral goals for the exposure are set. 
Without guidance, clients with social anxiety disorder 
tend to set unrealistic, perfectionistic goals (e.g., “I 
won’t get anxious” or “I will never stumble over my 
words”), or goals that are based on the reactions of 
other people and not under their control (e.g., to make 
a good impression). The therapist helps the client to develop 
two or three measureable and observable goals 
for the situation (e.g., asking at least three questions to 
get to know the person better, stating an opinion, talking 
about three different points during a speech). These 
goals are recorded below the rational response, so that 
the client can refer to them during the exposure. 

During the exposure, the therapists requests SUDS 
ratings at 1-minute intervals and whenever anxiety appears 
to increase or decrease. At each SUDS prompt, 
the client also reads his/her rational response aloud. 
Clients quickly adjust to this disruption, particularly if 
the role player(s) help to reorient them with a verbal 
cue (e.g., “You were talking about .. . ”). The exposure 
should continue until anxiety has begun to decrease or 
plateau and the goals have been met, typically around 
10 minutes. The therapist should be the one to end the 
exposure to help the client overcome any tendencies to 
escape the situation when it becomes difficult. 

The postprocessing phase of the exposure includes a 
review of goal attainment, with the therapist noting the 
occurrence of automatic thoughts that were the focus 
of cognitive restructuring before the exposure, a discussion 
of the usefulness of the rational response, and 
identification of any unexpected automatic thoughts 
that should be addressed in the future. Rather than asking 
the client about how the role play went from his/ 
her perspective, the therapist asks the whether the client’s 
agreed-upon goals were accomplished, providing 
no opening for the client to revert to a discussion about 
failure to attain other goals, such as not becoming anxious. 
The therapist also shares his/her opinion on goal 
attainment, responding to concerns raised by the client 
and not allowing the client to disqualify the positive. In 
later exposures, outside role players may also be asked 
to share their reactions and answer any questions the 
client has about how the exposure went. Feedback from 
the therapist and role players should emphasize information 
that counters the client’s negative beliefs. For 
example, the client might believe that he blushes bright 
red, is boring, appears inadequate to others, and cannot 
carry on a 10-minute conversation. Perhaps, objectively, 
the client did blush at the beginning of the exposure, 
only responded to questions from the role player, and 
reported very high SUDS for the whole 10 minutes (90 
or higher). However, the client met his goals of sharing 
something about himself and staying in the exposure 
until the therapist said to stop. In this situation, the 
therapist would point out how the client met his goals 
and how many of the client’s feared consequences (e.g., 
being too anxious to carry on a conversation) did not 
occur. Additionally, only in rare cases do clients look 
as anxious as they think they do, so it is often quite appropriate 
to acknowledge that the client showed some 
symptoms of anxiety, but that the anxiety was not as 
noticeable as the client’s SUDS ratings might suggest, 
the anxiety did not detract from enjoyment of the conversation, 
and so forth. Therapists who deny seeing 
any anxiety in a client who was obviously anxious risk 
damaging their credibility. Especially early in treatment, 
therapists should think seriously before providing 
a laundry list of client behaviors that detracted from 
the quality of the conversation (e.g., the client only responded 
to questions and did not ask any, the client 
could have engaged in more eye contact). Many clients 
discount the positive aspects of the exposure and focus 
only on the negative feedback. Therefore, it is better 
to set this information aside temporarily and to make 
sure that these behaviors are included as goals for the 


Social Anxiety Disorder 

next role play, particularly if the client does not spontaneously 
suggest one of these problematic behaviors 
as a goal. For clients who are self-critical during the 
post-processing for an objectively poor behavior such 
as never asking any questions, the most common strategy 
is to share with the client the conceptualization 
of the problematic behavior as an avoidance response 
to significant anxiety (rather than as evidence of poor 
social skills or some other inadequacy within the client). 
Working from this conceptualization, the therapist 
may then inquire about automatic thoughts leading 
to the problematic behavior. The client’s responses are 
often quite illuminating (e.g., “I might inadvertently 
ask a question about a sensitive subject that will offend 
the other person”). The therapist would then plan with 
the client to work on these automatic thoughts and approach 
the feared social behavior by including it as a 
goal in a future exposure. 

Next, the pattern of SUDS ratings is quickly graphed 
for the client. Different SUDS patterns may be used to 
make different points. The most common pattern is for 
the initial SUDS ratings to be rather high, then to decline 
over time. In these cases, the therapist can point 
out that it seems like getting started is the hardest part, 
and that if the client hangs in there, things seem to get 
easier. If this pattern holds across future exposures, it 
can lead to a new rational response (e.g., “It gets easier”; 
“The hardest part is getting started”). For clients 
with high SUDS ratings throughout the entire exposure 
who still meet their goals, the therapist can point out 
that a person may simultaneously be quite anxious and 
still do what he/she needs to do in a given social situation 
(e.g., “I can be anxious and still share my opinion” 
might be a future rational response). The therapist also 
inquires about any automatic thoughts that may have 
interfered with habituation, so that these might be addressed 
prior to the next exposure. Another common 
pattern is decreasing or steady SUDS ratings that spike 
to a high level when the client perceives a difficulty 
arising during the exposure. Sometimes the therapist 
is able to observe what led to the spike in anxiety (e.g., 
a pause in the conversation). At other times, it may not 
be as obvious, and the client needs to explain what happened 
(e.g., there was no pause, but the client had an automatic 
thought that the discussion of the current topic 
had reached its limits and feared that he/she would be 
unable to continue the conversation). Such discussions 
may lead to new goals (e.g., “Allow yourself to pause 
twice during the conversation, so you learn that you can 
recover from pauses and not to fear them”) and targets 

for cognitive restructuring (i.e., the belief that pauses 
reflect social incompetence might be challenged and 
lead to a rational response, such as “Pauses are a normal 
part of conversations” or “I am only 50% responsible 
for ending a pause”). Clients are then asked to 
rerate their degree of belief in their automatic thoughts 
and rational responses, based specifically on their experience 
of the in-session exposure. Finally, the client 
is asked what he/she has learned from the exposure that 
can be applied to life outside of the clinic. 

Homework assignments are a very important part of 
treatment in this segment because the client is asked to 
enter situations similar to those that have been targeted 
during in-session exposures. To assist them in engaging 
in cognitive restructuring prior to the actual conduct 
of the homework exposure, clients are provided copies 
of the Be Your Own Cognitive Therapist (BYOCT) 
worksheet, which is also discussed in session and exemplified 
in the client workbook. This form leads clients 
through each of the steps of cognitive restructuring 
described earlier and is often used for in-session exposures, 
as well as those assigned for homework. After 
the homework exposure is completed, the second portion 
of the BYOCT assists clients in completing a cognitive 
debriefing and consolidating the learning that has 
occurred during and after the homework experience. 

Segment 4: Advanced Cognitive Restructuring 

After three or four exposure sessions, the therapist and 
client should begin to notice common themes in the 
client’s automatic thoughts. This is an indication that 
it will soon be time to move on to advanced cognitive 
restructuring (Chapter 12 of the client workbook). This 
segment assists the client in moving beyond situationspecific 
automatic thoughts by applying the downward 
arrow technique (see J. S. Beck, 1995) to thoughts that 
have frequently recurred over the course of treatment. 
To accomplish this task efficiently, client and therapist 
review all previous written homework assignments 
that involved the recording of automatic thoughts, as 
well as the thoughts recorded in advance of in-session 
exposures and work through the Peeling Your Onion 
worksheet from the client workbook, which provides a 
systematic approach to questioning automatic thoughts 
and further probing the responses to these questions, 
until the client’s core belief(s) have been identified. 

The beginning of advanced cognitive restructuring 
does not signal the end to exposures. Rather, the therapist 
and client create in-session and in vivo exposures 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

to challenge core beliefs. For instance, if a client has a 
core belief along the lines of “I need to be perfect to 
be accepted by others,” the client might be engaged in 
exposures that involve making mistakes or social missteps 
(e.g., spilling a drink, turning in a report with an 
error) and noticing whether others continue to be accepting. 
Core beliefs may be challenged in other ways 
as well. For instance, in addition to exposures, the client 
may be asked to notice instances in which others’ 
mistakes actually make them easy to identify with or 
more endearing. One session is typically devoted completely 
to helping the client utilize the downward arrow 
technique and challenge core beliefs. Additional sessions 
not only continue to explore core beliefs but also 
include an in-session exposure. 

Segment 5: Termination 

As treatment approaches Session 16, the issue of termination 
and/or reevaluation of the treatment contract 
will have been raised informally by the therapist several 
times. After Session 15, Chapter 13 in the client 
workbook is assigned. Session 16 formally focuses on 
assessment of progress, relapse prevention, and the 
issue of termination. The therapist and client go over a 
worksheet in which the client reports things that he/she 
has learned during treatment (e.g., how to identify and 
challenge automatic thoughts, the importance of avoiding 
avoidance). The therapist asks the client to provide 
current ratings for all items from the fear and avoidance 
hierarchy developed earlier in treatment; a discussion 
follows regarding progress that has been made and 
where further work is needed. When the therapist and 
client mutually agree that termination is in order, risk 
factors for relapse are discussed (e.g., social pressure 
from others, new situations that arise as improvement 
continues). Plans to deal with signs of relapse are also 
made (e.g., the client can review chapters in the client 
workbook or call the therapist). Mixed emotions (e.g., 
pride, sadness over the termination of the therapeutic 
relationship) associated with termination are also processed. 


In our clinic, the same measures administered at pretreatment 
are repeated after Session 16. The client is 
given feedback on these assessments, with data presented 
in the context of the initial pretreatment assessment 
results. At the end of 16 sessions, many clients still experience 
problematic social anxiety in a few domains. 
As we stated in the first session, elimination of social 
anxiety is not the criterion for termination. Instead, if 

the client has stopped avoiding key social situations, 
has experienced a meaningful reduction of anxiety in 
a few areas, and believes that he/she can use the skills 
gained in therapy to continue to work independently, 
then the client is ready to stop treatment. Most individuals 
who respond to treatment in this way are likely to 
continue to make progress after termination. Follow-up 
appointments are recommended to monitor the client’s 
clinical status (e.g., 1- and 6-months posttreatment). 

For some individuals, treatment gains will be evident, 
but the anxiety and avoidance continue to be too 
severe and pervasive for the client to continue on alone. 
This phenomenon is most common among clients with 
severe social anxiety at treatment onset, typically, clients 
with APD or those who fear many social situations. 
Clients with significant comorbidities may also 
take longer to make sufficient treatment gains. In such 
cases, continued treatment is recommended. The new 
treatment contract, as with the original one, should be 
for 16 sessions or less, at which point another assessment 
should occur. The treatment plan typically consists 
of more cognitive restructuring and exposures, although 
new domains are often introduced (e.g., moving 
from working on friendships to dating relationships). 

case stuDy 

To illustrate better how individual CBT for social 
anxiety disorder is implemented, a case example is 
presented. First, background and pretreatment assessment 
data are given, followed by a description of the 
client’s progress through 16 weeks of treatment and her 
status 1-year and 5-years posttreatment. Note that treatment 
was conducted in accordance with the first edition 
of the client workbook (Hope, Heimberg, Juster, & 
Turk, 2000) and therapist guide (Hope, Heimberg, & 
Turk, 2006), resulting in some differences in procedure 
from the updated version of the protocol presented earlier. 
We made this decision so that we could present a 
case example including an examination of longer-term 
follow-up information. 

Josie, age 22, presented to treatment with significant 
anxiety concerning both social interaction and performance 
situations. She was a full-time student studying 
music at a local college and living with a roommate. 
She was not employed despite significant financial 
need. Josie described herself as shy and having trouble 
connecting with others. She socialized with her roommate 
and her boyfriend, but she often turned down op



Social Anxiety Disorder 

portunities to socialize with their friends because of 
anxiety. Josie reported that she had no close friends 
of her own and that her anxiety kept her from forming 
close friendships, especially with women her age. 
Josie’s social anxiety had also resulted in occupational 
and academic impairment. For example, although Josie 
had gone on numerous job interviews and had even 
been offered positions, she was currently unemployed 
because she had difficulty accepting job offers due to 
her fears that she would get fired. She reported great 
anxiety in her classes and did not participate unless directly 
asked a question, even if participation was a significant 
part of her grade. She often declined to enroll 
in classes that interested her because of participation 
requirements. In addition, Josie was required to do recitals 
and in-class critiques of her music compositions 
several times a semester. Although she never avoided 
any of these events, she worried about them for weeks 
in advance and suffered through them with great anxiety. 
Josie feared that her social anxiety would cause 
her even greater difficulty after graduation, when she 
would need to go on job interviews and auditions. 

Pretreatment Assessment 

Josie came to the clinic seeking help for social anxiety, 
but she also had difficulties with general worry and 
tension, depression, and panic attacks. She was administered 
the ADIS-IV-L and a series of self-report measures. 
Based on this information, Josie was assigned a 
diagnosis of social anxiety disorder, with an ADIS-IV-
L CSR of 5, which indicates moderate to severe symptoms. 
She received additional diagnoses of generalized 

anxiety disorder, recurrent major depressive disorder of 
moderate severity, posttraumatic stress disorder related 
to a recent automobile accident, and panic disorder 
with agoraphobia. 

With regard to measures of social anxiety, Josie’s 
scores indicated significant fear in both social interaction 
and performance/observation situations (see Table 
3.2). Heimberg and colleagues (1992) suggested cutoff 
scores of 34 for the full 20-item version of the SIAS 
(interaction fears) and 24 for the SPS (performance/ 
observation fears) to differentiate between individuals 
with and without social anxiety disorder. Josie’s scores 
on both measures exceeded these cutoffs. Similarly, on 
the LSAS, Josie reported fear and avoidance of both 
social interaction and performance situations, and her 
total score was well above the empirically derived cutoff 
score for the presence of social anxiety disorder 
(Mennin et al., 2002). 

Ideally, treatment should result in symptom reduction 
and improved functionality, as well as promote the 
client’s overall sense of well-being and life satisfaction. 
Safren, Heimberg, Brown, and Holle (1997) reported 
a mean score of 0.8 on the Quality of Life Inventory 
for clients with social anxiety disorder, which is significantly 
lower than the mean score of the nonclinical 
adult sample reported by Frisch (1994; M = 2.6, SD = 
1.3). Josie’s score indicated that her degree of life satisfaction 
was very low but similar to that of others with 
social anxiety disorder. 

The disruption in functioning caused by social anxiety 
and the associated poor quality of life frequently 
results in dysphoria. Josie’s score on the BDI-II indicated 
a level of depression more severe than is typically 

table 3.2. self-report and Clinician-administered assessments 
at Pretreatment and 1-year and 5-year follow-Ups 

Measure Pretreatment 1-year follow-up 5-year follow-up 
Self-report 
Brief Fear of Negative Evaluation Scale 49 23 29 
Social Interaction Anxiety Scale 48 22 23 
Social Phobia Scale 38 12 24 
Beck Depression Inventory–II 25 8 8 
Quality of Life Inventory –0.9 1.1 –0.6 
Clinician-rated 
ADIS-IV-L Clinician Severity Rating 5 3 3 
Liebowitz Social Anxiety Scale—Total 48 37 31 

Note. ADIS-IV-L, Anxiety Disorders Interview Schedule for DSM-IV—Lifetime Version. 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

seen among individuals in our treatment program (Elting, 
Hope, & Heimberg, 1997). Josie did not endorse 
having any thoughts of suicide. Based on clinical interview, 
we determined that Josie’s current low mood was 
related to recurrent major depression. This most recent 
depressive episode had begun approximately 6 months 
prior to her assessment and was associated with negative 
social experiences while studying abroad. Josie 
reported that her depressed mood was slightly less distressing 
and impairing than her social anxiety. Thus, 
the depression was judged to be secondary to her social 
anxiety and unlikely to have an adverse impact on her 
treatment. Similarly, we determined that her other diagnoses, 
although clinically significant, did not rise to 
a level of concern that might interfere with or derail the 
treatment of her social anxiety disorder. 

Treatment 

Psychoeducational Segment 

sessions 1–2 

The first four sessions were devoted to laying the 
groundwork for treatment, establishing rapport, educating 
Josie about the cognitive-behavioral model of social 
anxiety disorder, and outlining her goals for treatment. 

In the first two meetings, Josie was very soft-spoken, 
made little eye contact, and expressed feelings of hopelessness 
about her ability to get better. She asked many 
questions about how other clients had fared with the 
treatment program, and the therapist stressed that outcome 
is often dependent on the client’s ability to put 
in consistent effort throughout treatment. The therapist 
used some of Josie’s own experiences to parallel the 
challenges and rewards she might face in treatment, 
such as asking Josie how long she had been playing 
piano and whether she had noticed any changes over 
that time. Josie reported that when she started, the process 
was very effortful, challenging, and even disheartening, 
but that with ongoing practice and education, she 
had reached a point where it was enjoyable and easy 
for her. With this, Josie appeared to be very encouraged 
about her prognosis, reporting that she was eager 
to begin treatment and motivated to work very hard. 
The majority of the first session was spent establishing 
rapport and introducing psychoeducational material 
about social anxiety and the components of treatment. 
To encourage Josie to speak about her own experiences 
with social anxiety, the therapist employed open-ended 
questions, asked if the examples sounded familiar to 

Josie, and requested that she describe some situations 
in which her anxiety was better or worse than others. 
For example, although Josie felt she had a significant 
amount of anxiety when performing in front of an audience, 
she felt that this anxiety was typical for most 
people in that situation. However, her anxiety while 
interacting with others at receptions before and after 
performances was severe, and she often avoided these 
situations by arriving at recitals at the last minute and 
leaving as soon as she finished. By participating in the 
session this way, Josie demonstrated an understanding 
of the important concept that social anxiety exists on a 
continuum. 

session 3 

In the third session, the development of Josie’s social 
anxiety and how it was maintained over the years was 
explored. After asking her mother, Josie learned that 
she was very shy even as a young child, and that her 
mother often had to push her to participate in social 
activities with other children. Josie also reported that 
her mother tended to keep to herself and limit interactions 
with others, which Josie may have modeled from 
a young age. In addition, Josie reported struggling with 
feelings of falling short from a young age. For example, 
she reported that she never qualified for elite youth soccer 
teams, although she was a skilled athlete, and never 
received more than third place or honorable mention in 
recitals and competitions. The therapist discussed with 
Josie how such experiences may have shaped her beliefs 
that she was not good enough and also highlighted 
how Josie’s tendency to view the negative aspects of 
situations (e.g., not getting first place) often led her to 
disqualify other successes (e.g., being among the top 
five performers in a large competition). 

sessions 4–5 

In the early part of the fourth session, the therapist and 
Josie completed a discussion from Session 3 on the 
role that perfectionistic standards and low self-efficacy 
played in Josie’s experience of social anxiety. The remainder 
of this session and the next were spent developing 
and refining Josie’s fear and avoidance hierarchy 
(see Table 3.3). Josie reported that interacting with 
people in person was easier than talking over the phone 
because face-to-face contact allowed her to interpret 
body language and facial expressions to determine how 
the interaction was going for the other person. In addi



Social Anxiety Disorder 

table 3.3. fear and avoidance Hierarchy with Pretreatment, Posttreatment, 
and 1-year and 5-year follow-Up ratings 

Situation Pretreatment Posttreatment 1-year follow-up 5-year follow-up 
1 Riding public transportation 
alone 
Fear 
Avoidance 
100 
100 
20 
20 
9 
6 
90 
85 
2 
3 
Staying after recitals to 
socialize 
Fear 
Avoidance 
Going to recitals 
Fear 
Avoidance 
95 
95 
90 
70 
7 
8 
7 
8 
3 
0 
3 
0 
55 
60 
45 
15 
4 Making phone calls to people I 
used to be close with 
Fear 
Avoidance 
75 
60 
5 
5 
3 
1 
65 
60 
5 Class critiques and talking 
about my compositions in class 
Fear 
Avoidance 
65 
50 
6 
1 
1 
0 
60 
20 
6 Talking with professors and 
authority figures I respect 
Fear 
Avoidance 
65 
50 
4 
2 
5 
5 
75 
60 
7 Making/maintaining 
conversations with friends and 
people I respect 
Fear 
Avoidance 
60 
60 
3 
1 
4 
2 
25 
10 
8 Making the first phone call 
Fear 
Avoidance 
55 
5 
2 
0 
4 
1 
65 
35 
9 Hanging out with boyfriend’s 
friends’ girlfriends 
Fear 
Avoidance 
50 
85 
6 
2 
3 
0 
40 
15 
10 Talking with old friends I’ve 
lost touch with 
Fear 
Avoidance 
40 
70 
7 
4 
4 
2 
30 
45 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

tion, Josie felt that it was easier to interact with males 
than with females, who she believed were more critical. 
Josie was also more anxious around individuals she respected 
and admired than she was with strangers. 

Cognitive Restructuring Training Segment 

session 6 

In this session, Josie was introduced to cognitive restructuring. 
Though she demonstrated an understanding 
of the importance of thoughts in producing feelings 
of anxiety, Josie reported difficulty identifying her own 
automatic thoughts. Specifically, she tended to identify 
questions that passed through her mind in anticipation 
of or during anxiety-provoking situations. For example, 
when recalling a recent anxiety-provoking situation in 
which she had to present her work in front of a class, 
Josie identified the thought, “What will other people 
think of me?” The therapist helped Josie to restate this 
question as a statement of what she feared, asking Josie 
to let her “anxious self” answer the question. She was 
able to come up with automatic thoughts, such as “Other 
people will think I’m a moron” and “Other people will 
think I am unprepared for this presentation.” She identified 
other thoughts, such as “I am wasting their time,” 
“They will get bored with me,” and “My professor will 
be disappointed that I didn’t do a better job.” Many of 
the automatic thoughts appeared to be related to a general 
sense of letting others down. The therapist encouraged 
Josie that, with continued practice, she would get 
better at recognizing automatic thoughts. 

session 7 

In this session, Josie again struggled to identify automatic 
thoughts, but with prompting, she was increasingly 
able to do so. She also had some difficulty identifying 
the thinking errors contained in her automatic 
thoughts, often insisting that all the thoughts qualified 
as unhelpful and unproductive thoughts—that is, true 
but unhelpful. The therapist asked Josie some disputing 
questions to illustrate that the thoughts were not true or 
totally accurate, and that other thinking errors could 
apply. By the end of session, Josie had a better handle 
on thinking errors and was able to start using some disputing 
questions successfully. Josie reported that the 
cognitive restructuring work was much more challenging 
than she expected, but that she was eager to put the 
work into action during exposures. 

session 8 

The therapist decided to take an additional session to 
continue work on cognitive restructuring before moving 
onto exposures, so that Josie was maximally prepared. 
Cognitive restructuring practice was focused on 
a recent situation in which Josie turned down tickets, 
offered by a professor at school, to a show by her favorite 
artist. Josie was much better able to identify her 
automatic thoughts related to this situation, which included 
the following: 

1. “Other students will be mad at me if I take the 
tickets.” 
2. “I will be too scared to go and would waste the 
tickets.” 
3. “I will not be able to take public transportation to 
get there.” 
4. “If I do take public transportation, I will get lost 
and miss the show.” 
5. “Other students want the tickets more than I do.” 
Josie was able to identify thinking errors such as 
fortune-telling, mind reading, and catastrophizing, 
among others. However, there was evidence that Josie 
was critical of herself and her occasional difficulty 
grasping the concepts of cognitive restructuring. At 
first, Josie struggled with labeling the thinking errors 
in her automatic thoughts and searching for the right 
rational response. The therapist suggested to Josie that 
there was no right or wrong way to challenge automatic 
thoughts or to develop a rational response, but 
Josie continued to evaluate her suggestions as not good 
enough. Furthermore, Josie grew extremely frustrated 
and pessimistic when she used disputing questions to 
challenge her automatic thoughts. Specifically, she had 
trouble challenging the thought that getting lost on the 
subway would have to lead to missing the show entirely. 
She reported that she doubted her own ability to read 
the subway map or ask for help and predicted that she 
would get so lost that she would either turn around 
and go home or arrive at the show after it had already 
started. Josie’s anxiety about entering the performance 
late would then, she predicted, lead her to go home anyway. 
Josie reported that she would feel disappointed, 
embarrassed, and ashamed if she lost her way on public 
transportation because it would mean she had failed to 
attend the performance and in doing so would anger 
her classmates, who she predicted would feel as though 
she wasted the opportunity. Josie grew increasingly 


Social Anxiety Disorder 

frustrated with the strength of her anxious thoughts 
and reported that she felt stupid for not being able to 
challenge them successfully. This highlighted some 
patterns noted throughout treatment, including Josie’s 
tendency to rely on perfectionist standards and all-ornothing 
thinking (e.g., evaluating her thoughts and behavioral 
responses as all right or all wrong) and impatience 
with her own progress in treatment. Despite this, 
she reported being willing to keep practicing and move 
on to in-session exposures. The therapist worked with 
Josie for the remainder of session to challenge her automatic 
thoughts. It was particularly helpful for Josie to 
identify that she had no evidence that she would get lost 
and to recognize that even if she did get lost, it would 
be important enough for her to attend the performance 
that she would ask for additional help or directions. 

Exposure Segment 

session 9 

During homework review, Josie reported that she was 
able to use her cognitive restructuring skills when she 
ran into an old roommate at a coffee shop. Josie reported 
that the exchange had gone much more smoothly 
than she anticipated and this encouraged her to feel 
more confident in her understanding of and abilities 
to use cognitive restructuring skills actively in social 
situations. With regard to the in-session exposure, 
the therapist wanted to choose a situation that would 
seem relevant to her treatment goals, elicit a moderate 
amount of anxiety, and in which Josie was likely 
to perform reasonably well. The in-session exposure 
was a follow-up to Josie’s recent interaction with her 
classmate Anne, who mentioned to Josie that some 
people from class would be getting together one weekend 
to hang out. However, Anne did not call Josie to 
make specific plans; neither did Josie follow through 
with making plans to attend the event, and she ended 
up missing it. Josie thought that Anne did not call because 
she might have interpreted Josie’s anxiety symptoms 
(e.g., shyness, quietness, lack of eye contact) as 
disinterest in socializing. Josie’s exposure involved 
her talking with Anne, whose role was played by the 
therapist, about this misunderstanding. The following 
excerpts are from the cognitive restructuring prior to 
the exposure. 

tHeraPist: First, let’s go to the BYOCT worksheet and 
work through the situation before the exposure hap


pens. When you think about this situation happening 
now? What kind of automatic thoughts come up for 
you? 

Josie: I’m not going to talk to her because I won’t know 
what to say. Also, I shouldn’t say anything about her 
not calling me because it would make everything 
awkward. I should be really friendly and smile the 
whole time. 

tHeraPist: Are you making any predictions about 
how this interaction will go? 

Josie: Oh, yeah. I’m going to choke up, and she is going 
to judge me. I think that’s it. 

tHeraPist: OK, good job identifying those automatic 
thoughts. Now what kinds of emotions come up 
when you think those thoughts? 

Josie: I feel sad. The anxiousness almost goes away, 
and I just don’t feel like talking to her. I also feel a 
little bit of anger and frustration at myself because 
I can’t confront her about this and I don’t want to 
make her feel uncomfortable. 

tHeraPist: So it sounds like that kind of thinking 
might lead to you not saying anything at all then, 
avoiding the interaction? 

Josie: Yeah, I’d definitely avoid it. 

tHeraPist: Well this exposure will allow us to practice 
confronting those automatic thoughts, but first 
we need to do some cognitive restructuring practice. 
Why don’t we start by identifying some thinking errors? 


Josie: Right away I see should statements and fortunetelling. 
And to think that she’s judging me, that’s 
mind reading. 

tHeraPist: Good job. Now let’s try to dispute some 
of these thoughts. Let’s start with the automatic 
thought: “I’m not going to talk to her because I won’t 
have anything to say.” Do you know this for certain? 

Josie: (smiling) No, actually I do want to talk with her, 
and I could always ask her little things. I have no 
evidence that I’ll have nothing to say. 

tHeraPist: So you could come up with something to 
say? 

Josie: Yeah, even if it’s just small talk, I could come 
up with something. I do want to ask her about what 
happened, but I don’t want to come across as too aggressive 
or confrontational. I feel bad when I confront 
people. 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

tHeraPist: So let’s figure out some ways you’d feel 
comfortable asking her to hang out, ways that allow 
you to get your message across without feeling aggressive 
or blunt. This can help us start to identify 
some behavioral goals for the exposure. Let’s take a 
look at what it is you want to ask her or tell her. 

Josie: Well, I want to ask her if we can hang out some 
other time, since she didn’t call me last time. But I 
have the automatic thought that I shouldn’t say anything 
because it will make things awkward. I guess if 
I challenge that, I don’t really know that I will make 
things awkward. 

tHeraPist: What might be another outcome if you say 
something? 

Josie: She might apologize and ask me if I want to 
come, and I can tell her that I’d love to come the next 
time she invites me. She did invite me in the first 
place. She just never called because she thought I 
didn’t want to go. 

tHeraPist: Good. So we identified some automatic 
thoughts, and you said they made you feel sad and 
frustrated. Then we challenged them and came up 
with some coping thoughts. How do those thoughts 
make you feel? 

Josie: That’s better. I feel a lot better. 

tHeraPist: How could we sum these up into a rational 
response? Does anything stand out to you? 

Josie: “Saying something might have a positive outcome” 
really stands out to me. I’d feel better and 
things might turn out better if I remind myself of 
that. It will help me to challenge the thought that I’ll 
choke up or run out of things to say. 

The therapist selected that automatic thought for 
cognitive restructuring, because it had been a recurrent 
one for Josie in homework and seemed relevant 
to the upcoming exposure. Also, the therapist made an 
effort to take Josie through the cognitive restructuring 
relatively quickly because the longer the exposure was 
delayed, the more anxious she would get and the more 
difficult it would be for her to focus on the cognitive 
restructuring because of her anxiety. The next step was 
to set goals for the exposure. Josie decided that her 
achievable behavioral goals for this exposure would 
include telling Anne that she was interested in the last 
social event, letting Anne know that she would be interested 
in hanging out some time soon, and giving Anne 
her phone number. 

The exposure began with both Josie and the therapist 
standing up to simulate more closely the interaction 
that might occur as they passed each other in the 
hallway at school. Josie stood where she would be able 
to see her rational response and behavioral goals written 
on the easel. 

tHeraPist: Josie, what is your initial SUDS rating? 

Josie: About a 45. 

tHeraPist: OK, and what is your rational response? 

Josie: Saying something might have a positive outcome. 


Josie and the therapist began to chat about class, and 
Josie soon brought up the recently past social event. 
The therapist let the exposure go on for approximately 
5 minutes. Upon being prompted by the therapist, Josie 
gave SUDS ratings at 1-minute intervals throughout the 
interaction and read her rational response aloud. After 
the exposure had ended, post-processing began. 

tHeraPist: Did you reach your behavioral goals? 

Josie: I told her I wanted to hang out and asked her to 
call me again. 

tHeraPist: So you met your goals. Great job. Did any 
new automatic thoughts come up? 

Josie: I noticed that I fidgeted a lot. I had the thought 
“This is scary,” but also that she seemed pretty cool 
about the interaction. I thought I really shouldn’t be 
nervous. 

tHeraPist: Did the thoughts we identified earlier 
come up? 

Josie: Yeah. I thought I wouldn’t know what to say, and 
there was a pause in the conversation, but it was fine 
when I said something. I worried that I’d make this 
awkward for her, but I think it was more awkward for 
me because I was so nervous. 

tHeraPist: How did your rational response work? 

Josie: It worked pretty well; it got easier to remember 
and I believed it was true when I said it. It really 
seemed to help me think more about rational 
thoughts instead of anxious ones. 

tHeraPist: Let’s take a look at your SUDS. You started 
at a 45 and went up to 55 when conversation started. 
When you said something to her about wishing she’d 
call you, the SUDS went up to a 60. By the time she 
told you what happened, the SUDS dropped to 40. 


Social Anxiety Disorder 

After some small talk, it went down to a 20. That’s a 

pretty significant drop. 
Josie: It was a lot better after I got over that bump, 

when I told her I wanted to hang out. 

tHeraPist: What thoughts do you remember having 

then? 
Josie: “I shouldn’t say anything,” “I should walk away,” 

“I have to say something.” 

tHeraPist: So what happened then? 

Josie: I said my rational response when you asked, 
right after I asked her about what happened, and I 
felt a lot better. It felt like things were going to be 
OK. I feel really good about how it went. 

After processing the exposure, the therapist helped 
Josie to plan an in vivo exposure to do on her own that 
week. She planned to meet her old roommate for coffee, 
using the BYOCT forms to guide her cognitive restructuring, 
the exposure, and her own postprocessing 
of the experience. 

session 10 

In the 10th session, Josie reported that she had a very 
challenging but rewarding week. She recalled an inclass 
critique of her work, and, though her anxiety was 
intense, she was able to manage it and remain in class 
by reminding herself of her rational response: “I can 
learn something from their feedback.” Josie also noted 
that she had completed two in vivo exposures, including 
having coffee with her old roommate and a conversation 
with her classmate Anne, just as she practiced in 
last week’s session. Josie seemed very encouraged by 
the outcomes of these situations and her ability to use 
cognitive restructuring techniques before and during 
anxiety-provoking events. 

For exposure this session, Josie planned to interact 
with two women playing the roles of her boyfriend’s 
friends’ fiancées, to whom Josie felt she could not relate. 
The therapist anticipated that this exposure would 
be more difficult for Josie because it involved a fairly 
unstructured interaction and likely a conversation 
about topics with which Josie was relatively unfamiliar, 
such as wedding planning. Josie reported the following 
automatic thoughts in anticipation of the exposure: 

1. “I’m not married yet, so what do I know about 
relationships and weddings?” 
2. “I will offend them with my views.” 
3. “They are going to think I am weird.” 
4. “They are going to think I act too young.” 
5. “I’m not going to give the right answers to their 
questions.” 
As with the automatic thoughts in her first exposure, 
Josie was able to identify thinking errors, including 
fortune-telling, mind reading, labeling, and all-ornothing 
thinking. By using the disputing questions, 
Josie was able to challenge the automatic thoughts she 
identified. In response to the first thought, Josie determined 
that although she was not married, she had been 
in a relationship for a number of years, so she would 
be able to relate to the other women on that level. In 
addition, she had helped her sister plan a wedding, so 
she was familiar with some aspects of wedding planning. 
Regarding her fear of being offensive, Josie noted 
that she was not sure she would offend them with her 
views and that her different perspective might lead to 
an interesting conversation. The automatic thought 
that the other women would think she was weird was 
more difficult for Josie to challenge, but she was satisfied 
when she determined that she would be able to 
live with herself if they thought she was a little unusual 
and that it was unlikely to affect her relationships with 
them. In reference to her fears that they would think she 
acts too young, Josie used the challenge that she was 
only 2 years younger than these women, but she had 
chosen a different path for herself that involved continued 
education and saving marriage until she felt more 
settled in life, a decision that she felt was very mature. 
In response to the automatic thought that she would not 
give the right answer to their questions, Josie argued 
that perhaps there was no right or wrong answer, and 
that even if she gave an answer that was inconsistent 
with the other women’s views, she could recover from 
those mistakes, and differences of opinion could lead to 
interesting conversation. 

Josie decided that an appropriate rational response 
would be one that helped her feel that she could relate 
to these women despite their different circumstances. 
Her rational response for this exposure was “I’m not 
so different.” Josie’s goals were to talk about her own 
interests (e.g., music), ask a question, offer an opinion, 
and stay in the conversation until the exposure was 
over. Josie’s SUDS ratings started out at 45, decreased 
to about 20 by the fourth minute of the exposure, and 
went as low as 15 by the final minute of the 8-minute 
exposure. Josie met all of her behavioral goals, 
and though she was quiet compared to the role players 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

early in the conversation, she appeared to grow more 
at ease as time passed. Josie reported that the exposure 
went fairly well, and she was pleased that her sharing 
a story during the conversation led to a change of subject 
and additional conversation. Although Josie did not 
share their experiences and opinions, she was able to 
find a way to relate to them and to participate in the 
conversation. She reported having thoughts of leaving 
but convinced herself to stay by reminding herself that 
she would benefit from staying in the situation. Josie’s 
homework was to call an old music composition classmate, 
have a conversation over the phone with him, and 
ask him to listen to her practice a piece she was working 
on for an upcoming show. 

session 11 

Prior to this session, Josie was very busy with class 
work and preparation for an upcoming recital of her 
compositions as part of a final exam. Consequently, she 
had missed several sessions. Josie reported that over the 
course of the past month, she had interviewed for a job 
at a local bookstore, was offered the position, and accepted 
it. She said she experienced a significant amount 
of anxiety on the interview and in the first few days 
of work, but that she was feeling much more confident 
about things now. Although she had made dramatic 
improvements in her self-reported anxiety and continued 
to improve during the 1-month hiatus from regular 
treatment, the therapist discussed the importance of 
completing the remaining 5–6 weeks of the treatment 
program. Josie committed to following through with 
treatment and doing her homework more consistently. 
Though Josie had not formally been doing her homework 
and an in-session exposure was not conducted, 
the therapist reviewed her progress so far in relation 
to her fear and avoidance hierarchy. Socializing with a 
group of friends and riding public transportation alone 
were identified as areas for continued work. For homework, 
Josie was assigned the task of handing out fliers 
to friends and family for the upcoming recital, which 
was to involve repeated social interactions and a discussion 
of her work. She was also given the assignment 
of reading the chapter in the client workbook related to 
social interactions and making small talk. 

session 12 

In the Session 12 homework review, Josie said she interacted 
with many people on campus and around town 
while promoting an upcoming show, and that the con


versations had gone much more smoothly than anticipated. 
She said it was helpful to remind herself that she 
was an expert on her own musical compositions, so she 
could talk at least some about the performance she was 
advertising. The third in-session exposure, completed 
in this session, was designed to help Josie work on 
some of her automatic thoughts related to her upcoming 
recital that weekend. The therapist had planned an 
exposure during which Josie was to interact with audience 
members at a reception following her recital, and 
staff members from the clinic volunteered to play these 
roles. Josie agreed that this exposure was very relevant 
to her current concerns and would make her very anxious. 
Josie reported the following automatic thoughts in 
anticipation of the exposure: 

1. “I’m going to sound pretentious if I talk confidently 
about my performance.” 
2. “They are only talking to me because they feel 
bad for me.” 
3. “I have to impress them.” 
4. “They will think this is boring.” 
5. “I won’t know what to say.” 
Josie was able to identify thinking errors, including allor-
nothing thinking, labeling, fortune-telling, and mind 
reading. During the cognitive restructuring, Josie was 
encouraged to look at her successful experiences in the 
two previous exposures as evidence that she had things 
to say that were of interest to others. With the help of 
the therapist, Josie arrived at this rational response: “I 
can talk about my performance because I created it.” 

Josie’s goals were to talk slowly, to provide information 
about herself, to answer questions posed to her, 
and to stay in a given interaction until the other person 
ended it. Josie’s initial SUDS rating started out at 80, 
but it had decreased to 30 within 3 minutes. At the end 
of the 10-minute exposure, Josie’s SUDS rating was 
below 20. Once again, Josie met her behavioral goals, 
and her performance was objectively skilled. Josie said 
that in addition to her rational response, it was helpful 
to tell herself that she did not have to take everything 
others said to heart. Josie thought the exposure went 
very well and even reported having fun interacting with 
the audience members and being the center of attention. 
She felt that this practice was going to be very helpful 
when she encountered the real situation at that weekend’s 
recital. Josie’s homework was to use the BYOCT 
worksheet before and after her actual recital to prepare 
herself to cope with anxious thoughts that might arise 
before, during, and after the performance. 


Social Anxiety Disorder 

session 13 

Josie came to the session, reporting that her anxiety at 
the reception following last week’s recital was much 
more manageable than it had been in the past, and that 
she was actually able to enjoy conversations she had 
with family, music instructors, and fellow students. 
She reported feeling confident about her performance, 
which helped her to feel confident and comfortable 
while interacting with others at the reception. Though 
Josie did report experiencing significant anxiety as she 
began to socialize with family and friends after the recital, 
she said that her anxiety dropped substantially as 
she continued to interact with others about her performance, 
and at no point did she have thoughts of leaving 
the reception. Josie felt that the recital and reception 
were a success, and that her anxiety did not prevent her 
from enjoying these situations as it had in the past. 

For an in-session exposure, Josie said it would be 
helpful to practice receiving feedback, both positive 
and negative, about her musical and academic performances. 
This situation was relevant because, as part 
of a final exam in Josie’s music composition course, 
she was to perform an original composition in front 
of students and her instructor, then receive their feedback. 
Though her ability to do this had improved on 
a smaller scale during her coursework, this particular 
class critique elicited a considerable amount of anxiety 
for Josie, and she wanted some direct help with the cognitive 
restructuring and behavioral practice. The therapist 
decided to conduct two smaller exposures—one in 
which Josie received neutral or positive feedback from 
class members and her instructor, and another in which 
she received negative feedback. Each exposure was 
designed to go on for approximately 5–10 minutes to 
allow Josie to discuss her composition and performance 
adequately and to receive and respond to feedback. A 
number of clinic staff members volunteered to assist 
with this exposure. 

Prior to the exposure, Josie identified the following 
automatic thoughts for both exposures: 

1. “I am going to mess this up.” 
2. “I must appear professional.” 
3. “I have to perform perfectly to impress them.” 
4. “I won’t know what to say.” 
5. “I won’t understand their questions.” 
Josie was able to identify thinking errors such as 
fortune-telling, all-or-nothing thinking, catastrophizing, 
and should statements. She also noted how her per


fectionistic standards and feelings of low self-efficacy 
were quickly elicited by this situation involving overt 
evaluation of her performance and interaction skills. 
After challenging her automatic thoughts, Josie decided 
that a helpful rational response in each of the exposures 
would be “I know my work because I did it,” which 
she felt would encourage her to continue talking confidently 
about her own composition and performance, 
regardless of the feedback she received. Josie’s behavioral 
goals were to answer questions posed to her and 
to ask follow-up questions, if she needed clarification. 

The exposures were set up to take place immediately 
after a performance and began with Josie saying, 
“Thank you, I’d like to hear your thoughts about the 
piece.” In the first exposure, she received a mix of neutral 
and positive feedback about her composition, her 
performance, and her ability to conduct herself during 
the critique. Josie’s SUDS score started at 45 and 
dropped down to 15 within 3 minutes. She met all of 
her behavioral goals. The second exposure began the 
same way, but this time she received a mix of neutral 
and negative feedback; listeners pointed out mistakes 
she made in her performance, told her that she looked 
nervous, and indicated that they did not like the music 
she wrote. Josie’s SUDS score again started at a 45 and 
went up as high as 60 when she received her first negative 
comment. By the fifth minute of the exposure, her 
SUDS score was 30, and by the end of the exposure, 20. 
Josie again met her behavioral goals and reported that 
she handled both situations very well. Josie noted that 
although her anxiety peaked when she received negative 
feedback, she felt she responded to the comments 
politely and was even able to learn from them. She 
felt the exposure was very helpful in preparing for her 
upcoming feedback sessions in class. For homework, 
Josie was asked to read the client workbook chapter on 
core beliefs and to do an in vivo exposure that would 
involve her taking public transportation to and from 
school with a friend. She was also asked to complete a 
BYOCT worksheet before and after her in-class performance 
and evaluation. 

Advanced Cognitive Restructuring Segment 

session 14 

Josie completed her homework exposure of riding the 
bus to and from school with a friend and reported that 
she was not very anxious. She said that next time she 
would take the bus on her own and work toward going 
places farther away and less familiar. Josie also report



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

ed that things went well with her in-class evaluation, 
that her performance of the music she composed went 
well, but that she thought she messed up once or twice. 
However, she noted that no students gave her feedback 
indicating that they noticed the mistake. Josie reported 
feeling incredibly anxious after she finished playing 
and that right before the feedback session she even had 
thoughts of excusing herself for a few minutes. Reminding 
herself of her rational response, “I can learn 
something from their feedback,” encouraged Josie to 
stay in class and complete the evaluation. Though she 
received some challenging questions about how she 
composed the music and who had influenced her, Josie 
thought she had done a decent job, although she had 
stumbled over her words a few times. She noted that a 
few students commented about not particularly liking 
the style of music she chose, but Josie said she did not 
take these comments personally. Overall Josie felt that 
she had learned a lot from the students’ and instructor’s 
feedback and that, although anxious, felt it was an 
acceptable level of anxiety given the performance and 
evaluation aspects of the situation. 

Josie did not read the chapter on core beliefs, so the 
therapist spent time in session introducing this concept. 
Josie worked hard in this session to identify her core 
beliefs, using the Peeling Your Onion worksheet. She 
realized that her most common automatic thoughts 
across situations were related to labeling herself, feeling 
as though she would not live up to others’ expectations, 
and fears that others would judge her negatively 
because of her social or performance skills. Josie felt 
that the theme of “not measuring up” was familiar and 
related potentially to her beliefs about never measuring 
up to her parents’ standards and not doing anything 
right, which led to more generalized perfectionism. 
Josie identified the thought, “I’m not measuring up,” as 
related to a fear that she would not be successful in life, 
and that to be successful, she felt she must be perfect. 
Identifying this chain of thinking left her feeling sad, 
frustrated, and disappointed. From here, Josie worked 
through the worksheet and identified the core belief, “If 
I’m not perfect, I’m worthless.” Time was spent brainstorming 
exposures Josie could do on her own to test 
and challenge this core belief. For homework, the therapist 
asked Josie to mess up intentionally while playing 
the piano for some family members, so as to challenge 
her core belief that anything short of perfectionism 
represents a failure. Josie also identified another situation 
in which she could intentionally mess up, while 
using the intercom system at her job. The therapist also 

challenged Josie to identify ways that her imperfections 
might actually contribute to her value as a person. Josie 
was hesitant to do this but agreed when she reminded 
herself of the importance of facing feared situations. 

session 15 

Josie arrived at the 15th session and reported that she 
had been unable to make a mistake intentionally in her 
musical performance in front of family members, but 
she was able to make a mistake while using the intercom 
system at work. The therapist continued to use 
cognitive restructuring to explore Josie’s core belief, 
“If I’m not perfect, I’m worthless.” 

tHeraPist: So, last week we started to talk about some 
core issues, and I felt like you left here feeling a little 
overwhelmed. How are you feeling about things 
now? 

Josie: It was a difficult session because I was feeling 
really good about overcoming hard stuff in the 
beginning, like learning how to pick out automatic 
thoughts, see how they were wrong, then finding a 
really good, challenging response to them and actually 
believing it. I felt good because I can do that 
now, almost automatically, or at least without too 
much effort. I felt like I was done, and then we ended 
up having to face some really scary stuff again. I feel 
like I took a giant step up, to a harder level of work. 

tHeraPist: The things we talked about last week were 
harder. That’s a good sign that we’ve really worked 
our way to your core beliefs because it feels so different. 
But remember all the work and practice that you 
put into identifying and challenging every other automatic 
thought or situation that we’ve worked on. It 
didn’t all happen right away. In terms of core beliefs, 
we’re going to do the same thing. All we’ve done is 
identify it. Now we will spend time challenging it 
and testing out the thought, “If I’m not perfect, I’m 
worthless.” We’ll start here in session today, but this 
is work you’ll continue on your own. What might be 
some thinking errors? What’s limiting in thinking 
that anything less than 100% is a failure? 

Josie: That’s catastrophizing. Probably also a should 
statement because I feel like I must be perfect. And 
also maybe fortune-telling because I feel like I’m assuming 
things will go wrong eventually. That’s it. 

tHeraPist: What about all-or-nothing thinking? 


Social Anxiety Disorder 

Josie: Oh yeah, definitely. In my mind, it’s like there’s 
0% success or 100% success. 

tHeraPist: So what are some ways we can challenge 
this? It won’t be easy, but let’s try. 

Josie: Umm, I guess simple challenges, like “How do I 
know I’m going to be worthless if I’m not perfect?” I 
don’t know. I guess not being perfect doesn’t have to 
equal being worthless. 

tHeraPist: Tell me more about that. 

Josie: Some things are maybe valuable even when 
they’re not perfect. Like people. Or art. 

tHeraPist: So sometimes people’s flaws, or quirks, 
make them more interesting? 

Josie: Yeah, that’s what I like best about my boyfriend. 
Those things other people are bothered by I find endearing. 
I like things that are imperfect, that have 
their own personality to them that’s not quite right. I 
don’t really have a problem when the imperfection is 
with someone else. But with me, it’s different. 

tHeraPist: Are you a harsher critic of yourself than 
others? 

Josie: Definitely. Too bad I can’t see myself the way I 
see others. 

tHeraPist: Maybe you can, maybe we can try that. It’s 
hard because you’ve been looking at yourself critically 
for a long time. It’s going to be a change, and it 
will take testing and practice. But what might be the 
reward for trying something besides being a harsher 
judge of yourself than others? 

Josie: I guess the work will pay off, like it did with 
everything else. With practice, I even had fun at my 
show. I didn’t believe that I was going to be a failure. 
I believed I could do it. It was a huge success. 

tHeraPist: Were there any minor flaws with the evening? 
Things that went wrong, but that you coped 
with? 

Josie: Oh, yeah, tons. Like I forgot my friend’s name 
when I was introducing her to my parents. But it 
didn’t ruin the evening. Overall things were good, 
and I felt good about it. I could skip over those flaws 
and just enjoy it. 

tHeraPist: So when thinking about that situation, how 
true does it feel that if you are not perfect, you are 
worthless? 

Josie: When I came in, I felt overwhelmed by everything; 
now that we can see all the work I’ve done, I 

feel better. I think I can challenge this. I don’t think 
it feels totally true anymore. 

tHeraPist: OK, so what’s some evidence that this core 
belief may not be true? 

Josie: Well, it’s OK for everyone else to not be perfect. 
Maybe a little less OK for me, but I guess it’s still 
somewhat OK. And some people are more valuable 
to me because of their imperfections. I guess being 
perfect is boring. Being perfect is impossible. 

tHeraPist: So that seems like a high standard to hold 
yourself to. 

Josie: (Laughs.) Yeah. I don’t know anyone who’s perfect. 
Everyone makes mistakes. Even me. Especially 
me. Everyone in the history of the world has been 
imperfect. 

tHeraPist: Right. Now let’s get back to you, not just 
others. Do we have evidence that you may be valuable 
even if you’re imperfect? Are there upsides of 
imperfection? 

Josie: I’ll be more unique, more of an individual. It 
makes for interesting challenges; it could make for a 
really interesting life. I could learn a lot about different 
ways to do things, try out all kinds of new things. 
Make lots of mistakes, and just learn to do things 
better the next time. Not perfect, but just better. And 
make room for failure. 

tHeraPist: So how much do you believe that if you’re 
not perfect, you’re worthless? 

Josie: Maybe like 20%. Right now, at least, only 20%. 

tHeraPist: So how can we sum up some of these challenges 
that have gotten you to believing this only 
about 20%? What might be a rational response to 
this core belief, “If I’m not perfect, I’m worthless.” 

Josie: I don’t know; this is hard. If I’m not perfect, I’m 
worthy? I don’t believe it, but it makes me laugh. I 
guess maybe it’s OK if I’m not perfect. 

tHeraPist: Does that feel convincing? 

Josie: Not really. I’m drawing a blank with coming up 
with the right rational response. 

tHeraPist: What if we recognized that this rational 
response won’t be perfect? Maybe we need to find 
one that’s good enough for now. So let’s keep at this. 

Josie: Oh I see, there’s the perfectionistic thinking 
again. I guess really, it is not humanly possible to be 
perfect. And I don’t think I would even want to be 
that person who finally was perfect. 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

tHeraPist: So it seems like a lot of work to be chasing 
perfection when it kind of doesn’t exist. It sounds 
like no matter how hard you try, there would always 
be the attempt to do better than perfect. 

Josie: Yeah, like no matter what, I’d never be able to 
be perfect. It’s not humanly possible. I guess if I 
had to make this a rational response, I’d tell myself 
something like “There is no such thing as perfect.” I 
like that. I think that will work for now. I’m going to 
think about this more. This is a challenge, but I want 
to spend time on this. 

tHeraPist: OK, so maybe we can try out this rational 
response this week by having you do some exposures 
that will allow you to challenge the core belief, “If 
I’m not perfect, I’m worthless.” 

Josie: Yeah. I need to do that every day, challenge 
this, become more accepting of my imperfections. It 
might be fun to mess up on purpose. But a lot of the 
time I mess up just naturally, but I guess even then 
I’m not worthless. Mistakes are going to happen because 
there is no such thing as perfect. 

For homework this session, Josie was assigned the 
task of intentionally making mistakes in conversation 
(e.g., “forgetting” people’s names, asking them to repeat 
something they have said), at work (e.g., pressing 
the wrong button when using the intercom, asking for 
help with a task), and in performances (e.g., playing the 
wrong notes while playing the piano for her family and 
friends). 

Termination Segment 

session 16 

In the final session, Josie and the therapist discussed 
her progress and the challenges that lay ahead. Josie 
rerated her fear and avoidance hierarchy, and the decrease 
in her ratings was considered significant and 
meaningful (see Table 3.3). She reported that, over the 
course of treatment, she learned new skills such as recognizing 
and challenging automatic thoughts and seeing 
all aspects of herself—including imperfection—as 
acceptable. The most important change she noted was 
being able to get and to keep a job at a bookstore, where 
she must interact with customers and coworkers all day. 
Josie reported that as a result of her treatment, for the 
first time she was able to see herself as equal rather 
than inferior to others, and she was optimistic about her 
future goals, both personal and professional. 

Session‑by‑Session Assessment 

Figure 3.2 displays Josie’s session-by-session scores on 
the SASCI and the BFNE. 

Recall that a score of 16 on the SASCI corresponds to 
no change, with lower scores indicative of increasingly 
greater improvement relative to baseline levels. Josie 
started to show modest improvement after Session 3. 
Her score spiked at Session 8, and then began a steady 
decline, reaching the minimum score of 4 by Session 
12 and remaining there until the end of treatment. For 
the BFNE, Weeks and colleagues (2005) reported a 
mean score of 46.91 (SD = 9.27) in a large sample with 
social anxiety disorder and a mean of 26.81 (SD = 4.78) 
among normal controls. Early in treatment, Josie’s session 
scores exceeded the mean of the clinical sample 
by as much as 10 points. However, her scores declined 
consistently thereafter, and by the end of treatment 
were just below the mean of the control sample. 

One‑Year Follow‑Up Assessment 

After 1 year with no treatment, Josie showed considerable 
improvement on all self-report and clinicianadministered 
measures compared to her pretreatment 
assessment (see Table 3.2). In fact, she no longer met 
diagnostic criteria for social anxiety disorder. She was 
considering applications to graduate programs to continue 
her study of music and had plans to audition for 
the local orchestra. Josie reported that she had been 
making friends at her job and felt that she now had a 
core of social supports on which she could rely. 

Five‑Year Follow‑Up Assessment 

Approximately 5 years after the conclusion of her treatment, 
we had the opportunity to check in with Josie 
and discuss how things had gone for her since she completed 
CBT as described herein. She had received no 
additional therapy, other than a brief period of some 
premarital counseling with a member of the clergy. 
Josie had gotten married, moved to a large city, and had 
a child; she experienced an episode of postpartum depression 
that resolved without treatment. She had completed 
a prestigious music fellowship program where 
she gained additional experience and confidence as a 
composer and performer. At the time of our check-in, 
Josie was hoping to devote more time to her music, perhaps 
as a teacher. Josie was very proud to report that 


Social Anxiety Disorder 


figUre 3.2. Weekly scores on the (a) Social Anxiety Session Change Index (SASCI) and (b) Brief Fear of Negative 
Evaluation Scale (BFNE). 

she has been successful in pushing herself to engage 
in social situations that were difficult at first and that 
she has learned that things often are not as difficult as 
she first feared. Josie reported a return of some anxiety 
symptoms, as reflected in ratings on her fear and avoidance 
hierarchy, which were higher than those reported 
at the 1-year follow-up but generally lower than those at 
the pretreatment assessment (Table 3.3). However, she 

reported that this did not significantly interfere with 
her daily functioning, as reflected in her scores on the 
majority of self-report and clinician-administered measures 
(See Table 3.2). As at the 1-year follow-up, Josie 
did not meet criteria for social anxiety disorder. However, 
she experienced some distress in social situations 
that were not relevant to her life at the time of treatment. 
For instance, socializing with other children’s 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

parents at school and church was a new challenge that 
had led to some anxiety and avoidance in recent years. 
Josie thought she might benefit from some booster sessions, 
but she reported that she continues to review her 
client workbook and therapy notes from time to time to 
maintain her CBT skills. 

cliNical PreDictors of success 
aND failure 

Josie’s treatment turned out well, as it does for many 
clients. However, treatment response is a variable phenomenon, 
and researchers have investigated a number 
of predictors of CBT outcome (see more in the review 
of this topic by L. Magee, Erwin, & Heimberg, 2009). 

Expectancy for improvement, subtype of social 
anxiety disorder, and comorbidity with other anxiety or 
mood disorders, as well as APD, have been discussed 
in other sections of this chapter. Here we briefly review 
three other variables—adherence to assigned CBT 
homework, anger, and cognitive change. 

Adherence to prescribed homework assignments has 
been associated with positive treatment outcome, and 
evidence suggests that adherence to particular components 
of CBT homework assignments may be differentially 
predictive of outcome. For instance, adherence to 
between-session cognitive restructuring and exposure 
assignments predicts posttreatment outcome better than 
adherence to assignments related more to psychoeducation 
early in treatment (Leung & Heimberg, 1996). 
Other studies have not replicated these effects immediately 
after treatment (Edelmann & Chambless, 1995; 
Woody & Adessky, 2002). However, 6-month followup 
assessments revealed that homework-compliant individuals 
reported fewer avoidant behaviors, less fear 
of negative evaluation, and less anxiety when giving a 
speech compared to less compliant clients (Edelman & 
Chambless, 1995). 

Anger is a significant predictor of CBT outcome as 
well. In a study by Erwin, Heimberg, Schneier, and 
Liebowitz (2003), individuals with high levels of trait 
anger were more likely to terminate treatment prematurely. 
Also, levels of state and trait anger and anger 
suppression before treatment were significantly correlated 
with posttreatment severity of social anxiety. 

Finally, in a study comparing group CBT, exposure 
group therapy, and waiting-list control conditions, 
changes in estimated social cost, or negative cognitive 
appraisal, mediated pretreatment to posttreatment 

changes in both active treatment groups (Hofmann, 
2004). Furthermore, only the group receiving cognitive 
techniques, in addition to exposure, continued to 
show improvement from posttreatment to the 6-month 
follow-up assessment. Continued benefit was associated 
with an overall reduction in estimated social cost 
from pre- to posttreatment assessments, suggesting 
that the cognitive-behavioral intervention is associated 
with greater treatment gains that are mediated through 
changes in estimated social cost (Hofmann, 2004). 
More recently, Boden and colleagues (2012) demonstrated 
that changes in interpersonal core beliefs mediated 
the effect of CBT on social anxiety symptoms, and 
Goldin and colleagues (2012) showed that increased 
belief in one’s ability to engage in cognitive reappraisal 
did the same. 

suMMary aND coNclusioNs 

Our primary purpose in this chapter was to provide a 
step-by-step analysis of the conduct of individual CBT 
for social anxiety disorder from initial assessment to 
long-term follow-up. Procedural difficulties that may 
arise in the conduct of CBT for social anxiety disorder 
were not be discussed in detail here because of space 
limitations, but they are discussed thoroughly by Heimberg 
and Becker (2002). Individuals like Josie, who 
make dramatic improvements in their lives, provide the 
impetus for continued research on the treatment of social 
anxiety disorder—a potentially debilitating disorder 
with an increasingly encouraging prognosis. 

referenCes 

Acarturk, C., de Graaf, R., van Straten, A., ten Have, M., & 
Cuijpers, P. (2008). Social phobia and number of social 
fears, and their association with comorbidity, healthrelated 
quality of life and help seeking. Social Psychiatry 
and Psychiatric Epidemiology, 43, 273–279. 

Aderka, I. M. (2009). Factors affecting treatment efficacy in 
social phobia: The use of video feedback and individual vs. 
group formats. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 23, 12–17. 

Aderka, I. M., Hofmann, S. G., Nickerson, A., Hermesh, H., 
Gilboa-Schectman, E., & Marom, S. (2012). Functional 
impairment in social anxiety disorder. Journal of Anxiety 
Disorders, 26, 393–400. 

American Psychiatric Association. (1980). Diagnostic and 
statistical manual of mental disorders (3rd ed.). Washington, 
DC: Author. 


Social Anxiety Disorder 

American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and 
statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.). Arlington, 
VA: Author. 

Antony, M. M., Coons, M. J., McCabe, R. E., Ashbaugh, A., 
& Swinson, R. P. (2006). Psychometric properties of the 
Social Phobia Inventory: Further evaluation. Behaviour 
Research and Therapy, 44, 1177–1185. 

Barlow, D. H. (2002). Anxiety and its disorders: The nature 
and treatment of anxiety and panic (2nd ed.). New York: 
Guilford Press. 

Beck, A. T., Steer, R. A., & Brown, G. K. (1996). Beck Depression 
Inventory manual (2nd ed.). San Antonio, TX: 
Psychological Corporation. 

Beck, J. S. (1995). Cognitive therapy: Basics and beyond. 
New York: Guilford Press. 

Beidel, D. C., Turner, S. M., Stanley, M. A., & Dancu, C. V. 
(1989). The Social Phobia and Anxiety Inventory: Concurrent 
and external validity. Behavior Therapy, 20, 417–427. 

Blanco, C., Heimberg, R. G., Schneier, F. R., Fresco, D. M., 
Chen, H., Turk, C. L., et al. (2010). A placebo-controlled 
trial of phenelzine, cognitive behavioral group therapy and 
their combination for social anxiety disorder. Archives of 
General Psychiatry, 67, 286–295. 

Blanco, C., Xu, Y., Schneier, F., Okuda, M., Liu, S.-M., & 
Heimberg, R. G. (2011). Predictors of persistence of social 
anxiety disorder: A national study. Journal of Psychiatric 
Research, 45, 1557–1563. 

Boden, M. T., John, O. P., Goldin, P. R., Werner, K., Heimberg, 
R. G., & Gross, J. J. (2012). The role of maladaptive 
beliefs in cognitive behavioral therapy: Evidence from social 
anxiety disorder. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 
50, 287–291. 

Brown, E. J., Heimberg, R. G., & Juster, H. R. (1995). Social 
phobia subtype and avoidant personality disorder: Effect 
on severity of social phobia, impairment, and outcome of 
cognitive-behavioral treatment. Behavior Therapy, 26, 
467–486. 

Brown, E. J., Turovsky, J., Heimberg, R. G., Juster, H. R., 
Brown, T. A., & Barlow, D. H. (1997). Validation of the 
Social Interaction Anxiety Scale and the Social Phobia 
Scale across the anxiety disorders. Psychological Assessment, 
9, 21–27. 

Brown, T. A., Di Nardo, P. A., & Barlow, D. H. (1994). Anxiety 
Disorders Interview Schedule for DSM-IV. New York: 
Oxford University Press. 

Brown, T. A., Di Nardo, P. A., & Barlow, D. H. (2013). Anxiety 
and Related Disorders Interview Schedule for DSM-5: 
Lifetime version (ADIS-5–L). Manuscript in preparation. 

Brown, T. A., Di Nardo, P. A., Lehman, S. L., & Campbell, 

L. A. (2001). Reliability of DSM-IV anxiety and mood 
disorders: Implications for the classification of emotional 
disorders. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 110, 49–58. 
Brozovich, F., & Heimberg, R. G. (2008). An analysis of 
post-event processing in social anxiety disorder. Clinical 
Psychology Review, 28, 891–903. 

Bruce, S. E., Yonkers, K. A., Otto, M. W., Eisen, J. L., Weisberg, 
R. B., Pagano, M., et al. (2005). Influence of psychiatric 
comorbidity on recovery and recurrence in generalized 
anxiety disorder, social phobia, and panic disorder: A 
12–year prospective study. American Journal of Psychiatry, 
162, 1179–1187. 

Bruch, M. A., Fallon, M., & Heimberg, R. G. (2003). Social 
phobia and difficulties in occupational adjustment. Journal 
of Counseling Psychology, 50, 109–117. 

Bruch, M. A., Gorsky, J. M., Collins, T. M., & Berger, P. 
(1989). Shyness and sociability reexamined: A multicomponent 
analysis. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
57, 904–915. 

Carleton, R. N., Collimore, K. C., Asmundson, G. J. G., Mc-
Cabe, R. E., Rowa, K., & Antony, M. M. (2009). Refining 
and validating the Social Interaction Anxiety Scale and 
the Social Phobia Scale. Depression and Anxiety, 26, E71– 
E81. 

Chambless, D. L., Fydrich, T., & Rodebaugh, T. L. (2008). 
Generalized social phobia and avoidant personality disorder: 
Meaningful distinction or useless duplication? Depression 
and Anxiety, 25, 8–19. 

Chambless, D. L., & Ollendick, T. H. (2001). Empirically 
supported psychological interventions: Controversies and 
evidence. Annual Review of Psychology, 52, 685–716. 

Chambless, D. L., Tran, G. Q., & Glass, C. R. (1997). Predictors 
of response to cognitive-behavioral group therapy for 
social phobia. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 11, 221–240. 

Clark, D. M., Ehlers, A., Hackmann, A., McManus, F., Fennell, 
M., Grey, N., et al. (2006). Cognitive therapy versus 
exposure and applied relaxation in social phobia: A randomized 
controlled trial. Journal of Consulting and Clinical 
Psychology, 74, 568–578. 

Clark, D. M., Ehlers, A., McManus, F., Hackmann, A., Fennell, 
M., Campbell, H., et al. (2003). Cognitive therapy 
versus fluoxetine in generalized social phobia: A randomized 
placebo-controlled trial. Journal of Consulting and 
Clinical Psychology, 71, 1058–1067. 

Clark, D. M., & Wells, A. (1995). The cognitive model of social 
phobia. In R. G. Heimberg, M. R. Leibowitz, D. A. 
Hope, & F. R. Schneier (Eds.), Social phobia: Diagnosis, 
assessment, and treatment (pp. 69–93). New York: Guilford 
Press. 

Collins, K. A., Westra, H. A., Dozois, D. J. A., & Stewart, S. 

H. (2005). The validity of the brief version of the Fear of 
Negative Evaluation Scale. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 
19, 345–359. 
Connor, K. M., Davidson, J. R. T., Churchill, E., Sherwood, 
A., Foa, E. B., & Weisler, R. H. (2000). Psychometric properties 
of the Social Phobia Inventory (SPIN): A new selfrating 
scale. British Journal of Psychiatry, 176, 379–386. 

Connor, K. M., Kobak, K. A., Churchill, E., Katzelnick, D., 
& Davidson, J. R. T. (2001). Mini-SPIN: A brief screening 
assessment for generalized social anxiety disorder. Depression 
and Anxiety, 14, 137–140. 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

Cox, B. J., Pagura, J., Stein, M. B., & Sareen, J. (2009). The 
relationship between generalized social phobia and avoidant 
personality disorder in a national mental health survey. 
Depression and Anxiety, 26, 354–362. 

Cox, B. J., Ross, L., Swinson, R. P., & Direnfeld, D. M. 
(1998). A comparison of social phobia outcome measures 
in cognitive-behavioral group therapy. Behavior Modification, 
22, 285–297. 

Davidson, J. R. T., Miner, C. M., De Veaugh-Geiss, J., Tupler, 

L. A., Colket, J. T., & Potts, N. L. (1997). The Brief Social 
Phobia Scale: A psychometric evaluation. Psychological 
Medicine, 27, 161–166. 
Davidson, J. R. T., Potts, N. L., Richichi, E. A., Ford, S. M., 
Krishnan, R. R., Smith, R. D., et al. (1991). The Brief 
Social Phobia Scale. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 
52(Suppl. 11), 48–51. 

Di Nardo, P. A., Brown, T. A., & Barlow, D. H. (1994). Anxiety 
Disorders Interview Schedule for DSM-IV: Lifetime 
version (ADIS-IV-L). New York: Oxford University Press. 

Edelmann, R. E., & Chambless, D. L. (1995). Adherence during 
session and homework in cognitive-behavioral group 
treatment of social phobia. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 
33, 537–577. 

Elting, D. T., Hope, D. A., & Heimberg, R. G. (1997). Interrelationships 
among measures commonly used in research 
on social phobia. Depression and Anxiety, 4, 246–248. 

Erwin, B. A., Heimberg, R. G., Juster, H. R., & Mindlin, M. 
(2002). Comorbid anxiety and mood disorders among persons 
with social phobia. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 
40, 19–35. 

Erwin, B. A., Heimberg, R. G., Schneier, F. R., & Liebowitz, 

M. R. (2003). Anger experience and expression in social 
anxiety disorder: Pretreatment profile and predictors of 
attrition and response to cognitive-behavioral treatment. 
Behavior Therapy, 34, 331–350. 
Fergus, T. A., Valentiner, D. P., McGrath, P. B., Gier-Lonsway, 

S. L., & Kim, H.-S. (2012). Short forms of the Social Interaction 
Anxiety Scale and the Social Phobia Scale. Journal 
of Personality Assessment, 94, 310–320. 
Feske, U., Perry, K. J., Chambless, D. L., Renneberg, B., & 
Goldstein, A. J. (1996). Avoidant personality disorder as a 
predictor for severity and treatment outcome among generalized 
social phobics. Journal of Personality Disorders, 
10, 174–184. 

Fresco, D. M., Coles, M. E., Heimberg, R. G., Liebowitz, M. 
R., Hami, S., Stein, M. B., et al. (2001). The Liebowitz 
Social Anxiety Scale: A comparison of the psychometric 
properties of self-report and clinician-administered formats. 
Psychological Medicine, 31, 1025–1035. 

Frisch, M. B. (1994). Manual and treatment guide for the 
Quality of Life Inventory. Minneapolis, MN: National 
Computer Systems. 

Gaston, J. E., Abbott, M. J., Rapee, R. M., & Neary, S. A. 
(2006). Do empirically supported treatments generalize 
to private practice?: A benchmark study of a cognitive


behavioural group treatment programme for social phobia. 
British Journal of Clinical Psychology, 45, 33–48. 

Gilbert, P. (2001). Evolution and social anxiety: The role of 
attraction, social competition, and social hierarchies. Psychiatric 
Clinics of North America, 24, 723–751. 

Goldin, P. R., Ziv, M., Jazaieri, H., Werner, K., Kraemer, 
H., Heimberg, R. G., et al. (2012). Cognitive reappraisal 
self-efficacy mediates the effects of individual cognitivebehavioral 
therapy for social anxiety disorder in a randomized 
controlled trial. Journal of Consulting and Clinical 
Psychology, 80, 1034–1040. 

Hackmann, A., Clark, D. M., & McManus, F. (2000). Recurrent 
images and early memories in social phobia. Behaviour 
Research and Therapy, 38, 601–610. 

Hackmann, A., Surawy, C., & Clark, D. M. (1998). Seeing 
yourself through others’ eyes: A study of spontaneously 
occurring images in social phobia. Behavioural and Cognitive 
Psychotherapy, 26, 3–12. 

Hambrick, J. P., Turk, C. L., Heimberg, R. G., Schneier, F. R., 
& Liebowitz, M. R. (2003). The experience of disability 
and quality of life in social anxiety disorder. Depression 
and Anxiety, 18, 46–50. 

Hayes, S. A., Hope, D. A., Van Dyke, M., & Heimberg, R. 

G. (2007). Working alliance for clients with social anxiety 
disorder: Relationship with session helpfulness and 
within-session habituation. Cognitive Behaviour Therapy, 
36, 34–42. 
Hayes, S. A., Miller, N. A., Hope, D. A., Heimberg, R. G., & 
Juster, H. R. (2008). Assessing client progress session-bysession: 
The Social Anxiety Session Change Index. Cognitive 
and Behavioral Practice, 15, 203–211. 

Heimberg, R. G. (1994). Cognitive assessment strategies and 
the measurement of outcome of treatment for social phobia. 
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 32, 269–280. 

Heimberg, R. G., & Becker, R. E. (2002). Cognitivebehavioral 
group therapy for social phobia: Basic mechanisms 
and clinical strategies. New York: Guilford Press. 

Heimberg, R. G., Brozovich, F. A., & Rapee, R. M. (2010). 
A cognitive-behavioral model of social anxiety disorder: 
Update and extension. In S. G. Hofmann & P. M. DiBartolo 
(Eds.), Social anxiety: Clinical, developmental, and 
social perspectives (2nd ed., pp. 395–422). New York: 
Academic Press. 

Heimberg, R. G., Dodge, C. S., Hope, D. A., Kennedy, C. R., 
Zollo, L. J., & Becker, R. E. (1990). Cognitive-behavioral 
group treatment for social phobia: Comparison with a 
credible placebo control. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 
14, 1–23. 

Heimberg, R. G., & Holaway, R. M. (2007). Examination of 
the known-groups validity of the Liebowitz Social Anxiety 
Scale. Depression and Anxiety, 24, 447–454. 

Heimberg, R. G., Holt, C. S., Schneier, F. R., Spitzer, R. L., 
& Liebowitz, M. R. (1993). The issues of subtypes in the 
diagnosis of social phobia. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 
7, 249–269. 


Social Anxiety Disorder 

Heimberg, R. G., Hope, D. A., Dodge, C. S., & Becker, R. E. 
(1990). DSM-III-R subtypes of social phobia: Comparison 
of generalized social phobics and public speaking phobics. 
Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 178, 172–179. 

Heimberg, R. G., Horner, K. J., Juster, H. R., Safren, S. A., 
Brown, E. J., Schneier, F. R., et al. (1999). Psychometric 
properties of the Liebowitz Social Anxiety Scale. Psychological 
Medicine, 29, 199–212. 

Heimberg, R. G., Liebowitz, M. R., Hope, D. A., Schneier, F. 
R., Holt, C. S., Welkowitz, L. A., et al. (1998). Cognitive 
behavioral group therapy vs. phenelzine therapy for social 
phobia: 12–week outcome. Archives of General Psychiatry, 
55, 1133–1141. 

Heimberg, R. G., Mueller, G. P., Holt, C. S., Hope, D. A., & 
Liebowitz, M. R. (1992). Assessment of anxiety in social 
interaction and being observed by others: The Social Interaction 
Anxiety Scale and the Social Phobia Scale. Behavior 
Therapy, 23, 53–73. 

Heimberg, R. G., Salzman, D. G., Holt, C. S., & Blendell, 

K. A. (1993). Cognitive-behavioral group treatment for social 
phobia: Effectiveness at five-year followup. Cognitive 
Therapy and Research, 17, 325–339. 
Heimberg, R. G., & Turk, C. L. (2002). Assessment of social 
phobia. In R. G. Heimberg & R. E. Becker (Eds.), 
Cognitive-behavioral group therapy for social phobia: 
Basic mechanisms and clinical strategies (pp. 107–126). 
New York: Guilford Press. 

Herbert, J. D., Bellack, A. S., & Hope, D. A. (1991). Concurrent 
validity of the Social Phobia and Anxiety Inventory. 
Journal of Psychopathology and Behavioral Assessment, 
13, 357–368. 

Herbert, J. D., Hope, D. A., & Bellack, A. S. (1992). Validity 
of the distinction between generalized social phobia and 
avoidant personality disorder. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 
101, 332–339. 

Hofmann, S. G. (2004). Cognitive mediation of treatment 
change in social phobia. Journal of Consulting and Clinical 
Psychology, 72, 392–399. 

Hofmann, S. G., Newman, M. G., Becker, E., Taylor, C. 
B., & Roth, W. T. (1995). Social phobia with and without 
avoidant personality disorder: Preliminary behavior 
therapy outcome findings. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 
9, 427–438. 

Hope, D. A., Heimberg, R. G., & Bruch, M. A. (1995). Dismantling 
cognitive-behavioral group therapy for social 
phobia. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 33, 637–650. 

Hope, D. A., Heimberg, R. G., Juster, H., & Turk, C. L. 
(2000). Managing social anxiety: A cognitive-behavioral 
therapy approach (client workbook). New York: Oxford 
University Press. 

Hope, D. A., Heimberg, R. G., & Turk, C. L. (2006). Managing 
social anxiety: A cognitive-behavioral therapy approach 
(therapist guide). New York: Oxford University 
Press. 

Hope, D. A., Heimberg, R. G., & Turk, C. L. (2010a). Man


aging social anxiety: A cognitive-behavioral therapy approach 
(Client Workbook, 2nd ed.). New York: Oxford 
University Press. 

Hope, D. A., Heimberg, R. G. , & Turk, C.L. (2010b). Managing 
social anxiety: A cognitive-behavioral therapy 
approach (Therapist Guide, 2nd ed.). New York: Oxford 
University Press. 

Hope, D. A., Herbert, J. D., & White, C. (1995). Diagnostic 
subtype, avoidant personality disorder, and efficacy of 
cognitive behavioral group therapy for social phobia. Cognitive 
Therapy and Research, 19, 399–417. 

Hope, D. A., Van Dyke, M., Heimberg, R. G., Turk, C. L., 
& Fresco, D. M. (2002). Cognitive-behavioral therapy for 
social anxiety disorder: Therapist adherence scale. Unpublished 
manuscript, available from Richard G. Heimberg, 
Adult Anxiety Clinic, Department of Psychology, 
Temple University, Philadelphia, PA 19122–6085. 

Huppert, J. D., Strunk, D. R., Ledley, D. R., Davidson, J. R. T., 
& Foa, E. B. (2008). Generalized social anxiety disorder 
and avoidant personality disorder: Structural analysis and 
treatment outcome. Depression and Anxiety, 25, 441–448. 

Kabat-Zinn, J. (1990). Full catastrophe living: Using the wisdom 
of your body and mind to face stress, pain, and illness. 
New York: Dell. 

Katzelnick, D. J., Kobak, K. A., DeLeire, T., Henk, H. J., Greist, 
J. H., Davidson, J. R. T., et al. (2001). Impact of generalized 
social anxiety disorder in managed care. American 
Journal of Psychiatry, 158, 1999–2007. 

Kendall, P. C., Chu, B., Gifford, A., Hayes, C., & Nauta, M. 
(1998). Breathing life into a manual: Flexibility and creativity 
with manual-based treatments. Cognitive and Behavioral 
Practice, 5, 177–198. 

Kendall, P. C., Gosch, E., Furr, J. M., & Sood, E. (2008). 
Flexibility within fidelity. Journal of the American Academy 
of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 47, 987–993. 

Kessler, R. C., Berglund, P. D., Demler, O., Olga, J. R., Merikangas, 
K. R., & Walters, E. E. (2005). Lifetime prevalence 
and age-of-onset distributions of DSM-IV disorders 
in the National Comorbidity Survey Replication. Archives 
of General Psychiatry, 62, 593–602. 

Koszycki, D., Benger, M., Shlik, J., & Bradwejn, J. (2007). 
Randomized trial of a meditation-based stress reduction 
program and cognitive behavior therapy in generalized social 
anxiety disorder. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 
45, 2518–2526. 

Kupper, N., & Denollet, J. (2012). Social anxiety in the general 
population. Introducing abbreviated versions of the 
SIAS and SPS. Journal of Affective Disorders, 136, 90–98. 

Leary, M. R. (1983). A brief version of the Fear of Negative 
Evaluation Scale. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 
9, 371–375. 

Leary, M. R., Kowalski, R. M., & Campbell, C. D. (1988). 
Self-presentational concerns and social anxiety: The role 
of generalized impression expectancies. Journal of Research 
in Personality, 22, 308–321. 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

Ledley, D. R., Heimberg, R. G., Hope, D. A., Hayes, S. A.., 
Zaider, T. I., Van Dyke, M., et al. (2009). Efficacy of a 
manualized and workbook-driven individual treatment for 
social anxiety disorder. Behavior Therapy, 40, 414–424. 

Leung, A. W., & Heimberg, R. G. (1996). Homework compliance, 
perceptions of control, and outcome of cognitivebehavioral 
treatment for social phobia. Behaviour Research 
and Therapy, 34, 423–432. 

Liebowitz, M. R. (1987). Social phobia. Modern Problems in 
Pharmacopsychiatry, 22, 141–173. 

Liebowitz, M. R., Heimberg, R. G., Fresco, D. M., Travers, 
J., & Stein, M. B. (2000). Social phobia or social anxiety 
disorder: What’s in a name? Archives of General Psychiatry, 
57, 191–192. 

Liebowitz, M. R., Heimberg, R. G., Schneier, F. R., Hope, 

D. A., Davies, S., Holt, C. S., et al. (1999). Cognitivebehavioral 
group therapy versus phenelzine in social 
phobia: Long-term outcome. Depression and Anxiety, 10, 
89–98. 
Lincoln, T. M., Rief, W., Hahlweg, K., Frank, M., von 
Witzleben, I., Schroeder, B., et al. (2003). Effectiveness 
of an empirically supported treatment for social phobia 
in the field. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 41, 1251– 
1269. 

MacLeod, C., & Mathews, A. (1991). Biased cognitive operations 
in anxiety: Accessibility of information or assignment 
of processing priorities? Behaviour Research and 
Therapy, 29, 599–610. 

Magee, L., Erwin, B. A., & Heimberg, R. G. (2009). Psychological 
treatment of social anxiety disorder and specific 
phobia. In M. M. Antony & M. B. Stein (Eds.), Handbook 
of anxiety and the anxiety disorders (pp. 334–349). New 
York: Oxford University Press. 

Magee, W. J., Eaton, W. W., Wittchen, H.-U., McGonagle, K. 
A., & Kessler, R. C. (1996). Agoraphobia, simple phobia, 
and social phobia in the National Comorbidity Survey. Archives 
of General Psychiatry, 53, 159–168. 

Mannuzza, S., Schneier, F. R., Chapman, T. F., Liebowitz, M. 
R., Klein, D. F., & Fyer, A. J. (1995). Generalized social 
phobia: Reliability and validity. Archives of General Psychiatry, 
52, 230–237. 

Marques, L., Porter, E., Keshaviah, A., Pollack, M. H., Van 
Ameringen, M., Stein, M. B., et al. (2012). Avoidant personality 
disorder in individuals with generalized social 
anxiety disorder: What does it add? Journal of Anxiety 
Disorders, 26, 665–672. 

Mattick, R. P., & Clarke, J. C. (1998). Development and validation 
of measures of social phobia scrutiny fear and social 
interaction anxiety. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 
36, 455–470. 

Mattick, R. P., & Peters, L. (1988). Treatment of severe social 
phobia: Effects of guided exposure with and without cognitive 
restructuring. Journal of Consulting and Clinical 
Psychology, 56, 251–260. 

McEvoy, P. M. (2007). Effectiveness of cognitive behavioural 
group therapy for social phobia in a community clinic: A 
benchmarking study. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 
45, 3030–3040. 

McEvoy, P. M., Nathan, P., Rapee, R. M., & Campbell, B. N. 

C. (2012). Cognitive behavioural group therapy for social 
phobia: Evidence of transportability to community clinics. 
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 50, 258–265. 
Mennin, D. S., Fresco, D. M., Heimberg, R. G., Schneier, F. 
R., Davies, S. O., & Liebowitz, M. R. (2002). Screening 
for social anxiety disorder in the clinical setting: Using 
the Liebowitz Social Anxiety Scale. Journal of Anxiety 
Disorders, 16, 661–673. 

Mörtberg, E., Clark, D. M., & Bejerot, S. (2011). Intensive 
group cognitive therapy and individual cognitive therapy 
for social phobia: Sustained improvement at 5–year 
follow-up. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 25, 994–1000. 

Narrow, W. E., Rae, D. S., Robins, L. N., & Regier, D. A. 
(2002). Revised prevalence estimates of mental disorders 
in the United States: Using a clinical significance criterion 
to reconcile two surveys’ estimates. Archives of General 
Psychiatry, 59, 115–123. 

Norton, P. J., & Hope, D. A. (2001). Kernels of truth or distorted 
perceptions: Self and observer ratings of social 
anxiety and performance. Behavior Therapy, 32, 765–786. 

Ougrin, D. (2011). Efficacy of exposure versus cognitive 
therapy in anxiety disorders: Systematic review and meta 
analysis. BMC Psychiatry, 11, 200. 

Peters, L., Sunderland, M., Andrews, G., Rapee, R. M., & 
Mattick, R. P. (2012). Development of a short form Social 
Interaction Anxiety (SIAS) and Social Phobia Scale (SPS) 
using nonparametric item response theory: The SIAS-6 
and the SPS-6. Psychological Assessment, 24, 66–76. 

Piet, J., Hougaard, E., Hecksher, M. S., & Rosenberg, N. K. 
(2010). A randomized pilot study of mindfulness-based 
cognitive therapy and group cognitive-behavioral therapy 
for young adults with social phobia. Scandinavian Journal 
of Psychology, 51, 403–410. 

Pontoski, K., Heimberg, R. G., Turk, C. L., & Coles, M. E. 
(2010). Psychotherapy for social anxiety disorder. In D. 
Stein, E. Hollander, & B. Rothbaum (Eds.), American 
Psychiatric Publishing textbook of anxiety disorders (2nd 
ed., pp. 501–521). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric 
Press. 

Powers, M. B., Sigmarsson, S. R., & Emmelkamp, P. M. G. 
(2008). A meta-analytic review of psychological treatments 
for social anxiety disorder. International Journal of 
Cognitive Therapy, 1, 94–113. 

Rapee, R. M., & Heimberg, R. G. (1997). A cognitivebehavioral 
model of anxiety in social phobia. Behaviour 
Research and Therapy, 35, 741–756. 

Rapee, R. M., & Lim, L. (1992). Discrepancy between self- 
and observer ratings of performance in social phobics. 
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 101, 728–731. 


Social Anxiety Disorder 

Ries, B. J., McNeil, D. W., Boone, M. L., Turk, C. L., Carter, 

L. E., & Heimberg, R. G. (1998). Assessment of contemporary 
social phobia verbal report instruments. Behaviour 
Research and Therapy, 36, 983–994. 
Rodebaugh, T. L. (2009). Social phobia and perceived 
friendship quality. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 23, 872– 
878. 

Rodebaugh, T. L., Heimberg, R. G., Brown, P. J., Fernandez, 

K. C., Blanco, C., Schneier, F. R., et al. (2011). More reasons 
to be straightforward: Findings and norms for two 
scales relevant to social anxiety. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 
25, 623–630. 
Rodebaugh, T. L., Woods, C. M., & Heimberg, R. G. (2007). 
The reverse of social anxiety is not always the opposite: 
The reverse-scored items of the Social Interaction Anxiety 
Scale do not belong. Behavior Therapy, 38, 192–206. 

Rodebaugh, T. L., Woods, C. M., Thissen, D. M., Heimberg, 

R. G., Chambless, D. L., & Rapee, R. M. (2004). More 
information from fewer questions: The factor structure 
and item properties of the original and Brief Fear of 
Negative Evaluation Scale. Psychological Assessment, 16, 
169–181. 
Roth, D. A., Coles, M. E., & Heimberg, R. G. (2002). The 
relationship between memories for childhood teasing and 
anxiety and depression in adulthood. Journal of Anxiety 
Disorders, 16, 149–164. 

Rytwinski, N. K., Fresco, D. M., Heimberg, R. G., Coles, M. 
E., Liebowitz, M. R., Cissell, S., et al. (2009). Screening 
for social anxiety disorder with the self-report version of 
the Liebowitz Social Anxiety Scale. Depression and Anxiety, 
26, 34–38. 

Safren, S. A., Heimberg, R. G., Brown, E. J., & Holle, C. 
(1997). Quality of life in social phobia. Depression and 
Anxiety, 4, 126–133. 

Safren, S. A., Heimberg, R. G., & Juster, H. R. (1997). Client 
expectancies and their relationship to pretreatment symptomatology 
and outcome of cognitive-behavioral group 
treatment for social phobia. Journal of Consulting and 
Clinical Psychology, 65, 694–698. 

Sanderson, W. C., Di Nardo, P. A., Rapee, R. M., & Barlow, 

D. H. (1990). Syndrome comorbidity in patients diagnosed 
with a DSM-III-R anxiety disorder. Journal of Abnormal 
Psychology, 99, 308–312. 
Sank, L. I., & Shaffer, C. S. (1984). A therapist’s manual for 
cognitive behavior therapy in groups. New York: Plenum 
Press. 

Schneier, F. R., Heckelman, L. R., Garfinkel, R., Campeas, 
R., Fallon, B. A., Gitow, A., et al. (1994). Functional impairment 
in social phobia. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 
55, 322–331. 

Schneier, F. R., Johnson, J., Hornig, C. D., Liebowitz, M. R., 
& Weissman, M. M. (1992). Social phobia: Comorbidity 
and morbidity in an epidemiologic sample. Archives of 
General Psychiatry, 49, 282–288. 

Scholing, A., & Emmelkamp, P. M. G. (1993). Exposure with 
and without cognitive therapy for generalized social phobia: 
Effects of individual and group treatment. Behaviour 
Research and Therapy, 31, 667–681. 

Segal, Z. V., Williams, J. M., & Teasdale, J. D. (2002). 
Mindfulness-based cognitive therapy for depression: A 
new approach to preventing relapse. New York: Guilford 
Press. 

Stangier, U., Heidenreich, T., Peitz, M., Lauterbach, W., & 
Clark, D. M. (2003). Cognitive therapy for social phobia: 
Individual versus group treatment. Behaviour Research 
and Therapy, 41, 991–1007. 

Stangier, U., Schramm, E., Heidenreich, T., Berger, M., & 
Clark, D. M. (2011). Cognitive therapy vs. interpersonal 
therapy in social anxiety disorder. Archives of General 
Psychiatry, 68, 692–700. 

Stopa, L., & Clark, D. M. (1993). Cognitive processes in social 
phobia. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 31, 255– 
267. 

Taylor, S., Woody, S., McLean, P. D., & Koch, W. J. (1997). 
Sensitivity of outcome measures for treatments of generalized 
social phobia. Assessment, 4, 181–191. 

Turner, S. M., Beidel, D. C., Dancu, C. V., & Stanley, M. A. 
(1989). An empirically derived inventory to measure social 
fears and anxiety: The Social Phobia and Anxiety Inventory. 
Psychological Assessment, 1, 35–40. 

Turner, S. M., Beidel, D. C., & Townsley, R. M. (1992). Social 
phobia: A comparison of specific and generalized subtype 
and avoidant personality disorder. Journal of Abnormal 
Psychology, 101, 326–331. 

Turner, S. M., Beidel, D. C., Wolff, P. L., Spaulding, S., & 
Jacob, R. G. (1996). Clinical features affecting treatment 
outcome in social phobia. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 
34, 795–804. 

Vriends, N., Becker, E. S., Meyer, A., Michael, T., & Margraf, 

J. (2007). Subtypes of social phobia: Are they of any use? 
Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 21, 59–75. 
Vriends, N., Becker, E. S., Meyer, A., Williams, S. L., Lutz, 
R., & Margraf, J. (2007). Recovery from social phobia in 
the community and its predictors: Data from a longitudinal 
epidemiological study. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 
21, 320–337. 

Wallace, S. T., & Alden, L. E. (1991). A comparison of social 
standards and perceived ability in anxious and nonanxious 
men. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 15, 237–254. 

Watson, D., & Friend, R. (1969). Measurement of socialevaluative 
anxiety. Journal of Consulting and Clinical 
Psychology, 33, 448–457. 

Weeks, J. W., Heimberg, R. G., Fresco, D. M., Hart, T. A., 
Turk, C. L., Schneier, F. R., et al. (2005). Empirical validation 
and psychometric evaluation of the Brief Fear of 
Negative Evaluation Scale in patients with social anxiety 
disorder. Psychological Assessment, 17, 179–190. 

Weeks, J. W., Heimberg, R. G., & Rodebaugh, T. L., & Nor



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

ton, P. J. (2008). Exploring the relationship between fear of 
positive evaluation and social anxiety. Journal of Anxiety 
Disorders, 22, 386–400. 

Weeks, J. W., Spokas, M. E., & Heimberg, R. G. (2007). Psychometric 
evaluation of the Mini–Social Phobia Inventory 
(Mini-SPIN) in a treatment-seeking sample. Depression 
and Anxiety, 24, 382–391. 

Wenzel, A. (2002). Characteristics of close relationships in 
individuals with social phobia: A preliminary comparison 
with nonanxious individuals. In J. H. Harvey & A. Wenzel 
(Eds.), A clinician’s guide to maintaining and enhancing 
close relationships (pp. 199–214). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 

Wlazlo, Z., Schroeder-Hartwig, K., Hand, I., Kaiser, G., & 
Münchau, N. (1990). Exposure in vivo vs. social skills 

training for social phobia: Long-term outcome and differential 
effects. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 28, 
181–193. 

Wolpe, J., & Lazarus, A. A. (1966). Behavior therapy techniques. 
New York: Pergamon. 

Wong, J., Gordon, E. A., & Heimberg, R. G. (2012). Social 
anxiey disorder. In P. Sturmey & M. Hersen (Eds.), Handbook 
of evidence-based practice in clinical psychology: 
Volume II, Adult disorders (pp. 621–649). New York: 
Wiley. 

Woody, S. R., & Adessky, R. S. (2002). Therapeutic alliance, 
group cohesion, and homework compliance during 
cognitive-behavioral group treatment of social phobia. Behavior 
Therapy, 35, 5–27. 


C H a P t e r 4 C H a P t e r 4 
obsessive–Compulsive Disorder 

MartiN e. fraNkliN 
eDNa B. foa 

it will not take the reader long to see that successful therapy for obsessive–compulsive 
disorder (oCD) is markedly different in both structure and content from the usual therapeutic 
approaches. for this reason, regrettably, few therapists feel self‑efficacious enough 
to undertake this therapy, yet this approach is clearly the treatment of choice for the most 
beneficial short‑ and long‑term effects in oCD according to clinical trials. The information 
provided in this detailed chapter should be sufficient for any reasonably well‑trained 
mental health professional to undertake this treatment, particularly if few other options 
are available. The suffering involved with oCD can be extraordinary, and even imperfect 
attempts at therapy can relieve much of this suffering. This chapter describes the detailed 
conduct of intensive daily sessions involving both imaginal and direct in vivo practice. 
Also noticeable is the ingenuity required of therapists (e.g., Where do you find dead animals?). 
The importance of involving significant others continues a theme first described 
by Craske and Barlow in Chapter 1 of this volume, in which spouses/partners or other 
people close to the individual with the problem become an important and integral part 
of treatment. finally, this chapter contains an up‑to‑date review of the current status of 
psychological and pharmacological approaches to oCD.—D. H. B. 

Advances in cognitive-behavioral and pharmacological 
treatments in the last four decades have greatly 
improved the prognosis for patients with obsessive– 
compulsive disorder (OCD). In this chapter we first 
discuss diagnostic and theoretical issues of OCD and 
review the available treatments, then describe assessment 
procedures and illustrate in detail how to implement 
intensive cognitive-behavioral treatment (CBT) 
involving exposure and ritual prevention (EX/RP) for 
OCD. Throughout the chapter, we use case material to 
illustrate interactions that occur between therapist and 
patient to demonstrate the process that occurs during 
treatment. 

DefiNitioN 

In the fifth edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical 
Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5; American Psychiatric 
Association, 2013), OCD is characterized by 
recurrent obsessions and/or compulsions that interfere 
substantially with daily functioning. Obsessions are 
“persistent thoughts, urges, or images that are experienced, 
at some time during the disturbance, as intrusive 
and unwanted, and that in most individuals cause 
marked anxiety or distress” (p. 237). Common obsessions 
are repeated thoughts about causing harm to others, 
contamination, and doubting whether one locked 

155 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

the front door. Compulsions are “repetitive behaviors 
or mental acts that the individual feels driven to perform 
in response to an obsession or according to rules 
that must be applied rigidly” (p. 237). Common compulsions 
include handwashing, checking, and counting. 
In DSM-5, OCD is categorized among obsessive– 
compulsive and related disorders (e.g., Stein et al., 
2010), which highlights the formal and functional similarity 
between OCD and several other disorders that involve 
intense anxiety and associated compulsions (e.g., 
body dysmorphic disorder), as well as those involving 
repetitive behaviors that appear to be driven by appetitive 
urges (e.g., trichotillomania [hair pulling], excoriation 
[skin picking] disorder; American Psychiatric 
Association, 2013). 

In DSM, the functional link between obsessions and 
compulsions is emphasized: “Obsessions” are defined 
as thoughts, images, or impulses that cause marked 
anxiety or distress, and “compulsions” are defined as 
overt (behavioral) or covert (mental) actions that are 
performed in an attempt to reduce the distress brought 
on by obsessions or according to rigid rules. This modification 
is supported by findings from the DSM-IV field 
trial on OCD, in which over 90% of participants reported 
that the aim of their compulsions was either to 
prevent harm associated with their obsessions or to reduce 
obsessional distress (Foa et al., 1995). 

Data from the DSM-IV field study also indicated 
that the vast majority (over 90%) of individuals with 
OCD manifest both obsessions and behavioral rituals. 
When mental rituals are also included, only 2% of the 
sample report “pure” obsessions (Foa et al., 1995). Behavioral 
rituals (e.g., handwashing) are equivalent to 
mental rituals (e.g., silently repeating special prayers) 
in their functional relationship to obsessions: Both 
serve to reduce obsessional distress, to prevent feared 
harm, or to restore safety. Thus, whereas all obsessions 
are indeed mental events, compulsions can be either 
mental or behavioral. Identification of mental rituals is 
an especially important aspect of treatment planning 
because obsessions and compulsions are addressed via 
different techniques. For example, we once treated a 
patient who described himself as a “pure obsessional,” 
who would experience intrusive and unwanted images 
of harm coming to his girlfriend by an animal attack. 
The patient would quickly and intentionally insert his 
own image into the scene to become the victim of the 
animal mauling, thereby reducing his distress and, in 
his estimation, reducing the likelihood that some future 
harm would come to his girlfriend. The substitution 

of his own image into the scene constituted a mental 
ritual, and the success of imaginal exposure exercises 
required that the patient refrain from this form of compulsion. 


A growing consensus about a continuum of insight 
in individuals with OCD (e.g., Foa et al., 1995; Insel & 
Akiskal, 1986) led to the inclusion in DSM-IV (American 
Psychiatric Association, 1994) of a subtype of 
OCD “with poor insight” to include individuals who 
indeed have obsessions and compulsions but fail to recognize 
their senselessness. In DSM-5, individuals are 
classified as having good or fair insight, poor insight, 
or absent insight/delusional beliefs, reflecting an even 
greater recognition of a continuum of insight in OCD 
(Leckman et al., 2010). Clinically it is important to 
evaluate the degree of insight prior to initiating CBT 
because fixed belief about the consequences of refraining 
from compulsions and avoidance behaviors has 
been found to be associated with attenuated treatment 
outcome (e.g., Foa, Abramowitz, Franklin, & Kozak, 
1999; Neziroglu, Stevens, Yaryura-Tobias, & McKay, 
2000). 

To be diagnosed with OCD, obsessions and/or compulsions 
must be found to be of sufficient severity to 
cause marked distress, be time-consuming, and interfere 
with daily functioning. If another Axis I disorder 
is present, the obsessions and compulsions cannot be 
restricted to the content of that disorder (e.g., preoccupation 
with food in the presence of eating disorders). 

PrevaleNce aND course of ocD 

Once thought to be an extremely rare disorder, the 12month 
prevalence of OCD was estimated at 1.0% in 
the recent National Comorbidity Survey Replication 
involving over 9,000 adult participants in the United 
States (Kessler et al., 2005). Epidemiological studies 
with children and adolescents suggest similar lifetime 
prevalence rates in these samples (e.g., Flament et al., 
1988; Valleni-Basille et al., 1994). Slightly more than 
half of adults suffering from OCD are female (Rasmussen 
& Tsuang, 1986), whereas a 2:1 male to female 
ratio has been observed in several pediatric clinical 
samples (e.g., Hanna, 1995; Swedo, Rapoport, Leonard, 
Lenane, & Cheslow, 1989). Age of onset of the disorder 
typically ranges from early adolescence to young 
adulthood, with earlier onset in males; modal onset is 
ages 13–15 in males, and ages 20–24 in females (Rasmussen 
& Eisen, 1990). However, cases of OCD have 


Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder 

been documented in children as young as age 2 (Rapoport, 
Swedo, & Leonard, 1992). 

Development of the disorder is usually gradual, but 
acute onset has been reported in some cases. Although 
chronic waxing and waning of symptoms are typical, 
episodic and deteriorating courses have been observed 
in about 10% of patients (Rasmussen & Eisen, 1989). 
In some cases of pediatric OCD and tic disorders, onset 
is very sudden and associated with streptococcal infection; 
treatment of the infection is associated with 
substantial reduction of symptoms, but recurrence of 
infection is again associated with symptom exacerbation 
(Swedo et al., 1998). Presentation of OCD in these 
cases, which is much more typical in males than in 
females, came to be known as pediatric autoimmune 
neuropsychiatric disorders associated with streptococcal 
infection (PANDAS) and has more recently been 
revised and broadened under the umbrella term “pediatric 
autoimmune neuropsychiatric syndrome” (PANS; 
Swedo, Leckman, & Rose, 2012); the prevalence of 
PANDAS or PANS has yet to be determined. OCD 
is frequently associated with impairments in general 
functioning, such as disruption of gainful employment 
(Koran, 2000; Leon, Portera, & Weissman, 1995) and 
interpersonal relationship difficulties (Emmelkamp, de 
Haan, & Hoogduin, 1990; Riggs, Hiss, & Foa, 1992). 
Adolescents identified as having OCD (Flament et al., 
1988) reported in a subsequent follow-up study that 
they had withdrawn socially to prevent contamination 
and to conserve energy for obsessive–compulsive behaviors 
(Flament et al., 1990). Many individuals with 
OCD suffer for years before seeking treatment. In one 
study, individuals first presented for psychiatric treatment 
over 7 years after the onset of significant symptoms 
(Rasmussen & Tsuang, 1986). The disorder may 
cause severe impairment in functioning that results in 
job loss and disruption of marital and other interpersonal 
relationships. Marital distress is reported by approximately 
50% of married individuals seeking treatment 
for OCD (Emmelkamp et al., 1990; Riggs et al., 
1992). 

coMorBiDity 

Convergent epidemiological and clinical data indicate 
that OCD rarely occurs in isolation: Although the rates 
of comorbidity differ across studies due to selection of 
population and methodology, comorbidity is generally 
high. For example, Weissman and colleagues (1994) 

found that 49% of individuals diagnosed with OCD suffered 
from a comorbid anxiety disorder and 27% from 
comorbid major depressive disorder (MDD). Among 
studies conducted specifically within anxiety clinics, 
there is great variability, but comorbid conditions are 
generally common (for a review, see Ledley, Pai, & 
Franklin, 2007). In the largest of the studies conducted 
in the context of an anxiety clinic, Brown, Campbell, 
Lehman, Grisham, and Mancill (2001) found that 57% 
of 77 adults with a principal diagnosis of OCD had 
a current comorbid Axis I condition; the rate rose to 
86% for lifetime comorbid Axis I conditions. Notably, 
when OCD co-occurs with other anxiety disorders, it 
is typically the principal diagnosis (e.g., the diagnosis 
of greatest severity; see Antony, Downie, & Swinson, 
1998). It also appears to be the case that MDD onset 
tends to follow that of OCD, suggesting that depression 
might be a response to OCD symptoms (Bellodi, 
Sciuto, Diaferia, Ronchi, & Smeraldi, 1992; Diniz et 
al., 2004). 

The data are equivocal with respect to the influence 
of comorbidity on OCD presentation. In one study, 
Denys, Tenney, van Megen, de Geus, and Westenberg 
(2004) found that comorbidity did not influence OCD 
symptom severity, whereas others (Angst, 1993; Tukel, 
Polat, Ozdemir, Aksut, & Turksov, 2002) found a relationship 
between comorbidity and OCD symptom severity. 
A more consistent finding is that comorbidity 
is associated with poorer quality of life, particularly 
in the case of comorbid depression (Lochner & Stein, 
2003; Masellis, Rector, & Richter, 2003). 

With respect to the effect of comorbid anxiety and 
depression on treatment outcome, the influence of depression 
has received more empirical attention to date. 
Some studies have found that higher levels of depression 
at pretreatment are related to poorer outcome (e.g., 
Keijsers, Hoogduin, & Schaap, 1994; Steketee, Chambless, 
& Tran, 2001), whereas others have found little 
or no effect (Mataix-Cols, Marks, Greist, Kobak, & 
Baer, 2002; O’Sullivan, Noshirvani, Marks, Monteiro, 
& Lelliott, 1991; Steketee, Eisen, Dyck, Warshaw, & 
Rasmussen, 1999). Some have suggested that, more 
specifically, the severity of the comorbid depression 
might influence its effects on OCD treatment outcome: 
Abramowitz, Franklin, Street, Kozak, and Foa (2000) 
found that only severely depressed patients were less 
likely to respond to EX/RP therapy for OCD. Similarly, 
highly depressed patients with OCD seem to be at 
greater risk for relapse following treatment discontinuation 
(Abramowitz & Foa, 2000; Basoglu, Lax, Kasvi



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

kis, & Marks, 1988). The influence of comorbid anxiety 
disorders on outcome has received less attention 
thus far: One study reported that patients with OCD 
and comorbid generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) terminate 
OCD treatment at higher rates than other patients 
(Steketee et al., 2001), and another found that the 
presence of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) in patients 
with OCD attenuated response to EX/RP (Gershuny, 
Baer, Jenike, Minichiello, & Wilhelm, 2002). 
Within pediatric OCD specifically, comorbidity other 
than a second anxiety disorder (e.g., externalizing disorder, 
mood disorder) was associated with poorer acute 
response to CBT (Storch et al., 2008), and another recent 
report indicated that comorbid attention-deficit/ 
hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) specifically attenuated 
CBT outcomes at follow-up among children and adolescents 
(Farrell, Waters, Milliner, & Ollendick, 2012). 
Notably, the mechanisms by which these comorbid 
conditions influence outcome have yet to be explored. 

Tourette syndrome and other tic disorders also appear 
to be related to OCD, although not sufficiently to 
be grouped within obsessive–compulsive and related 
disorders in DSM-5. Estimates of the comorbidity of 
Tourette syndrome and OCD range from 28 to 63% 
(Comings, 1990; Kurlan et al., 2002; Leckman & Chittenden, 
1990; Pauls, Towbin, Leckman, Zahner, & 
Cohen, 1986). Conversely, up to 17% of patients with 
OCD are thought to have Tourette syndrome (Comings, 
1990; Kurlan et al., 2002; Rasmussen & Eisen, 1989). 
In a recent report, tic comorbidity was associated with 
poorer treatment outcome in general (Matsunaga et 
al., 2005), yet in a recent pediatric study was found to 
influence pharmacotherapy treatment outcome but not 
CBT response (March et al., 2007). 

DiffereNtial DiaGNosis 

The high comorbidity of OCD with other disorders 
noted earlier, as well as the similarity between the criteria 
for OCD and other DSM disorders, can pose diagnostic 
quandaries. Below we review some of the more 
common diagnostic difficulties likely to confront clinicians 
and provide recommendations for making these 
difficult diagnostic judgments. 

Obsessions versus Depressive Rumination 

It is sometimes difficult to differentiate between depressive 
ruminations and obsessions. The distinction 
rests primarily on thought content and the patient’s re


ported resistance to such thoughts. Unlike obsessions, 
ruminations are typically pessimistic ideas about the 
self or the world, and ruminative content frequently 
shifts. Additionally, depressive ruminators tend to not 
make repeated attempts to suppress their ruminations 
the way individuals with OCD try to suppress obsessions. 
When depression and OCD co-occur, both phenomena 
may be present, but only obsessions should be 
targeted with exposure exercises. We have also found 
clinically that the generally pessimistic presentation of 
depressed patients can undermine hopefulness about 
improvement during EX/RP; thus, these beliefs may 
require therapeutic intervention even though they are 
not obsessional. 

Anxiety Disorders 

OCD was previously classified as an anxiety disorder 
in DSM-IV, and it often co-occurs with anxiety disorders. 
Diagnostic criteria are sometimes similar among 
these related (anxiety) disorders, but the symptoms 
associated with each diagnosis can usually be distinguished. 
For example, the excessive worries characteristic 
of GAD may appear similar to those in OCD 
but, unlike obsessions, worries are excessive concerns 
about real-life circumstances and are experienced by 
the individual as appropriate (ego-syntonic). In contrast, 
obsessive thinking is more likely to be unrealistic 
or magical, and obsessions are usually experienced by 
the individual as inappropriate (ego-dystonic). There 
are, however, exceptions to this general rule: Individuals 
with either GAD or OCD may worry about everyday 
matters, such as their children getting sick. However, 
when worried about their children catching cold, 
parents with GAD might focus their concern on the 
long-term consequences (e.g., falling behind in school, 
development of a lifelong pattern of debilitation), 
whereas parents with OCD might focus more on the 
contamination aspect of illness (e.g., their child being 
infested with “cold germs”). The problem of distinguishing 
between obsessions and worries in a particular 
patient is most relevant when the patient exhibits 
no compulsions, but, as we mentioned earlier, pure obsessionals 
comprise only about 2% of individuals with 
OCD (Foa et al., 1995). 

In the absence of rituals, the avoidance associated 
with specific phobias may also appear similar to OCD. 
For example, excessive fear of germs and specific phobia 
both may result in persistent fear of dogs. However, 
unlike an individual with OCD, a person with a specific 
phobia can successfully avoid dogs for the most part, or 


Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder 

reduce distress quickly by escaping dogs when avoidance 
is impractical. In contrast, the individual with 
OCD who is obsessed with “dog germs” continues to 
feel contaminated even after the dog is gone, and sometimes 
knowing that a dog was in the vicinity several 
hours earlier can also produce obsessional distress even 
if there is no possibility that the dog will return. This 
distress often prompts subsequent avoidance behaviors 
(e.g., taking off clothing that might have been near the 
contaminating dog) not typically observed in specific 
phobias. 

Body Dysmorphic Disorder 

The preoccupation with imagined physical defects of 
body dysmorphic disorder (BDD) is formally similar 
to the obsessions of OCD, and BDD is grouped with 
obsessive–compulsive and related disorders in DSM-5. 
The best way to differentiate between this disorder and 
OCD is to examine for content specificity of the fearprovoking 
thoughts. Most individuals with BDD are 
singly obsessed, whereas most individuals with OCD 
have multiple obsessions. 

Tourette Syndrome and Tic Disorders 

To differentiate the stereotyped motor behaviors that 
characterize Tourette syndrome and tic disorders from 
compulsions, the functional relationship between these 
behaviors and any obsessive thoughts must be examined. 
Motor tics are generally experienced as involuntary 
and are not aimed at neutralizing distress brought 
about by obsessions. There is no conventional way to 
differentiate them from “pure” compulsions, but OCD 
with “pure” compulsions is extremely rare (Foa et al., 
1995). As noted earlier, there appears to be a high rate 
of comorbidity between OCD and tic disorders (e.g., 
Pauls et al., 1986); thus, both disorders may be present 
simultaneously in a given patient. Interestingly, tics 
were similarly responsive to an EX/RP protocol when 
compared in a randomized study to habit-reversal training 
in which a competing response is substituted for the 
tic; this finding suggests that the conceptual model underlying 
the treatment of tics might require modification 
(Verdellen, Keijsers, Cath, & Hoogduin, 2004). 

Delusional Disorder and Schizophrenia 

Individuals with OCD may present with obsessions of 
delusional intensity (for a review, see Kozak & Foa, 
1994). Approximately 5% of patients with OCD report 

complete conviction that their obsessions and compulsions 
are realistic, with an additional 20% reporting 
strong but not fixed conviction. Therefore, it is important 
to consider the diagnosis of OCD “with poor insight” 
even if these beliefs are very strongly held. The 
differentiation between delusional disorder and OCD 
can depend on the presence of compulsions in OCD 
(Eisen et al., 1998). In OCD, obsessions of delusional 
intensity are usually accompanied by compulsions. 

It is also important to recognize that the content of 
obsessions in OCD may be quite bizarre, as in the delusions 
of schizophrenia, but bizarreness in and of itself 
does not preclude a diagnosis of OCD. For example, 
one patient seen at our center was fearful that small bits 
of her “essence” would be forever lost if she passed too 
close to public trash cans. This patient did not report 
any other symptoms of formal thought disorder, such 
as loose associations, hallucinations, flat or grossly inappropriate 
affect, and thought insertion or projection. 
Following a course of EX/RP that focused on exercises 
designed to expose the patient to the loss of her “essence” 
(e.g., driving by the city dump), her OCD symptoms 
were substantially reduced. On occasion patients 
do meet diagnostic criteria for both OCD and schizophrenia, 
and a dual diagnosis is appropriate under these 
circumstances. Importantly, EX/RP with such patients 
should proceed only if the associated treatment exercises 
do not exacerbate the comorbid thought disorder 
symptoms. 

coGNitive aND Behavioral MoDels 

Mowrer’s (1939) two-stage theory for the acquisition 
and maintenance of fear and avoidance behavior has 
been commonly adopted to explain phobias and OCD. 
As elaborated by Mowrer (1960), this theory proposes 
that in the first stage, a neutral event becomes associated 
with fear by being paired with a stimulus that by 
its nature provokes discomfort or anxiety. Through 
conditioning processes, objects, as well as thoughts and 
images, acquire the ability to produce discomfort. In 
the second stage of this process, escape or avoidance 
responses are developed to reduce the anxiety or discomfort 
evoked by the various conditioned stimuli and 
are maintained by their success in doing so. Dollard 
and Miller (1950) adopted Mowrer’s two-stage theory 
to explain the development of phobias and obsessive– 
compulsive neurosis. As noted earlier, because of the 
intrusive nature of obsessions, many situations that 
provoke obsessions cannot readily be avoided. Passive 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

avoidance behaviors, such as those utilized by phobics, 
are also less effective in controlling obsessional distress. 
Active avoidance patterns in the form of ritualistic 
behaviors are then developed and maintained by 
their success in alleviating this distress. 

In light of equivocal empirical support for the twostage 
theory and its limitations in explaining the etiology 
of obsessions, several cognitive explanations were 
proposed to account for the development and maintenance 
of OCD symptoms (e.g., Beck, 1976; Carr, 
1974). Salkovskis (1985) offered a more comprehensive 
cognitive analysis of OCD. He posited that intrusive 
obsessional thoughts are stimuli that may provoke 
certain types of negative automatic thoughts. Accordingly, 
an intrusive thought leads to mood disturbances 
only if it triggers negative automatic thoughts through 
interaction between the unacceptable intrusion and the 
individual’s belief system (e.g., only bad people have 
sexual thoughts). According to Salkovskis, exaggerated 
senses of responsibility and self-blame are the central 
themes in the belief system of a person with OCD. 
Neutralization, in the form of behavioral or cognitive 
compulsions, may be understood as an attempt to reduce 
this sense of responsibility and to prevent blame. 
In addition, frequently occurring thoughts regarding 
unacceptable actions may be perceived by the individual 
with OCD as equivalent to the actions themselves, 
so, for example, even if the person has not sinned, the 
thought of sinning is as bad as sinning itself. 

Salkovskis (1985) further proposed that five dysfunctional 
assumptions characterize individuals with OCD 
and differentiate them from persons without OCD: 

(1) Having a thought about an action is like performing 
the action; (2) failing to prevent (or failing to try 
to prevent) harm to self or others is the same as having 
caused the harm in the first place; (3) responsibility is 
not attenuated by other factors (e.g., low probability of 
occurrence); (4) not neutralizing when an intrusion has 
occurred is similar or equivalent to seeking or wanting 
the harm involved in that intrusion to actually happen; 
(5) one should (and can) exercise control over one’s 
thoughts. (p. 579) 
Thus, while the obsession may be ego-dystonic, the 
automatic thought it elicits will be ego-syntonic. By 
extension, this model suggests that treatment of OCD 
should largely focus on identifying the erroneous assumptions 
and modifying the automatic thoughts. This 
theory paved the way for various elaborations on the 
cognitive models, experimental studies of the model, 

and the development of cognitive therapies that derive 
from the central role of these key cognitive factors. 

Salkovskis’s (1985) theory sparked examination of 
the role of responsibility in the psychopathology of 
OCD (Ladoucer et al., 1995; Rachman, Thordarson, 
Shafran, & Woody, 1995; Rhéaume, Freeston, Dugas, 
Letarte, & Ladoucer, 1995). Further attention has been 
paid to what Rachman (1998) referred to as thought– 
action fusion (TAF), wherein individuals believe that 
simply having an unacceptable thought increases the 
likelihood of the occurrence of a feared outcome, and 
that thoughts of engaging in repugnant activities are 
equivalent to actually having done so. Contemporary 
cognitive theorists would then suggest that obsessive– 
compulsive beliefs such as TAF, exaggerated responsibility, 
and intolerance of uncertainty likely result in 
increased and ultimately futile efforts at thought suppression 
and other ill-advised mental control strategies, 
which would then yield increased frequency of 
such thoughts and associated distress (Purdon & Clark, 
2002). Hence, a vicious cycle of avoidance maintains 
and strengthens the OCD, and the cognitive therapies 
that derive from these contemporary models would directly 
target these obsessive–compulsive beliefs in an 
effort to break the cycle. 

In an integrated cognitive-behavioral account, Foa 
and Kozak (1985) conceptualized anxiety disorders in 
general as specific impairments in emotional memory 
networks. Following Lang (1979), they view fear as an 
information network existing in memory that includes 
representation about fear stimuli, fear responses, and 
their meaning. With regard to the fear content, Foa 
and Kozak suggested that fear networks of individuals 
with anxiety disorders are characterized by the presence 
of erroneous estimates of threat, unusually high 
negative valence for the feared event, and excessive 
response elements (e.g., physiological reactivity), and 
are resistant to modification. This persistence may reflect 
failure to access the fear network because of either 
active avoidance or because the content of the fear 
network precludes spontaneous encounters with situations 
that evoke anxiety in everyday life. Additionally, 
anxiety may persist because of some impairment in the 
mechanism of extinction. Cognitive defenses, excessive 
arousal with failure to habituate, faulty premises, and 
erroneous rules of inference are all impairments that 
would hinder the processing of information necessary 
for modifying the fear structure to reduce fear behavior. 

Foa and Kozak (1985) suggested that several forms 
of fear occur in individuals with OCD. The patient 


Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder 

who fears contracting venereal disease from public 
bathrooms and washes to prevent such harm has a fear 
structure that includes excessive associations between 
the stimuli (e.g., bathroom) and the anxiety/distress 
responses, as well as mistaken beliefs about the harm 
related to the stimulus. For other individuals with OCD, 
fear responses are associated with mistaken meaning 
rather than with a particular stimulus. For example, 
some patients who are disturbed by perceived asymmetry, 
and who reduce their distress by rearranging objects, 
do not fear the objects themselves, nor do they anticipate 
disaster from the asymmetry. Rather, they are 
upset by their view that certain arrangements of stimuli 
are “improper.” 

Like Reed (1985), Foa and Kozak (1985) proposed 
that in addition to the pathological content of the obsessions, 
OCD is distinguished from other disorders by 
pathology in the mechanisms underlying information 
processing. Specifically, they suggested that patients 
with OCD experience impairments in considering the 
rules for making inferences about harm, often concluding 
that a situation is dangerous based on the absence 
of evidence for safety, and that they often fail to make 
inductive leaps about safety from information about the 
absence of danger. Consequently, rituals performed to 
reduce the likelihood of harm can never provide safety 
and must be repeated. In an elaboration on emotional 
processing theory and the mechanism by which exposure 
works, Foa, Huppert, and Cahill (2006) suggested 
that in vivo exposure to the feared stimulus in the absence 
of the anticipated harm corrects the exaggerated 
probability estimates; imaginal exposure not only corrects 
the exaggerated cost but also strengthens the discrimination 
between “thoughts about harm” and “real 
harm,” thus altering the associations between threat 
meaning of stimulus and/or response elements in the 
fear structure. 

In contrast to the more general theories of OCD described 
earlier, some theorists have posed more specific 
hypotheses to account for the pathology observed in 
certain OCD subtypes. For example, clinical observations 
led some investigators to hypothesize that memory 
deficits for actions underlie compulsive checking 
(e.g., Sher, Frost, & Otto, 1983). However, the results 
of experimental investigations of this hypothesis are 
equivocal. Some support for an action–memory deficit 
was found in nonclinical individuals with checking 
rituals (e.g., Rubenstein, Peynircioglu, Chambless, 
& Pigott, 1993; Sher et al., 1983). In contrast, a study 
using a clinical sample found that compared to nonpa


tients, patients with OCD with checking rituals better 
recalled their fear-relevant actions (e.g., plugging in an 
iron, unsheathing a knife), but not fear-irrelevant actions 
(e.g., putting paper clips in a box; Constans, Foa, 
Franklin, & Mathews, 1995). From these data, it appears 
that checking is not motivated primarily by memory 
problems; hence, teaching mnemonic strategies to 
patients with OCD with checking rituals is probably 
not the optimal clinical strategy; rather, having patients 
repeatedly confront the low-risk situations that provoke 
obsessional distress, while simultaneously refraining 
from checking behavior or mental reviewing of actions, 
is preferred. 

treatMeNts 

Exposure and Ritual Prevention 

The prognostic picture for OCD has improved dramatically 
since Victor Meyer (1966) first reported on two 
patients who responded well to a treatment that included 
prolonged exposure to obsessional cues and strict 
prevention of rituals. This procedure, known at the 
time as exposure and ritual prevention (EX/RP), was 
later found to be extremely successful in 10 of 15 cases 
and partly effective in the remainder. Patients treated 
with this regimen also appeared to maintain their treatment 
gains: At a 5-year follow-up, only two of these patients 
had relapsed (Meyer & Levy, 1973; Meyer, Levy, 
& Schnurer, 1974). 

As was the case with Meyer’s program, current EX/ 
RP treatments typically include both prolonged exposure 
to obsessional cues and procedures aimed at 
blocking rituals. Exposure exercises are often done in 
real-life settings (in vivo), for example, by asking the 
patient who fears accidentally causing a house fire by 
leaving the stove on, to leave the house without checking 
the burners. When patients report specific feared 
consequences of refraining from rituals, these fears 
may also be addressed via imaginal exposure. In fact, in 
vivo and imaginal exposure exercises are designed specifically 
to prompt obsessional distress. It is believed 
that repeated, prolonged exposure to feared thoughts 
and situations provides information that disconfirms 
mistaken associations and evaluations held by the patients 
and thereby promotes habituation (Foa & Kozak, 
1986). Exposure is usually done gradually by confronting 
situations that provoke moderate distress before 
confronting more upsetting ones. Exposure homework 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

is routinely assigned between sessions, and patients are 
also asked to refrain from rituals. 

Since Meyer’s (1966) initial positive report of the efficacy 
of EX/RP, many subsequent studies of EX/RP 
have indicated that most EX/RP treatment completers 
make and maintain clinically significant gains. Randomized 
controlled trials (RCTs) have indicated that 
EX/RP is superior to a variety of control treatments, 
including placebo medication (Marks, Stern, Mawson, 
Cobb, & McDonald, 1980), relaxation (Fals-Stewart, 
Marks, & Schafer, 1993), and anxiety management 
training (Lindsay, Crino, & Andrews, 1997). Foa and 
Kozak’s (1996) review of 12 outcome studies (N = 330) 
reporting treatment responder rates indicated that 83% 
of EX/RP treatment completers were classified as responders 
at posttreatment. In 16 studies reporting longterm 
outcome (N = 376; mean follow-up interval of 
29 months), 76% were responders. Moreover, several 
studies have now indicated that these encouraging findings 
for EX/RP are not limited to highly selected RCT 
samples (Franklin, Abramowitz, Kozak, Levitt, & Foa, 
2000; Rothbaum & Shahar, 2000; Valderhaug, Larsson, 
Gotestam, & Piacentini, 2007; Warren & Thomas, 
2001). 

In general, EX/RP has been found quite effective in 
ameliorating OCD symptoms and has produced great 
durability of gains following treatment discontinuation. 
In our review of the literature, it also was apparent that 
among the many variants of EX/RP treatment, some 
are relevant for outcome and others are not. We review 
the literature on the relative efficacy of the ingredients 
that comprise EX/RP to help clinicians decide which 
EX/RP components are most essential. 

EX/RP Treatment Variables 

exPosUre VersUs riTUAl PreVenTion 
VersUs ex/rP 

To separate the effects of exposure and ritual prevention 
on OCD symptoms, Foa, Steketee, Grayson, Turner, 
and Latimer (1984) randomly assigned patients with 
washing rituals to treatment by exposure only (EX), 
ritual prevention only (RP), or their combination (EX/ 
RP). Each treatment was conducted intensively (15 
daily 2-hour sessions conducted over 3 weeks) and followed 
by a home visit. Patients in each condition were 
found to be improved at both posttreatment and followup, 
but EX/RP was superior to the single-component 
treatments on almost every symptom measure at both 

assessment points. In comparing EX and RP, patients 
who received EX reported lower anxiety when confronting 
feared contaminants than did patients who had 
received RP, whereas the RP group reported greater 
decreases in urge to ritualize than did the EX patients. 
Thus, it appears that EX and RP affected different 
OCD symptoms. The findings from this study clearly 
suggest that EX and RP should be implemented concurrently; 
treatments that do not include both components 
yield inferior outcome. It is important to convey 
this information to patients, especially when they are 
experiencing difficulty either refraining from rituals or 
engaging effectively in exposure exercises during and 
between sessions. 

iMPleMenTATion of riTUAl PreVenTion 

Promoting abstinence from rituals during treatment 
is thought to be essential for successful treatment outcome, 
but the preferred method of RP has changed over 
the years. In Meyer’s (1966) EX/RP treatment program, 
hospital staff members physically prevented patients 
from performing rituals (e.g., turning off the water 
supply in a patient’s room). However, physical intervention 
by staff or family members to prevent patients 
from ritualizing is no longer typical nor recommended. 
It is believed that such prevention techniques are too 
coercive to be an accepted practice today. Moreover, 
physical prevention by others may actually limit generalizability 
to nontherapy situations in which others 
are not present to intercede. Instead, instructions and 
encouragement to refrain from ritualizing and avoidance 
are now recommended. As noted earlier, although 
exposure in itself can reduce obsessional distress, it is 
not so effective in reducing compulsions. To maximize 
treatment effects, the patient needs to refrain voluntarily 
from ritualizing while engaging in systematic exposure 
exercises. The therapist should strongly emphasize 
the importance of refraining from rituals and help the 
patient with this difficult task by providing support, 
encouragement, and suggestions about alternatives to 
ritualizing. 

Use of iMAginAl exPosUre 

Treatment involving imaginal plus in vivo EX/RP at 
follow-up was superior to an in vivo EX/RP program 
that did not include imaginal exposure (Foa, Steketee, 
Turner, & Fischer, 1980; Steketee, Foa, & Grayson, 


Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder 

1982). However, a second study did not find that the 
addition of imaginal exposure enhanced long-term efficacy 
compared to in vivo exposure only (De Araujo, 
Ito, Marks, & Deale, 1995). The treatment program in 
the former study differed from that of De Araujo and 
colleagues on several parameters (e.g., 90-minute vs. 
30-minute imaginal exposures, respectively); thus, the 
source of these studies’ inconsistencies cannot be identified. 


In our clinical work, we have found imaginal exposure 
to be helpful for patients who report that disastrous 
consequences will result if they refrain from rituals. 
Because many of these consequences cannot be readily 
translated into in vivo exposure exercises (e.g., burning 
in hell), imaginal exposure allows the patient an opportunity 
to confront these feared thoughts. Also, the 
addition of imagery to in vivo exposure may circumvent 
the cognitive avoidance strategies used by patients 
who intentionally try not to consider the consequences 
of exposure while confronting feared situations in vivo. 
In summary, although imaginal exposure does not appear 
essential for immediate outcome, it may enhance 
long-term maintenance and be used as an adjunct to in 
vivo exercises for patients who fear disastrous consequences. 
For patients who only report extreme distress 
as a consequence of refraining from rituals and avoidance 
behaviors, imaginal exposure may not be needed. 

grADUAl VersUs ABrUPT exPosUres 

No differences in OCD symptom reduction were detected 
in a study comparing patients who confronted 
the most distressing situations from the start of therapy 
to those who confronted less distressing situations 
first, yet patients preferred the more gradual approach 
(Hodgson, Rachman, & Marks, 1972). However, because 
patient motivation and agreement with treatment 
goals are core elements of successful EX/RP, situations 
of moderate difficulty are usually confronted first, followed 
by several intermediate steps, before the most 
distressing exposures are attempted. Thus, we emphasize 
that exposure will proceed at a pace that is acceptable 
to the patient, and that no exposure will ever be 
attempted without the patient’s approval. At the same 
time, it is preferable to confront the highest item on the 
treatment hierarchy relatively early in treatment (e.g., 
within the first week of intensive treatment) to allow 
sufficient time to repeat these difficult exposures over 
the later sessions. 

DUrATion of exPosUre 

Duration of exposure was once believed to be important 
for outcome in that prolonged, continuous exposure 
was found to be more effective than short, interrupted 
exposure (Rabavilas, Boulougouris, & Perissaki, 
1979). Indeed, reduction in anxiety (habitation) across 
sessions has been associated with improvement following 
exposure-based treatments for OCD and for 
PTSD (e.g., Jaycox, Foa, & Morral, 1998; Kozak, Foa, 
& Steketee, 1988; van Minnen & Hagenaars, 2002). 
However, several studies have not found a strong relationship 
between within-session habituation and fear 
and symptom reduction (Jaycox et al., 1998; Kozak et 
al., 1988; Mathews, Johnston, Shaw, & Gelder, 1974; 
Rowe & Craske, 1998). In an elaboration on emotional 
processing theory, Foa and colleagues (2006) 
found that the recent deemphasis on the relationship 
between within-session habituation and outcome is 
not critical to emotional processing theory because the 
proposed mechanism underlying symptom reduction 
is the modification of the relevant erroneous associations 
through disconfirming information, not through 
habituation per se. In practical terms, this means patients 
should be instructed that although, optimally, 
they should persist with exposure until the anxiety is 
substantially reduced, the more important factor is repeating 
the same exposures, to promote reduction of 
associated anxiety over time. Patients with OCD might 
be particularly vulnerable to fears of ending exposures 
“too soon,” hence, doing the treatment incorrectly, so 
this new instruction might help encourage patients to 
go about their business without ritualizing or avoiding, 
regardless of whether anxiety still lingers on from an 
exposure task. The deemphasis on the critical importance 
of habituation in the moment is more pronounced 
procedurally when using acceptance and commitment 
therapy (e.g., Twohig et al., 2010), but generally speaking 
this viewpoint appears to be gaining acceptance 
among cognitive-behavioral therapists as well. For example, 
clinically we often remind patients that whether 
or not they are anxious is less relevant than what they 
do (or do not do) when they are anxious, since ritualizing 
and avoidance will maintain fear down the line. 

freqUenCy of exPosUre sessions 

Optimal frequency of exposure sessions has yet to 
be established. Intensive exposure therapy programs 
that have achieved excellent results (e.g., Foa, Kozak, 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

Steketee, & McCarthy, 1992) typically involve daily 
sessions over the course of approximately 1 month, but 
quite favorable outcomes have also been achieved with 
more widely spaced sessions (e.g., Abramowitz, Foa, & 
Franklin, 2003; De Araujo et al., 1995; Franklin et al., 
1998). A recent RCT in pediatric OCD found no difference 
between intensive and weekly treatment (Storch et 
al., 2007). Clinically, we have found that less frequent 
sessions may be sufficient for highly motivated patients 
with mild to moderate OCD symptoms, who readily 
understand the importance of daily exposure homework. 
Patients with very severe symptoms or those who 
for various reasons cannot readily comply with EX/RP 
tasks between sessions, are typically offered intensive 
treatment. 

THerAPisT‑AssisTeD VersUs self‑exPosUre 

Evaluations of the presence of a therapist during exposure 
have yielded inconsistent results. In one study, 
patients with OCD receiving therapist-assisted exposure 
were more improved immediately posttreatment 
than those receiving clomipramine and self-exposure, 
but this difference was not evident at follow-up (Marks 
et al., 1988). However, these results are difficult to interpret 
in light of the study’s complex design. A second 
study using patients with OCD also indicated that 
therapist-assisted treatment was not superior to selfexposure 
at posttreatment or at follow-up (Emmelkamp 
& van Kraanen, 1977), but the number of patients in 
each condition was too small to render these findings 
conclusive. In contrast to the negative findings 
of Marks and colleagues (1988) and Emmelkamp and 
van Kraanen (1977), therapist presence yielded superior 
outcome of a single, 3-hour exposure session compared 
to self-exposure for persons with specific phobia 
(Öst, 1989). Because specific phobias are, on the 
whole, less disabling and easier to treat than OCD, one 
may surmise that therapist presence should also influence 
treatment outcome with OCD. Moreover, using 
meta-analytic procedures, Abramowitz (1996) found 
that therapist-controlled exposure was associated with 
greater improvement in OCD and GAD symptoms 
compared to self-controlled procedures. A recent study 
found comparable outcome for patients receiving EX/ 
RP with therapist assistance and those who received 
teletherapy (Lovell et al., 2006), which further raises 
the question of whether therapist assistance is required 
for good outcome. In light of these inconsistent findings, 
no clear answer is available on the role of thera


pist assistance with exposure tasks in OCD treatment. 
However, we have found clinically that the presence of 
a therapist can be useful in helping patients to remain 
engaged in exposures while anxiety is high, to avoid 
subtle rituals or avoidance behaviors during exposure 
(e.g., distraction, mental rituals), and to remain sufficiently 
motivated despite distress. Researchers have 
begun to examine the question of whether telephone 
therapy or Skype would also be effective, including 
adapted CBT protocols for Tourette syndrome (Himle, 
Olufs, Himle, Tucker, & Woods, 2010 ) and OCD specifically 
(e.g., Bachofen et al., 1999); such research may 
provide greater confidence that these methods can be 
used efficaciously, which will help to address the ongoing 
problem of the paucity of OCD treatment expertise 
that plagues most communities. 

EX/RP versus Other Treatment Approaches 

In this section we review the literature on the efficacy 
of standard individual EX/RP treatment versus other 
therapeutic approaches, including group treatment, 
family-based EX/RP treatment, cognitive therapy, and 
pharmacotherapy. 

inDiViDUAl VersUs groUP ex/rP 

Intensive individual EX/RP, although effective, can 
pose practical obstacles such as high cost for treatment, 
and scheduling problems for patient and therapist alike. 
Additionally, because experts in EX/RP treatment are 
few and far between, patients may need to wait for long 
periods or travel substantial distances to be treated. 
Thus, some researchers have begun to examine the 
efficacy of more affordable and efficient treatment 
modalities. One such alternative is group treatment. 
Fals-Stewart and colleagues (1993) conducted a controlled 
study in which patients with OCD were randomly 
assigned to individual EX/RP, group EX/RP, or 
a psychosocial control condition (relaxation). Each of 
the active treatments was 12 weeks long, with sessions 
held twice weekly, and included daily exposure homework. 
Significant improvement in OCD symptoms was 
evident in both active treatments, with no differences 
detected between individual and group EX/RP immediately 
posttreatment or at 6-month follow-up. Profile 
analysis of OCD symptom ratings collected throughout 
treatment did indicate a faster reduction in symptoms 
for patients receiving individual treatment. These 
results offer evidence for the efficacy of group treat



Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder 

ment. However, because patients were excluded from 
this study if they were diagnosed with any personality 
disorder or with comorbid depression, it may be that 
the sample was somewhat atypical. In addition, none of 
the participants had received previous OCD treatment, 
which is also unusual for this population and suggestive 
of a less symptomatic sample. Thus, inferences about 
the broader OCD population merit caution until these 
results are replicated. 

More recently, Barrett, Healy-Farrell, and March 
(2004) found that individual and group CBT were 
highly and similarly efficacious for children and adolescents 
with OCD relative to a wait-list control; this 
raises the possibility that group interventions might 
hold particular promise in the treatment of youth with 
OCD. Also in youth, Asbahr and colleagues (2005) 
found group CBT and sertraline comparable at posttreatment, 
but there was less relapse in the former 
condition. More recently, another Australian research 
group found comparable outcomes for group treatment 
compared to individual treatment, both of which were 
superior to a wait-list control (Anderson & Rees, 2007); 
not surprisingly, though, individual treatment was associated 
with more rapid response. 

fAMily inVolVeMenT 
VersUs sTAnDArD ex/rP TreATMenT 

Emmelkamp and colleagues (1990) examined whether 
family involvement in treatment would enhance the 
efficacy of EX/RP for OCD. Patients who were married 
or living with a romantic partner were randomly 
assigned to receive EX/RP either with or without partner 
involvement in treatment. Results indicated that 
OCD symptoms were significantly lowered following 
treatment for both groups. No differences between the 
treatments emerged, and initial marital distress did not 
predict outcome. However, the reduction in anxiety/ 
distress reported for the sample as a whole was modest 
(33%), which may have resulted from the relatively 
short treatment sessions and absence of in vivo exposure 
exercises in treatment sessions. 

Mehta (1990) also examined the effect of family 
involvement on EX/RP treatment outcome. To adapt 
the treatment to serve the large numbers of young unmarried 
people seeking OCD treatment and the “joint 
family system” prevalent in India, Mehta used a familybased 
rather than spouse-based treatment approach. 
Patients who did not respond to previous pharmacotherapy 
were randomly assigned to receive treatment 

by systematic desensitization and EX/RP, either with 
or without family assistance. Sessions in both conditions 
were held twice per week for 12 weeks; response 
prevention was described as “gradual.” In the family 
condition, a designated family member (parent, spouse, 
or adult child) assisted with homework assignments, 
supervised relaxation therapy, participated in response 
prevention, and was instructed to be supportive. On 
self-reported OCD symptoms, a greater improvement 
was found for the family-based intervention at posttreatment 
and 6-month follow-up. Although this study 
had methodological problems that complicate interpretation 
of findings (e.g., use of self-report OCD measures 
only, unclear description of treatment procedures), it 
offers some preliminary evidence that family involvement 
may be helpful in OCD treatment. Clinically, we 
routinely enlist the support of family members in EX/ 
RP, providing psychoeducation about the illness and 
its consequences during the early stages of treatment 
planning, and advice and encouragement in managing 
the patient’s request for assurances, his or her avoidant 
behaviors, and violation of EX/RP rules between 
sessions. We also try to reduce family members’ criticism 
of the patient and unconstructive arguing about 
OCD and related matters when these issues arise in the 
therapy. 

Published randomized studies of CBT for OCD with 
youth have each included parents at least to some extent 
in treatment (Barrett et al., 2004; de Haan, Hoogduin, 
Buitelaar, & Keijsers, 1998; Pediatric OCD Treatment 
Study Team, 2004), and a direct comparison of CBT, 
with and without a family component, using an otherwise 
identical protocol has yet to be conducted in pediatric 
OCD. Research on whether family involvement 
enhances individual CBT outcomes in other anxiety 
disorders has generally yielded mixed findings, however, 
and a large, recently completed RCT indicated that 
both forms of treatment are efficacious and essentially 
equivalent to one another (Bogels & Bodden, 2005). 
Higher family dysfunction in general was associated 
with poorer long-term outcome in a recent study (Barrett, 
Farrell, Dadds, & Boulter, 2005), as was family accommodation 
of OCD rituals specifically (Peris et al., 
2012), and at this point it might be clinically prudent 
to include a more comprehensive family component 
when family members are very directly involved in 
the patient’s rituals (e.g., reassurance seeking) or when 
family psychopathology threatens generalizability of 
treatment gains to a chaotic home environment. It also 
may be that greater family involvement in treatment is 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

needed when the patient is very young (Freeman et al., 
2003, 2007). 

ex/rP VersUs CogniTiVe THerAPies 

Increased interest in cognitive therapy (e.g., Beck, 
1976; Ellis, 1962), coupled with dissatisfaction with 
formulations of treatment mediated by processes such 
as extinction (Stampfl & Levis, 1967) or habituation 
(Watts, 1973), prompted examination of the efficacy of 
cognitive procedures for anxiety disorders in general 
and for OCD in particular. A number of early studies 
found few differences between standard behavioral 
treatments and behavioral treatments enhanced with 
various cognitive approaches (e.g., Emmelkamp & 
Beens, 1991; Emmelkamp, Visser, & Hoekstra, 1988). 
Recent advances in cognitive conceptualizations of 
OCD have apparently yielded more efficacious and 
durable cognitive treatments. Freeston and colleagues 
(1997) found a cognitive-behavioral intervention efficacious 
compared to a wait-list control group for patients 
with “pure” obsessions. Several other studies (Cottraux 
et al., 2001; McLean et al., 2001; Vogel, Stiles, 
& Götestam, 2004; Whittal, Thordarson, & McLean, 
2005) have suggested equivalent results for CBT and 
EX/RP, respectively, although some procedural overlap 
between the two conditions in these studies makes their 
findings difficult to interpret. In concert with studies attesting 
to the utility of cognitively oriented approaches 
for conditions that are quite similar to OCD, such as 
hypochondriasis (Barsky & Ahern, 2004; Warwick, 
Clark, Cobb, & Salkovskis, 1996), it does appear that 
cognitive therapies hold promise for the treatment of 
OCD and might be an efficacious potential alternative 
to EX/RP. More recently, however, Whittal, Woody, 
McLean, Rachman, and Robichaud (2010) failed to 
find a difference between cognitive therapy and stress 
management training (SMT) for a sample with primary 
obsessions and mental rituals, although this appeared 
to be due to the fact that SMT yielded substantial and 
lasting benefit compared to pretreatment rather than 
because cognitive therapy did not. 

The question of whether cognitive therapy improves 
the efficacy of EX/RP is generally difficult to discern 
because both exposure therapy and cognitive therapy 
are intended to modify mistaken cognitions. An RCT 
that compared “pure” forms of CT or EX/RP, with or 
without medication, found similar, yet somewhat attentuated, 
outcomes relative to what might typically 
be expected from either treatment (van Balkom et al., 

1998). Foa and Kozak (1986) argued that the disconfirmation 
of erroneous associations and beliefs is a 
crucial mechanism underlying the efficacy of exposure 
treatments, hence disputing discussions that mistaken 
cognitions from EX/RP might be expected to hamper 
outcome. For example, a patient and therapist sitting 
on the bathroom floor in a public restroom conducting 
an exposure to contaminated surfaces routinely 
discuss risk assessment, probability overestimation, 
and so forth, as the therapist helps the patient achieve 
the cognitive modification necessary for improvement. 
The practical issue of interest is how to maximize efficacy: 
Is informal discussion of cognitive distortions 
during the exposure exercises sufficient, or should the 
therapist engage in formal Socratic questioning of hypothesized 
distortions, such as inflated responsibility? 
Notably, in a meta-analytic review, cognitive therapies 
for OCD that included some form of exposure to feared 
stimuli were superior to those that did not, suggesting 
that exposure may be necessary to maximize outcomes 
(Abramowitz, Franklin, & Foa, 2002). 

To expand upon this point further, Hiss, Foa, and 
Kozak (1994) investigated whether formal relapse 
prevention techniques following intensive EX/RP enhanced 
maintenance of gains. Notably, all discussions 
about cognitive factors typically included during the 
core treatment (e.g., discussion of lapse vs. relapse, 
posttreatment exposure instructions, themes of guilt 
and personal responsibility, and feared consequences) 
were removed. Patients received this modified EX/RP, 
followed by either a relapse prevention treatment or a 
psychosocial control treatment (associative therapy). 
All patients in both conditions were classified as responders 
at posttreatment (defined as 50% or greater 
reduction in OCD symptoms), with treatment gains 
better maintained in the relapse prevention group than 
in the associative therapy condition at 6-month followup. 
The percentages of responders at follow-up were 
75% in the relapse prevention condition and 33% in 
associative therapy. The higher than usual observed 
relapse rate in the associative therapy condition may 
have resulted from the removal of cognitive techniques 
typically utilized during the core treatment, such as 
discussion of feared consequences. These findings, and 
those discussed earlier, further underscore our belief 
that blended treatment designed to provide patients the 
opportunity to disconfirm their erroneous cognitions 
makes the most sense clinically. Accordingly, our approach 
clearly incorporates informal cognitive procedures, 
and discussions of the outcome of exposures are 


Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder 

geared toward challenging mistaken beliefs; this is accomplished 
in the context of a treatment approach that 
still emphasizes the importance of EX/RP in bringing 
about such changes. 

Serotonergic Medications 

Effectiveness of Medications 

The use of serotonergic medications in the treatment 
of OCD has received a great deal of attention in the 
past 25 years. Of the tricyclic antidepressants, clomipramine 
(CMI) has been studied most extensively. 
In controlled trials, CMI has consistently been found 
to be superior to placebo (e.g., DeVeaugh-Geiss, Landau, 
& Katz, 1989). Similar results have been obtained 
with the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) 
fluoxetine, fluvoxamine, and sertraline (see Greist, Jefferson, 
Kobak, Katzelnick, & Serlin, 1995). Accordingly, 
each of these medications has been approved 
by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) as 
treatments for adult OCD. On the whole, these studies 
suggest that up to 60% of patients show some response 
to treatment with SSRIs. However, even the average 
treatment gain achieved by treatment responders is 
moderate at best (Greist, 1990). In addition, amelioration 
of obsessive–compulsive symptoms is maintained 
only as long as the drug is continued: For example, in 
an early controlled, double-blind discontinuation study, 
90% of patients relapsed within a few weeks after being 
withdrawn from CMI (Pato, Zohar-Kadouch, Zohar, & 
Murphy, 1988). More recent discontinuation studies 
with slower taper periods have not yielded such dramatic 
results, but they nevertheless converge to suggest 
that maintenance treatment is necessary to sustain 
achievements attained with pharmacotherapy alone for 
OCD (Dougherty, Rauch, & Jenike, 2002). 

EX/RP versus Pharmacotherapy 

Many controlled studies have indicated that serotonergic 
antidepressants are superior to placebo in ameliorating 
OCD symptoms (for a review, see Greist et al., 
1995). However, only a few controlled studies have 
directly compared the relative or combined efficacy 
of antidepressant medications and EX/RP, and several 
studies that have made such a comparison included 
complex designs that make it difficult to draw confident 
conclusions about relative and combined efficacy (e.g., 
Marks et al., 1980, 1988). Cottraux and colleagues 

(1990) compared fluvoxamine (FLV) with antiexposure 
instructions, FLV plus weekly EX/RP, and pill placebo 
(PBO) plus EX/RP, and found FLV + EX/RP and FLV 

+ antiexposure instructions superior to PBO + EX/RP; 
there was a trend toward an advantage for combined 
treatment, but it failed to reach significance. Hohagen 
and colleagues (1998) compared EX/RP + FLV to EX/ 
RP + PBO and found that both groups improved significantly 
and comparably on compulsions, but the patients 
who received EX/RP + FLV were significantly 
better at posttreatment on obsessions than those who 
received EX/RP + PBO. Subanalyses indicated that 
patients with secondary depression also fared better if 
they were receiving EX/RP + FLV. 
The relative and combined efficacy of CMI and intensive 
EX/RP was examined in a multicenter, RCT 
conducted at our center (Penn) and at Columbia University. 
Findings with both treatment completer and 
intention-to-treat (ITT) data indicated at posttreatment 
that the active treatments were superior to placebo, EX/ 
RP was superior to CMI, and the combination of the 
two treatments was not superior to EX/RP alone (Foa 
et al., 2005); relapse was more evident following treatment 
discontinuation in the CMI group than in either 
treatment that included intensive EX/RP (EX/RP, EX/ 
RP + CMI; Simpson et al., 2004). However, the design 
used in the Penn–Columbia study may not have optimally 
promoted an additive effect for CMI because the 
intensive portion of the EX/RP program was largely 
completed before patients reached their maximum dose 
of CMI. In addition, combined treatment effects may 
be more evident when intensive EX/RP is not used 
(Foa, Franklin, & Moser, 2002). Notably, an additive 
effect for combined treatment was found in a recent 
study in pediatric OCD at Penn, Duke, and Brown (Pediatric 
OCD Treatment Study Team, 2004), although 
examination of effect sizes by site indicated that the 
CBT monotherapy effect at Penn was very large, and 
no additive effect for combined treatment was found at 
this site. 

In summary, although there is clear evidence that 
both pharmaceutical treatment with serotonergic medications 
and EX/RP treatments are effective for OCD, 
information about their relative and combined efficacy 
remains scarce because most of the studies that examined 
these issues have been methodologically limited. 
Nevertheless, no study has found clear, long-term superiority 
for combined pharmacotherapy plus EX/RP over 
EX/RP alone. The absence of conclusive findings notwithstanding, 
many experts continue to advocate com



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

bined procedures as the treatment of choice for OCD 
(e.g., Greist, 1992). In clinical practice, it is common to 
see patients in EX/RP treatment who are taking SSRIs 
concurrently. In uncontrolled examinations of EX/RP 
treatment outcome for adults (Franklin, Abramowitz, 
Bux, Zoellner, & Feeny, 2002) and youth (Franklin et 
al., 1998; Piacentini, Bergman, Jacobs, McCracken, & 
Kretchman, 2002) treated in OCD outpatient clinics, 
no posttreatment differences in OCD symptom severity 
were detected between patients who received EX/RP 
alone and those who received SSRI medication when 
receiving EX/RP. From these data we can surmise that 
concomitant pharmacotherapy is not required for every 
patient to benefit substantially from EX/RP, and that 
concomitant pharmacotherapy does not appear to inhibit 
EX/RP treatment response. With respect to EX/ 
RP augmentation in SSRI partial responders, there is 
now evidence from randomized trials that EX/RP augmented 
treatment outcome compared to medication 
alone in youth (Franklin et al., 2011) and compared to 
stress management training in adults (Simpson et al., 
2010). More definitive conclusions about the effects 
of augmenting pharmacotherapy with EX/RP await a 
more carefully controlled examination, however. 

assessMeNt 

Following a diagnostic interview to ascertain the presence 
of OCD, it is advisable to quantify the severity 
of the OCD symptoms with one or more of the instruments 
described below. Quantification of symptom severity 
assists the therapist in evaluating how successful 
treatment was for a given patient. In our clinic, we use 
several assessment instruments. As in most OCD clinical 
research studies, however, the primary measure of 
OCD symptom severity used in our center is the Yale– 
Brown Obsessive–Compulsive Scale (Goodman et al., 
1989a, 1989b). 

Yale–Brown Obsessive–Compulsive Scale 

The Yale–Brown Obsessive–Compulsive Scale (Y-
BOCS; Goodman et al., 1989a, 1989b), a standardized, 
semistructured interview, takes approximately 30 minutes 
to complete. The Y-BOCS severity scale includes 
10 items (five assess obsessions and five, compulsions), 
each of which is rated on a 5-point scale ranging from 0 
(No symptoms) to 4 (Severe symptoms). Assessors rate 
the time occupied by the obsessions and compulsions, 

the degree of interference with functioning, the level 
of distress, attempts to resist the symptoms, and level 
of control over the symptoms. The Y-BOCS has shown 
adequate interrater agreement, internal consistency, 
and validity (Goodman et al., 1989a, 1989b). The Y-
BOCS served as the primary measure of outcome in 
most of the published OCD pharmacotherapy and CBT 
treatment studies conducted during the 1990s. 

Self‑Report Measures 

Obsessive–Compulsive Inventory—Revised 

The Obsessive–Compulsive Inventory—Revised (OCI-
R; Foa, Huppert, et al., 2002) is an 18-item, self-report 
measure that assesses the distress associated with obsessions 
and compulsions. In addition to the total score, 
six separate subscale scores are calculated by adding 
the three items that comprise each subscale: Washing, 
Checking, Ordering, Obsessing, Hoarding, and Neutralizing. 
Foa, Huppert, and colleagues (2002) reported 
good internal consistency, test–retest reliability, and 
discriminant validity in clinical patients with OCD, 
PTSD, generalized social phobia, and nonanxious controls. 
The total score ranges from 0 to 72, and each subscale 
ranges from 0 to 12. 

Other Self-Report Measures 

A few self-report instruments for assessing OCD symptoms, 
such as the Leyton Obsessional Inventory (Kazarian, 
Evans, & Lefave, 1977) and the Lynfield Obsessional/
Compulsive Questionnaire (Allen & Tune, 
1975), are also available. These instruments are limited 
in that they assess only certain forms of obsessive– 
compulsive behavior and/or they include items that are 
unrelated to OCD symptoms. More recently, Storch 
and colleagues (2009) have developed the Children’s 
Florida Obsessive–Compulsive Inventory, which is intended 
primarily for screening purposes. 

iNitial iNterview 

After a diagnosis of OCD has been established, and before 
actually beginning treatment, the therapist should 
schedule 4–6 hours of appointments with the patient. In 
these sessions, the therapist needs to accomplish three 
important tasks. First, the sessions are used to collect 
the information necessary to develop a treatment plan. 


Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder 

Specifically, the therapist must first identify specific 
cues that cause the patient distress (threat cues), avoidance, 
rituals, and feared consequences. Second, the 
therapist should develop a good rapport with the patient, 
who will engage in exposure exercises designed 
to elicit anxiety and distress during intensive EX/RP, 
and the lack of a good relationship between therapist 
and the patient may compromise outcome. Third, the 
therapist needs to explore the patient’s beliefs about 
OCD and the perceived consequences of refraining 
from rituals and avoidance because this information 
guides the informal discussions of cognitive processes 
that take place throughout EX/RP. 

Threat cues may be either (1) tangible objects in the 
environment or (2) thoughts, images, or impulses that 
the person experiences (for lack of better terms, we 
have labeled them “external cues” and “internal cues,” 
respectively). Passive avoidance and ritualistic behavior 
(sometimes called “active avoidance”) both serve 
to reduce the distress associated with the threat cues. 
Rituals may be further divided into overt or covert 
(mental) forms. It is essential that patients understand 
the difference between obsessions and mental compulsions 
because obsessions are treated with systematic 
exposure and mental compulsions, with ritual preventions. 
During treatment, patients should be instructed 
to report any mental compulsions to the therapist because 
performing such compulsions during exposure 
exercises attenuates the effects of these exercises in the 
same way that behavioral compulsions do. 

External Fear Cues 

Most individuals with OCD experience fear in reaction 
to specific environmental cues (objects, persons, or situations), 
but each patient has his/her own idiosyncratic 
threat cues. For example, individuals who fear contamination 
from toilets may differ as to whether they 
fear all toilets or only those open to the public. One 
patient may fear only the toilet itself, whereas another 
may also fear bathroom floors, doorknobs, and faucets. 
Similarly, two individuals may experience distress at 
the prospect of a fire burning down their home, but 
whereas one experiences the distress only when she is 
the last person to leave the house, the other experiences 
distress before going to bed at night when his children 
are present. 

The therapist needs to gather specific information 
about cues that elicit the patient’s distress to identify 
the basic sources of the fear. Identification of the basic 

source is important for planning the treatment program. 
Confronting the source of the fear is essential for successful 
behavioral treatment of OCD. Often, when such 
exposure does not take place during treatment, relapse 
occurs. For example, a patient who feared contamination 
by her hometown was treated with EX/RP 3,000 
miles away from the town. Because of the distances 
involved, direct exposure to the town was impossible, 
so treatment comprised exposure to objects contaminated 
directly or indirectly by contact with the town. 
Although the patient habituated to the objects used in 
the exposure sessions, she continued to fear her hometown. 
Within 1 year after treatment, she had developed 
fears to new objects related to her hometown. Not until 
she engaged in repeated exposures to the town itself did 
she experience lasting improvement. 

It is important that the therapist conduct a thorough 
investigation of objects, situations, and places that 
evoke obsessional distress for the patient at the time 
of presentation and at onset. Such information helps to 
identify the source of the distress. To facilitate communication 
with the patient about situations that evoke distress, 
a Subjective Units of Discomfort Scale (SUDS) 
ranging from 0 to 100 points is introduced. Patients are 
asked to rate each situation with respect to the level of 
distress they expect to experience upon exposure. The 
source of the distress is expected to be 100. The following 
dialogue between therapist and patient illustrates 
the process of gathering information about distressing 
situations. 

tHeraPist: When do you get the urge to wash your 

hands? 
Patient: In a lot of places. There are so many places. 

tHeraPist: Are there any places where the urges are 
particularly strong? 

Patient: Well when I am sitting in my living room, 
particularly near the fireplace. Also in the laundry 
room, which I never go to. Also, when I walk in the 
park. 

tHeraPist: Let’s talk about your living room. How 

upset are you when you are sitting next to your fire


place? 

Patient: That’s bad. I guess about a 90. 

tHeraPist: Can you tell me what makes you so upset 

in your living room? 
Patient: Well that is a long story . . . and I know it 

doesn’t make sense. 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

tHeraPist: Go on. It’s important that we understand 
what makes you uncomfortable and fearful in your 
living room. 

Patient: About 2 years ago, I got up in the morning 
and went into the living room, and I saw a dead 
squirrel in the fireplace. I guess he got in through the 
chimney. So, I figured that if the squirrel was dead, 
he must have been sick. I know that a lot of squirrels 
have rabies, so I thought that if the squirrel died of 
rabies, then there are germs all over the chimney. 

tHeraPist: Have you tried to have the chimney and 
the fireplace cleaned? 

Patient: Yes, we did have a company come in and 
clean the whole area, but I’m not sure that they can 
clean away the germs. 

tHeraPist: I understand. How about the laundry room, 
how upsetting is it to be in the laundry room? 
Patient: That would be a 100; that’s why I don’t go 
in there. 

tHeraPist: How did the laundry room become dangerous? 


Patient: Oh, that’s another story. Until a year ago, my 
children used to keep their guinea pigs in the laundry 
room. One day we found the female guinea pig 
dead. So I thought that it probably died of rabies, too. 

tHeraPist: Oh, I understand. So you are generally 
afraid you will contract rabies if you come in contact 
with things that you think are contaminated with rabies 
germs. Is this true? 

Patient: Exactly. That’s why I don’t like to walk in the 
woods or the park. You know, those places have all 
kind of animals, and you can never tell where the 
germs might be. 

It is clear from this conversation that it was not living 
rooms, laundry rooms, or parks per se that the patient 
feared. Rather, any situation or object that, in her 
mind, had some probability of being infested with rabies 
germs became a source of contamination. Some 
contamination-fearful patients, however, cannot specify 
feared consequences of coming into contact with 
stimuli they perceive to be contaminated. For these 
patients, the primary fear is that they will not be able 
to tolerate the extreme emotional distress generated by 
being contaminated. With such patients, it is also important 
to probe further to discern whether they have 

fears about the long-term health consequences of experiencing 
high and unremitting anxiety in response to 
stimuli that prompt obsessions. 

Internal Fear Cues 

Anxiety and distress may also be generated by images, 
impulses, or abstract thoughts that the individual finds 
disturbing, shameful, or disgusting. Examples of such 
cues include impulses to stab one’s child, thoughts of 
one’s spouse injured in an accident, or images of religious 
figures engaged in sexual activity. Clearly, internal 
threat cues may be produced by external situations, 
such as the sight of a knife triggering the impulse to 
stab one’s child. Some patients may become distressed 
when they experience certain bodily sensations, such as 
minor pains triggering the fear of having cancer. 

In many cases, patients may be reluctant to express 
their obsessive thoughts because they are either 
ashamed of them or fear that expressing them will 
make the consequence more likely to occur. In these 
cases, the therapist needs to encourage the expression 
of these thoughts through direct questioning and 
a matter-of-fact attitude. Sometimes it helps to tell the 
patient that many people with and without OCD have 
unwanted thoughts (as many as 85% of normal individuals; 
Rachman & DeSilva, 1978). It may also be 
helpful to remind the patient that talking about the obsessions 
will be a part of therapy; the evaluation session 
provides an opportunity to begin this process. 

tHeraPist: So tell me, when is it that you feel the urge 

to count? 
Patient: It seems like I’m always counting something, 

but it’s mostly when I think about certain things. 

tHeraPist: What kind of things? 

Patient: I don’t know. Bad things. 

tHeraPist: Can you give me some examples of bad 

thoughts that will make you want to count? 
Patient: (brief silence) I really prefer not to talk about 

them. It makes things worse. 

tHeraPist: You mean it makes the counting worse? 

Patient: Yes. 

tHeraPist: All right, I know now that when you think 

or talk about certain bad things, you have an urge to 

count, but I still don’t know what those bad things 


Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder 

are. How about you tell me so that I can help you 
with them? 
Patient: I’d really rather not. Can’t we talk about 
something else? 

tHeraPist: It is important that I know what the 
thoughts are to plan your treatment. I’ll try to help 
you. Do the thoughts involve someone being hurt? 

Patient: Yes. 
tHeraPist: Do the thoughts involve only certain peo


ple getting hurt or could it be anyone? 
Patient: Mostly my family. 
tHeraPist: OK, what else can you tell me about the 

thoughts? 
Patient: I really don’t want to say any more. 
tHeraPist: I know this is scary, but remember that fac


ing your fears is what this treatment is all about. 
Patient: OK. It’s not always thoughts. Sometimes I see 
pictures in my mind, where my brother or my mom 
and dad are killed. I’m afraid when I talk about these 
thoughts and pictures that they really will die. 
tHeraPist: A lot of people have thoughts that they 
don’t like to have. Even people without OCD. Just 
because you have these thoughts, or talk about them, 
doesn’t mean that bad things will actually happen or 
that you want them to come true. 

It is important to reassure the patient that unpleasant 
thoughts occur often and to emphasize the distinction 
between thoughts and reality. Many patients with 
OCD have magical ideas in which the distinction between 
“thinking about” and “making things happen” 
is blurred, a process labeled by Salkovskis (1985) 
as “thought–action fusion” (TAF). It is important 
to point out to the patient that thoughts are different 
from actions. Also, many patients think that if negative 
thoughts enter their mind, then it means they wish the 
bad thing will happen. The therapist should assure the 
patient that thinking about bad things does not mean 
that one wants them to happen. These sorts of informal 
discussions of mistaken beliefs are an integral part 
of correct implementation of EX/RP. Such discussions 
should accompany the treatment planning process, and 
be reiterated as needed during exposure exercises. It is, 
however, important that such discussions accompany 
EX/RP exercises rather than replace them. 

Feared Consequences 

Many individuals with OCD are afraid that something 
terrible will happen if they fail to perform their rituals. 
Such patients with washing rituals, for example, typically 
fear that they and/or someone else will become 
ill or disabled, or die, as a result of being contaminated. 
Many patients with checking rituals fear that because 
of their negligence, certain catastrophes will occur, 
such as their homes burning down, or that they might 
kill someone while driving. Some patients have only a 
vague notion of what these negative consequence might 
be (e.g., “I don’t know exactly what will happen, but I 
feel that if I don’t count to seven, something bad will 
happen to my family”). Others do not fear catastrophes 
at all, but they cannot tolerate the emotional distress 
they experience if they do not perform rituals. Some 
fear that unless they ritualize, anxiety will increase 
continually, until they have a nervous breakdown. Data 
from the DSM-IV field trial indicated that approximately 
two-thirds of patients with OCD could clearly 
identify consequences other than emotional distress 
that would result when they refrained from performing 
rituals, whereas the remainder could report no such 
consequences (Foa et al., 1995). 

It is important to identify the specific details of the 
patient’s feared consequences to plan an effective exposure 
program. For example, the content of the imaginal 
exposure of a patient who checks while driving for fear 
of having hit a pedestrian and being sent to jail differs 
from that of a patient who fears that hitting a pedestrian 
will result in punishment by God. Similarly, patients 
who ritualistically place objects in a specific order may 
differ with respect to their feared catastrophes. Some 
perform the ritual to prevent catastrophic consequences 
(e.g., death of parents), whereas others do so only to reduce 
distress elicited by disordered objects. The former 
would benefit from treatment that includes both imaginal 
and in vivo exposure, whereas the latter is likely to 
profit from in vivo exposure alone. 

Strength of Belief 

Clinical observations have led to suggestions that individuals 
with OCD who have poor insight do not respond 
well to exposure and response prevention, although two 
later studies failed to find a linear relationship between 
strength of belief in feared catastrophes and improvement 
following exposure and response prevention (Foa 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

et al., 1999; Lelliott, Noshirvani, Basoglu, Marks, & 
Monteiro, 1988). Two issues need to be considered in 
evaluating these collective findings. First, the reliability 
and validity of the strength of belief measures used 
in previous studies are unknown. Second, the relationship 
between overvalued ideation and treatment outcome 
may not be linear. Clinical observation suggests 
that only patients who express extreme belief in their 
obsessional ideation show poor outcome. Indeed, Foa 
and colleagues (1999) found that only extremely strong 
belief (fixed belief) was associated with attenuated outcome. 
Such patients may appear delusional when discussing 
their feared catastrophes. We hypothesize that 
the effect of fixed belief on outcome may be mediated 
by treatment compliance: Patients who are convinced 
that feared disasters will ensue if they engaged in prescribed 
exercises probably will not complete the tasks 
as assigned. 

When assessing the strength of belief, it is important 
to remember that a patient’s insight into the senselessness 
of his/her belief often fluctuates. Some patients 
readily acknowledge that their obsessional beliefs are 
irrational, but the beliefs still cause marked distress. A 
few individuals firmly believe that their obsessions and 
compulsions are rational. In most patients, though, the 
strength of belief fluctuates across situations, making it 
difficult to ascertain the degree to which they believe 
the obsessions are irrational. The following example is 
an inquiry into the strength of a patient’s belief in her 
obsessional fear of contracting acquired immune deficiency 
syndrome (AIDS). 

tHeraPist: How likely is it that you will contract 

AIDS from using a public restroom? 
Patient: I’m really terrified that I will get AIDS if I 

use a bathroom in a restaurant. 

tHeraPist: I know that you are afraid of getting AIDS, 

but if you think logically, how likely do you think 

you are to get AIDS by sitting on a public toilet? 

Patient: I think I will get AIDS if I use a public toilet. 

tHeraPist: So do you mean to say that there is a 100% 

chance of you getting AIDS if you sit on a public 

toilet once? 

Patient: Well, I don’t know about once, but if I did it 
again and again I would. 

tHeraPist: What about other people? Will they get 
AIDS if they use a public toilet? 

Patient: I guess so. I’m not sure. 

tHeraPist: Since most people use public bathrooms, 
almost everyone should have AIDS by now. How do 
you explain the fact that a relatively small number of 
people have AIDS? 

Patient: Maybe not everybody is as susceptible to 
AIDS as I am. 

tHeraPist: Do you think that you are more susceptible 

than other people? 
Patient: I don’t know for sure. Maybe the likelihood of 

my getting AIDS is only 50%. 

Based on the interaction just described, the therapist 
concluded that the patient was not an “overvalued ideator”; 
thus, the prognosis for this patient is brighter than 
it would be if she continued strongly to hold her original 
belief. Accordingly, the implementation of EX/RP 
for this patient would follow the standard guidelines. 

###CUT###
Avoidance and Rituals 

To maximize treatment efficacy, all avoidance and ritualistic 
behaviors, even seemingly minor ones, should 
be prevented. Therefore, the therapist should gather 
complete information about all passive avoidance and 
rituals. When the therapist is in doubt as to whether 
a particular avoidance behavior is related to OCD, he/ 
she might suggest an “experiment” in which the patient 
is exposed to the avoided situation. If the patient experiences 
anxiety or distress, the avoidance behavior 
should be prevented as part of treatment. Similarly, if it 
is unclear whether a given action constitutes a ritual, a 
response prevention “experiment” may be implemented. 
If refraining from performing the action evokes distress, 
the action is identified as a ritual and should be 
addressed in therapy. 

Individuals with OCD, like those with specific 
phobias, often attempt to avoid anxiety-evoking situations. 
Most passive avoidance strategies are fairly obvious 
(e.g., not entering public restrooms, not preparing 
meals, and not taking out the trash). However, the 
therapist also needs to be attentive to subtle forms of 
avoidance, such as carrying money in one’s pockets to 
avoid opening a wallet, wearing slip-on shoes to avoid 
touching laces, and using drinking straws to avoid 
contact with a glass or a can. Patients with obsessive– 
compulsive checking rituals also engage in subtle 
avoidance behaviors that are important to explore, such 
as arranging their work schedules to ensure that they 
are rarely, if ever, the last person to leave the business, 


Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder 

thus ensuring that the responsibility for checking the 
safe falls on a coworker. 

Active rituals, such as passive avoidance, may be explicit 
(e.g., prolonged washing, repeated checks of the 
door, and ordering of objects) and/or subtle (e.g., wiping 
hands on pant legs, blinking, and thinking “good” 
thoughts). It is important that the therapist identify 
both explicit and subtle rituals, so that both may be addressed 
during treatment. 

Although compulsive rituals are intended to reduce 
the distress associated with obsessions, patients 
sometimes report that the performance of these rituals 
is aversive in itself. For example, Ms. S, who was 
obsessed with the orderliness of objects on her shelves, 
found reordering the shelves aversive because she was 
unable to find the “perfect” place for everything. Similarly, 
Mr. J, who felt contaminated by chemicals, found 
the act of decontaminating himself by repeated handwashing 
aversive because he was unable to decide when 
his hands were sufficiently clean; therefore, he washed 
until his hands became raw. Rituals may also become 
aversive because of their intrusion into other aspects of 
the person’s life. For example, Mr. J, who would take 
2-hour-long showers to feel adequately clean, was reprimanded 
repeatedly by his supervisor for arriving late 
to work. 

When certain compulsions become aversive, some 
patients decrease the time they spend performing the 
ritual by increasing avoidance behaviors, or by substituting 
other, less time-consuming rituals. For example, 
Ms. E, who was obsessed with fears of contamination 
by funeral-related objects (e.g., cemeteries and people 
returning from a funeral), responded with hours of 
showering and handwashing. She eventually retreated 
into her bedroom and avoided all contact with the 
outside world. Mr. J, described earlier, avoided taking 
a shower for days at a time, but between showers he 
wiped his hands compulsively and avoided touching his 
wife. In some cases, seemingly “new” rituals may develop 
during the course of treatment to function in the 
place of those previously identified and eliminated. For 
example, Mr. F, who was concerned about his hands 
becoming contaminated, successfully resisted the urge 
to wash his hands, but soon after response prevention 
was implemented, he started to rub his hands together 
vigorously to “decontaminate” them. When such a substitute 
ritual is identified, it also needs to be addressed 
in treatment with ritual prevention. Therapists must not 
only remain alert to such shifts in ritualistic behaviors 
but also alert patients to the possibility of such shifts. 

History of Main Complaint 
and Treatment History 

Many individuals with OCD are unable to give a detailed 
account of the onset of their symptoms because 
the symptoms began subtly, many years ago. Nevertheless, 
therapists should attempt to collect as much information 
as possible about the onset and course of the 
disorder. Such information may provide clues about aspects 
of the fear network and variables associated with 
the maintenance of symptoms, and may help to anticipate 
difficulties that may arise during treatment (e.g., 
old obsessions or rituals that may resurface as more 
prominent ones diminish). 

Many such individuals also have an extensive history 
of psychological and pharmacological treatments, 
and it is important to make a detailed inquiry about 
the outcome of previous treatments. If the patient has 
been treated with EX/RP, the therapist should assess 
whether the treatment was implemented appropriately 
and the patient was compliant with treatment demands. 
Knowledge that a patient experienced difficulty complying 
with response prevention instructions, or that 
previous therapy failed to provide adequate exposure 
experiences or response prevention instructions, is important 
for designing the behavioral program. Other 
factors that may have prevented successful outcome or 
caused relapse, such as job stress, death in the family, 
or pregnancy, should be discussed. At the same time, a 
prior failed course of EX/RP should not necessarily be 
viewed as prognostic, especially if the patient recognizes 
why the therapy was less successful in the past. One 
of our patients, who had failed multiple trials of less 
intensive EX/RP, came to our center with the knowledge 
that his noncompliance with exposure exercises 
between weekly sessions greatly reduced the effects 
of treatment. He also noted that the slow progress he 
observed in these previous therapies demoralized him 
and caused further disengagement from the treatment. 
When offered a choice of daily versus twice-weekly 
sessions, he opted for the daily treatment, noting that 
the more intensive approach might decrease the chance 
of similar lapses. He has now successfully completed 
the intensive regimen. 

In our clinic we have observed that a substantial 
majority of our outpatients have been treated, or are 
currently being treated, with serotonergic medications. 
Some seek EX/RP to augment the partial gains they 
have achieved with the medication. Others wish to discontinue 
the medication because it was ineffective, it 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

had side effects, or they do not want to continue taking 
medicine indefinitely. Assessment of the patient’s treatment 
goals is necessary for planning his/her treatment 
program. 

Social Functioning 

Obsessive–compulsive symptoms may severely disrupt 
the daily functioning of patients. Therapists should assess 
the impact of OCD symptoms on the various areas 
of functioning. Where appropriate, this information 
should be used to design suitable exposure exercises. 
For example, Ms. D experienced difficulties completing 
assignments at work because she repeatedly checked 
each task. Treatment included exposures to performing 
tasks at work without checking. Even if the client is not 
currently working, exposures simulating work situations 
may be necessary if symptoms created difficulties 
in previous jobs. 

OCD clearly has a deleterious effect on the intimate 
relationships of many patients. About half of married 
individuals seeking treatment for OCD experience 
marital distress (Emmelkamp et al., 1990; Riggs et al., 
1992). Other family and social relationships may also 
suffer as a result of OCD symptoms. The impairment 
in social functioning may arise because social contact 
is either perceived as threatening (e.g., “I may spread 
germs to other people”) or so much of the patient’s 
time and energy is invested in performing rituals and 
planning ways to avoid distressing situations. Again, 
information about the relation of social dysfunction 
to OCD symptoms may lead the therapist to include 
specific exposures aimed at ameliorating these social 
difficulties. 

The assessment of social functioning should also include 
an evaluation of what role, if any, other people 
play in the patient’s compulsive rituals. If the patient relies 
on others for reassurance or compliance with rituals 
(e.g., family members must remove their shoes before 
entering the house), the therapist should instruct family 
members how to respond appropriately when asked 
to participate in the patient’s rituals. A careful analysis 
of the relationship is called for before specific instructions 
are given to significant others. Moreover, if family 
members tend to criticize the patient when obsessional 
distress arises, it is important to address these negative 
exchanges in treatment. We have often addressed this 
issue with a combination of empathic discussion of the 
frustration experienced by the family member and role 
playing of more effective responses. 

Mood State 

Although some patients with serious depression and 
OCD may benefit from behavioral therapy for OCD 
(Foa et al., 1992), research suggests that severe depression 
may limit the extent of reduction of OCD 
symptoms and the maintenance of those gains (e.g., 
Abramowitz et al., 2000). Therefore, it is important 
to assess the mood state of the patient prior to beginning 
behavioral therapy. Patients with severe depression 
should be treated with antidepressant medication 
or cognitive therapy to reduce the depressive symptoms 
prior to implementing behavioral therapy for the OCD. 
Treatment with serotonergic antidepressants may reduce 
OCD symptoms, as well as depression. Because 
the effects of such medication on OCD symptoms may 
not be evident until 3 months after treatment begins, 
the therapist needs to use his/her clinical judgment to 
decide whether to begin EX/RP when the depression 
decreases or wait until the effects of the medication on 
OCD symptoms can be assessed. 

Choice of Treatment 

How should a therapist determine the most suitable 
treatment for a given patient? As discussed earlier, exposure 
and response prevention, as well as serotonergic 
medications, have demonstrated efficacy for OCD. 
Therapist and patient are faced with the choice of EX/ 
RP, pharmacotherapy, or a combination of the two. Neither 
treatment is effective with all patients, and no consistent 
predictors of who will benefit most from which 
treatment modality have been identified. Therefore, 
unless the patient has been particularly successful or 
unsuccessful with some previous course of treatment, 
the decision should be based on factors such as availability 
of treatment, amount of time the patient is able 
or willing to invest in treatment, and his/her motivation 
and willingness to tolerate side effects. 

The intensive treatment requires a considerable investment 
of time over a period of several weeks. Many 
patients are unable, or unwilling, to devote 4–5 hours a 
day to treatment. These patients should be advised to 
try pharmacological treatment, which does not require 
the same extensive time commitment. Recent investigations 
of the effects of a twice-weekly EX/RP regimen 
compared to intensive treatment suggested comparable 
outcomes at follow-up (Abramowitz et al., 2003; Storch 
et al., 2007); thus, in our center, we routinely offer either 
program to patients considering EX/RP. Some 


Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder 

patients may be unwilling (sometimes expressed as “I 
can’t do that”) to experience the temporary discomfort 
caused by EX/RP. These patients, too, may be advised 
to try medications. The need to develop “readiness 
programs” designed to prepare such patients to accept 
EX/RP treatment is often cited in light of the relatively 
high refusal rate among patients offered EX/RP. Such 
programs may include testimonials from previously 
treated patients, cognitive strategies designed to help 
the patient calculate objective risks more accurately, 
psychoeducation about OCD and EX/RP, and a review 
of the outcome literature for various treatments (Tolin, 
Maltby, Diefenbach, Hannan, & Worhunsky, 2004). 
An initial RCT of EX/RP plus motivational interviewing 
(MI) did not yield outcomes that were superior to 
EX/RP alone (Simpson et al., 2010), but the study did 
not specifically recruit patients who were experiencing 
low motivation. Manualizing programs specifically for 
those patients and examining the acceptance rate and 
efficacy of EX/RP infused with MI constitutes the next 
step in this line of research. 

Patients who are concerned about the potential (or 
have already experienced) side effects of medications 
or their unknown long-term effects often prefer EX/ 
RP. Other patients are concerned with the prospect of 
entering an “endless” treatment because, according to 
present knowledge, relapse occurs when medication is 
withdrawn (Pato et al., 1988; Thoren, Asberg, Chronholm, 
Journestedt, & Traskman, 1980). This concern is 
particularly relevant for women who plan to bear children 
and need to withdraw from the medication during 
pregnancy. EX/RP should be recommended to these 
patients because its effects are more enduring. 

As discussed earlier, the long-term effects of combining 
EX/RP and medication are unclear; therefore, 
it is premature to recommend treatment programs that 
combine the two therapies. However, some patients 
who present for treatment are already on antidepressant 
medication. Because these medications were found not 
to interfere with the effectiveness of EX/RP (Franklin 
et al., 2000), it is recommended that patients continue 
to take the medication if they have experienced some 
improvement in either obsessive–compulsive symptoms 
or depression. However, if the patient has not experienced 
improvement with medication, withdrawal 
of the medication before or during EX/RP should be 
considered. Special consideration should be given to 
patients with severe depression concurrent with their 
OCD. It is recommended that these patients be treated 
with antidepressants or cognitive therapy for the 

depression prior to entering intensive EX/RP for the 
OCD, given recent findings of somewhat attenuated 
outcome for severely depressed patients (Abramowitz 
et al., 2000). 

iNteNsive ex/rP 

The intensive treatment program comprises four phases: 
(1) information gathering, (2) intensive EX/RP, (3) 
a home visit, and (4) maintenance and relapse prevention. 


Information Gathering 
and Treatment Planning 

The first stage of information gathering consists of a 
thorough diagnostic evaluation to determine that the 
patient’s main psychopathology is OCD. The second 
step is to assess whether the patient is appropriate for 
EX/RP. We recommend that individuals who are abusing 
drugs or alcohol should be treated for the substance 
abuse prior to intensive treatment for OCD. Patients who 
have clear delusions and hallucinations are also poor 
candidates for intensive treatment. Individuals with severe 
MDD should be treated for depression before beginning 
treatment for OCD. The patient’s motivation to 
comply with the demands of intensive treatment should 
be carefully evaluated. It is important to describe the 
treatment program in enough detail that the patient 
is not surprised when treatment begins. If the patient 
does not express strong motivation and commitment to 
treatment, it might be preferable to delay implementation 
of intensive treatment or to offer alternative treatments, 
such as medication. As noted earlier, a study of 
less intensive EX/RP for patients who appear otherwise 
motivated, yet cannot accommodate the daily regimen 
into their schedules, suggested an outcome comparable 
to intensive treatment; future research with much larger 
samples is needed to determine whether patient factors 
predict differential outcome to either treatment schedule. 


Once a patient is judged to be appropriate for intensive 
treatment, information gathering for treatment 
planning begins. This phase typically comprises 4–6 
hours of contact with the patient over a period of 2–3 
days. During this phase, the therapist collects information 
about the patient’s obsessive–compulsive symptoms, 
general history, and the history of treatment 
for OCD, as described earlier. During these sessions, 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

the therapist discusses the rationale for treatment, describes 
the program in detail, teaches patients to monitor 
their rituals, and develops a treatment plan. 

First Information‑Gathering Session 

It is very important to discuss the rationale for treatment 
and to describe the treatment program in detail. 
The program requires that the patient abandon his/her 
obsessive–compulsive habits, therefore temporarily 
experiencing substantial discomfort. If patients do not 
understand why they are asked to suffer this short-term 
distress or are not convinced that treatment will work, 
they are unlikely to comply with treatment instructions. 
The treatment rationale is explained as follows: 

“You have a set of habits that, as you know, are called 
obsessive–compulsive symptoms. These are habits 
of thinking, feeling, and acting that are extremely 
unpleasant, wasteful, and difficult to get rid of on 
your own. Usually, these habits involve thoughts, images, 
or impulses that habitually come to your mind, 
even though you don’t want them. Along with these 
thoughts you have unwanted feelings of extreme distress 
or anxiety and strong urges to do something to 
reduce the distress. To try to get rid of the anxiety, 
people get into the habit of engaging in various special 
thoughts or actions, which we call ‘rituals.’ 

“Unfortunately, as you know, the rituals do not 
work all that well, and the distress decreases for a 
short time only, then comes back again. Eventually, 
you may find yourself doing more and more ritualizing 
to try to reduce anxiety, but even then the relief 
is temporary and you have to do the ritual all 
over again. Gradually, you find yourself spending so 
much time and energy ritualizing—which does not 
work that well anyway—that other areas of your life 
are seriously disrupted. 

“The treatment we are about to begin is called 
exposure and response prevention. It is designed to 
break two types of associations. The first association 
is between sensations of anxiety and the objects, 
situations, or thoughts that produce this distress. 
[The therapist uses information collected as examples; 
e.g., ‘Every time you touch anything associated 
with urine you feel anxious, distressed, or contaminated.’] 
The second association we want to break is 
that between carrying out ritualistic behavior and 
the feeling of less anxiety or less distress. In other 
words, after you carry out [specifies the identified 

rituals], you temporarily feel less distress. Therefore, 
you continue to engage in this behavior frequently. 
The treatment we offer breaks the automatic bond 
between the feelings of discomfort/anxiety/contamination 
of [specifies the obsession] and your rituals. 
It will also train you not to ritualize when you are 
anxious.” 

After presenting the treatment rationale, the therapist 
should begin to collect information about the patient’s 
OCD symptoms. The rationale for information gathering 
and a description of the treatment is presented as 
follows: 

“In the next two sessions, I will ask you specific 
questions about the various situations and thoughts 
that generate discomfort or anxiety in you. We will 
order them according to the degree of distress they 
generate in you on a scale from 0 to 100, where 0 
means No anxiety and 100 means Maximum anxiety 
or panic. The exposure treatment program involves 
confronting you with situations and thoughts that 
you avoid because they generate anxiety and urges 
to carry out ritualistic behavior. Why do we want to 
expose you to places and objects that will make you 
uncomfortable, situations that you have attempted to 
avoid even at much cost? We know that when people 
are exposed to situations that they fear, anxiety gradually 
declines. Through exposure, then, the association 
between anxiety and [specifies the obsession] 
weaken because you are repeatedly exposed to these 
situations, so that the previously evoked anxiety decreases 
with time. 

“For many people with OCD the obsessions occur 
within their imagination and rarely take place in 
reality. This makes it impossible to practice exposure 
by actually confronting those situations for prolonged 
periods. For example, if a person fears that 
her home will burn down, we certainly do not wish 
to have her house catch on fire in order to practice 
exposure. Similarly, someone who fears that he has 
run over a person who is now lying in the road cannot 
in reality be exposed to such a situation. 

“If confrontation with the feared situation is necessary 
to reduce obsessions, how can you improve 
without directly confronting the situation? You can 
confront these fears through imagery, in which you 
visualize the circumstances that you fear will happen. 
In imagery practice, you create in your mind 
detailed pictures of the terrible consequences that 


Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder 

you are afraid will occur if you do not engage in the 
ritualistic behavior. During prolonged exposure to 
these images, the distress level associated with them 
gradually decreases. 

“When people with OCD encounter their feared 
situations or their obsessional thoughts, they become 
anxious or distressed and feel compelled to perform 
the ritualistic behavior as a way to reduce their 
distress. Exposure practices can cause this same 
distress and urge to ritualize. Usually, performing 
rituals strengthens the pattern of distress and rituals. 
Therefore in treatment, ritual prevention is practiced 
to break the habit of ritualizing. This requires that 
you stop ritualizing, even though you are still having 
urges to do so. By facing your fears without resorting 
to compulsions, you gradually become less anxious. 
Behavior therapists call this process ‘habituation.’ 
Therefore, during the 3 weeks of intensive exposure, 
the association between relief from anxiety and carrying 
out [specifies the patient’s rituals] will become 
weaker because you will not be allowed to engage in 
such behaviors; therefore, you will find out that your 
anxiety decreases even if you do not resort to these 
activities.” 

The initial information-gathering session is also used 
to begin training the patient to monitor his/her rituals 
accurately. Accurate reports of the frequency and duration 
of ritualistic behavior are important to evaluate the 
progress of treatment and to demonstrate the reality of 
changes to the patient. In some cases, the monitoring 
also serves an active role in treatment. Patients begin to 
recognize that rituals do not truly occur “all day long” 
and the act of monitoring the rituals may decrease their 
frequency and duration. 

“It is very important for the treatment program that we 
have an accurate picture of the extent to which you 
engage in obsessive thinking and compulsive behavior. 
Having a clear picture of how much of your time 
is taken up by your problem will help us to monitor 
your progress and adjust the treatment program 
accordingly. Therefore, during this week, while I 
am still collecting information to form a treatment 
program, I would like you to record your symptoms 
every day. It is not easy to report accurately on how 
much you engage in your obsessive–compulsive behavior; 
therefore, we will spend some time now and 
in the next session going over some rules for how 
to record your symptoms. Here are some monitoring 

forms on which you will record your thoughts and 
rituals.” 

The therapist should specify which ritual(s) the patient 
is to record, go over the instructions carefully with 
the patient, and practice filling out the form with the 
patient using an “imaginary day” of his/her life. The 
following rules are helpful in monitoring rituals: 

1. Use your watch to monitor the time you spend on 
your rituals. 
2. Do not guess the time of ritualizing; be exact. 
3. Write the time immediately on your monitoring 
form. 
4. Do not save the recording to the end of the day or 
the beginning of the next day. 
5. Write a short sentence to describe the trigger for 
ritualizing. 
Prior to beginning treatment, the patient identifies 
an individual (e.g., parent, spouse, or close friend) 
who can serve as a support person during the intensive 
treatment program. The patient is instructed to rely on 
this person for support during exposures, and the support 
person is asked to help monitor compliance with 
response prevention instructions. If the patient experiences 
difficulty resisting the urge to ritualize, then the 
support person is contacted for support. Because the 
support person is involved in the therapy, the therapist 
allocates time during the information-gathering phase 
to describe the treatment and discuss its rationale with 
him or her. 

The therapist makes an effort to ensure that the support 
person and the patient mutually agree that the 
support person will offer constructive criticism and 
observations. In making these suggestions, the support 
person should be sensitive to any difficulties that have 
arisen in the past. For example, Mr. B, who served as 
his wife’s primary source of reassurance, also criticized 
her severely when he “caught” her performing 
her handwashing ritual. To prevent these responses 
from hampering treatment, to help the husband supervise 
his wife’s response prevention, the therapist spent 
time with the couple negotiating appropriate, uncritical 
responses to the wife’s requests for reassurance. 

The support person is in regular (at least twice weekly) 
contact with the therapist and is not only informed 
about the specific homework exposures that the patient 
has to accomplish but also relays his/her observations 
about the patient’s behavior outside the therapy session. 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

In addition, with the consent of the patient, the support 
person should contact the therapist if major treatment 
violations occur (e.g., refusing to do homework or engaging 
in ritualistic behavior). 

Second Information‑Gathering Session 

At the beginning of the second information-gathering 
session, the therapist devotes time to the patient’s selfmonitoring 
form, which includes examining the descriptions 
of situations that trigger ritualistic behavior 
and offering constructive comments when necessary. 
The therapist reminds the patient to use short phrases 
or sentences to describe the trigger situations, assesses 
the accuracy of the patient’s time estimates, and emphasizes 
the need for accurate measurements. 

Generating a Treatment Plan 

The bulk of the second information-gathering session 
is allotted to gathering detailed information about the 
patient’s symptoms and, based on what is learned about 
the symptoms, developing a treatment with the patient. 
It is important to explain to the patient how the exposure 
exercises that comprise his/her treatment will reduce the 
OCD symptoms. For, example, the patient with religious 
obsessions is told that the imaginal exposure to burning 
in hell in excruciating detail is designed to reduce 
his obsessional distress when a less elaborate image of 
burning in hell comes into his mind. It is important that 
patients understand the rationale underlying the central 
concept in EX/RP, that confronting obsession-evoking 
stimuli during treatment increases their suffering in the 
short run but will reduce it in the long run. We often tell 
patients that the difficulties they experience during the 
first week of exposure sessions are likely to diminish 
with proper implementation of EX/RP. 

Describing Homework 

At the end of the second information-gathering session, 
the therapist describes the homework assignments 
included in the treatment program. The homework, 
which usually requires 2–3 hours, in addition to the 
2-hour treatment session, comprises additional exposure 
exercises to be done between treatment sessions 
at the patient’s home or elsewhere (e.g., a shopping 
mall or a relative’s home). We suggest that the patient 
monitor his/her SUDS level every 10 minutes during 

the homework exposures. In some cases, when it is 
impossible for the patient to maintain an exposure for 
45–60 minutes, the therapist works with the patient to 
develop a plan that allows the exposure to be prolonged. 
For example, instead of asking the patient to spend 45 
minutes sitting in the restroom of a local restaurant, the 
therapist might suggest that he/she contaminate a handkerchief 
on the toilet seat and carry this “contamination 
rag” in a pocket. 

Treatment Period 

The treatment program at our center typically comprises 
fifteen 2-hour treatment sessions conducted daily 
for 3 weeks. Clinical observation suggests that massed 
sessions produce better results than do sessions spread 
out over time; therefore, we recommend a minimum 
of three sessions per week. Each session begins with a 
10- to 15-minute discussion of homework assignments 
and the previous day’s ritual monitoring. The next 90 
minutes are divided into 45 minutes each of imaginal 
and in vivo exposure. The final 15 minutes are spent 
discussing the homework assignment for the following 
day. This format may be adjusted when necessary. For 
example, if an in vivo exposure requires that therapist 
and patient travel to a local shopping mall to contaminate 
children’s clothing, the entire session is devoted 
to this activity. Some patients have difficulty engaging 
emotionally in imaginal exposures (i.e., the images fail 
to elicit distress). In these cases, treatment should focus 
exclusively on in vivo exercises. 

We recommend that the therapist discuss the plan for 
that session with the patient in the beginning of the session. 
Barring any unusual circumstances (e.g., patient’s 
stated objection to proceeding with the planned exposure), 
it is important to limit these discussions to no 
more than 15 minutes. Patients with OCD are usually 
very fearful of engaging in exposure tasks, and elaborate 
discussion of the task at hand may serve as a form 
of avoidance of going ahead with the exposure. These 
preexposure discussions are also fertile ground for assurance 
seeking (i.e., the patient asking the therapist if 
he/she is certain that the proposed exercise is safe). The 
therapist should answer such questions carefully, avoiding 
either extreme (i.e., neither providing compulsive 
reassurance nor conveying to the patient that the proposed 
exposure is objectively dangerous). 

Imaginal exposure exercises are typically conducted 
prior to in vivo exercises in each session, often as a pre



Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder 

lude to the scheduled in vivo exercise. During imaginal 
exposure the patient is seated in a comfortable chair 
and is given the following instructions: 

“Today you will be imagining [describes scene]. 
I’ll ask you to close your eyes so that you won’t be 
distracted. Please try to picture this scene as fully 
and vividly as possible, not like you are being told 
a story, but as if you were experiencing it now, right 
here. Every few minutes I will ask you to rate your 
anxiety level on a scale from 0 to 100. Please answer 
quickly and try not to leave the image.” 

The imaginal exposure sessions are audiotaped, and 
the patient is asked to repeat the exposure by listening 
to the tape as part of that day’s homework. The situations 
included in in vivo exposure vary greatly from 
patient to patient (particularly with patients with prominent 
checking rituals). Below are some examples of 
instructions that might be offered to patients during in 
vivo exposure exercises. 

For patients with prominent washing rituals: 

“Today, you will be touching [specifies item(s)]. This 
means that I will ask you to touch it with your whole 
hand, not just the fingers, and then to touch it to your 
face, hair, and clothing, all over yourself, so you feel 
that no part of you has avoided contamination. Then 
I’ll ask you to sit and hold it and repeatedly touch it 
to your face, hair, and clothes during the rest of the 
session. I know that this is likely to make you upset, 
but remember the anxiety will eventually decrease. 
I also want you to go ahead and let yourself worry 
about the harm you are afraid will occur—for example, 
disease—since you won’t he washing or cleaning 
after this exposure. I am sorry that this treatment 
has to be difficult and cause so much discomfort, but 
I’m sure you can do it. You’ll find it gets easier as 
time goes on. OK, here it is, go ahead and touch it.” 

The therapist should give the patient the object to 
hold, ask him/her to touch it, and then ask the patient to 
touch the object or the “contaminated” hands directly 
to his/her face, hair, and clothing. Every 10 minutes the 
patient should be asked, “What is your level of anxiety 
or discomfort from 0 to 100 right now as you focus on 
what you’re touching?” This can be shortened to “What 
is your SUDS?” once the patient understands the question. 


For patients with prominent checking rituals: 

“Now, I’d like you to [e.g., write out your checks to 
pay your monthly bills without looking at them after 
you’ve finished; just put them in the envelope and 
then we will mail them right away, without checking 
even once after you’ve done it]. Then we will go on 
and do [e.g., drive on a bumpy road without looking 
in the rearview mirror] in the same way. While 
doing this, I would like you to worry about what 
harm might occur because you aren’t checking your 
actions, but don’t let the thoughts interfere with actually 
doing those activities.” 

Patients should be reminded of the specific instructions 
for response prevention on the first day of treatment 
and periodically during treatment. We have found 
that giving patients a printed copy of the rules for response 
prevention can help them to understand and remember 
the rules. If the rules as outlined for the patient 
do not adequately cover the type of ritual(s) the patient 
exhibits, the therapist should provide a written set of 
instructions modeled after these forms. 

During the last few sessions of treatment, the patient 
should be introduced to rules of “normal” washing, 
cleaning, or checking. Response prevention requirements 
should be relaxed to enable the patient to return 
to what is considered a normal routine. 

Home Visit 

It is important to ensure that the patient’s gains from 
the treatment program generalize to the home environment. 
Usually homework assignments function to produce 
this generalization, but we have found that visits 
by the therapist to the patient’s home can be quite helpful, 
especially in cases where the patient is not able to 
return home daily during the intensive treatment phase 
(e.g., patients who are from out of town or are hospitalized). 
The home visit also offers therapist and patient 
an opportunity to discuss guidelines for “normal” behavior. 
The therapist should discuss the plans for these 
visits with the patient and his/her family before the 
treatment ends. It is also important to note that, in some 
cases, the majority of the treatment sessions need to be 
conducted at the patient’s home, such as when treating a 
hoarder. Determining the frequency of home visits during 
the core treatment should be based on whether the 
patient’s OCD symptoms are readily “transportable” to 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

situations outside the home, or whether they are specific 
to the home. For patients with prominent washing 
rituals, with “safe” rooms and areas in their houses, 
contamination of these areas is imperative and also 
quite difficult; it is often advisable that the therapist 
assist directly with these home-based exposures when 
it is questionable whether the patient can contaminate 
these “sanctuaries” successfully on his/her own. 

Typically, the home visit comprises 4-hour sessions 
held on each of 2 days at the end of the treatment program. 
The bulk of the time in these sessions is used 
to conduct additional exposures to obsessive stimuli in 
and around the patient’s home or workplace. For example, 
the therapist might accompany the patient as 
he/she contaminates objects around the house or at 
the local grocery store. Similarly, the patient might be 
asked to turn the stove on and off without checking 
and leave the house with the therapist. Most patients, 
particularly those who were able to return home during 
treatment, will report little or no discomfort when 
doing these exposures because they represent repetition 
of homework assignments. In some cases, though, the 
therapist will discover areas that the patient has not 
contaminated, or some areas at home that continue to 
generate distress despite previous exposures. The home 
visit should focus on exposure to situations or objects 
that remain problematic. 

Maintenance Period 

In addition to prescribing continued self-exposure tasks 
to help the patient maintain therapy gains, the therapist 
may wish to schedule regular maintenance sessions. 
These sessions may be used to plan additional exposures, 
to refine guidelines for normal behavior, and to 
address issues that arise as the patient adjusts to life 
without OCD. 

There is some evidence that patients benefit from 
continued contact with the therapist following the 
intensive therapy sessions. In one study, 12 weekly 
supportive therapy sessions (no exposure exercises) 
appeared to reduce the number of relapses in a sample 
of individuals with OCD treated with 3 weeks of 
intensive EX/RP (Foa et al., 1992). In another study, 
following the intensive treatment with 1 week of daily 
cognitive-behavioral sessions followed by eight brief 
(10-minute) weekly telephone contacts resulted in better 
long-term outcome than following intensive treatment 
with 1 week of treatment with free association 
(Hiss et al., 1994). 

Therapeutic Setting 

It is advisable for patients to remain in their normal environments 
during intensive treatment. This is particularly 
important for patients whose fears are cued mainly 
by stimuli in their home environment. The hospital 
may be an artificially protected setting, particularly for 
patients with prominent checking rituals, who may not 
feel responsible for their surroundings and as a result 
do not experience their usual urges to check. If patients 
live too far away to commute for daily sessions, we recommend 
that they rent an apartment or hotel room near 
the clinic. When this is not possible, hospitalization 
should be considered. Hospitalization is recommended 
for patients deemed to be at risk for suicide or psychotic 
breakdown, and for those who need close supervision 
but lack a support system sufficient to aid them during 
treatment. 

If a patient is employed and his/her OCD symptoms 
are work related, he/she should be encouraged to continue 
working, so that relevant exposures can he included 
in treatment. However, since treatment requires 5 to 
6 hours per day, the patient may opt to work half-days 
during the intensive treatment. 

When the patient’s symptoms are unrelated to work, 
he/she may decide not to continue working during intensive 
treatment. Because of the time-consuming nature 
of the treatment, we often suggest that patients take 
some time off from work. If it is not possible for the 
patient to take 3 full weeks off from work, the therapist 
might suggest that the patient work half-days or take 
time off from work during the first and second weeks 
of the treatment program. 

Therapist Variables 

Intensive treatment with exposure to feared situations 
and response prevention of ritualistic behavior provoke 
considerable stress for patients. Their willingness to 
undergo such “torture” attests to their strong motivation 
to rid themselves of the OCD symptoms. The intensive 
treatment regimen requires that the therapist maintain 
a delicate balance between pressuring the patient 
to engage in the treatment and empathizing with his/ 
her distress. Clinical observations and findings from a 
study by Rabavilas and colleagues (1979) suggest that 
a respectful, understanding, encouraging, explicit, and 
challenging therapist is more likely to achieve a successful 
outcome than a permissive, tolerant therapist. 
Notably, patients of well-supervised, nonexpert EX/RP 


Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder 

therapists appear to fare well with EX/RP (Franklin, 
Abramowitz, Furr, Kalsy, & Riggs, 2003; Valderhaug 
et al., 2007). 

During treatment, patients’ behavior may range from 
extreme cooperation and willingness to participate in 
exposures to blatant manipulation and refusal to follow 
the therapist’s instructions. An individual patient may 
fluctuate depending on what exposure is conducted 
during a particular session. To a great extent, the “art” 
of conducting behavioral therapy for OCD involves 
knowing when to push, when to confront, and when to 
be more flexible. Such decisions require that the therapist 
carefully observe the patient’s reactions and make 
a judgment based on his/her experience. As much as 
possible, the therapist should display an attitude that 
counteracts the harshness of the treatment program, 
while maintaining the rules for therapy established at 
the beginning of the program. The therapist should assure 
the patient that he/she will not use force to implement 
exposure and that no exposure will be planned 
without the patient’s consent. If the patient cannot trust 
that the therapist will adhere to these essential guidelines, 
the treatment is likely to be compromised. We 
also assure the patients that family members will be 
asked not to present unplanned exposures to the patient 
(e.g., taking out the garbage) without discussing it. 

Patient Variables 

A primary factor that influences a patient’s potential 
for benefiting from intensive behavioral treatment is 
the level of his/her motivation. Because EX/RP causes 
high distress, patients need to be highly motivated to 
undertake the treatment. Often the level of motivation 
is related to the severity of the patient’s symptoms. 
When symptoms are sufficiently intolerable, patients 
are more likely to tolerate considerable discomfort for 
a short period to gain relief from their symptoms in the 
long run. Tolin and colleagues (2004) have also discussed 
the importance of motivational readiness in EX/ 
RP and have suggested specifically how best to prepare 
patients for the often grueling treatment regimen. 

Sometimes individuals are pressured into entering 
therapy by their families, and they agree to participate 
in treatment only to appease a spouse or a parent. These 
patients are unlikely to follow the therapist’s instructions 
strictly; therefore, they are less likely to make 
lasting gains in therapy. In light of these observations, 
we do not recommend that patients enter into EX/RP 
if they are not committed to follow such instructions; 

alternative treatment strategies are typically recommended 
in such circumstances. 

It is important that the therapist clearly explain to 
the patient that 1 month of therapy, albeit intensive, is 
unlikely to eliminate all OCD symptoms. Rather, patients 
should expect that their anxiety and the urges to 
ritualize will diminish and become more manageable. 
An expectation of becoming symptom free at the end 
of treatment may lead to disappointment and can potentiate 
relapse because maintenance of treatment gains 
usually requires continued effort over time following 
the intensive treatment. Thus, in the initial interview, 
we tell patients that we do not have a “cure” for OCD; 
rather, we have a treatment that is likely to help them 
substantially reduce their symptoms in both the short 
and the long run. 

It is also important to explain to patients that EX/ 
RP treatment is not a panacea for all of their psychological 
and interpersonal problems. This treatment is 
aimed specifically at reducing patients’ obsessions and 
urges to ritualize. Problems that existed prior to treatment 
(e.g., marital discord or depression) are likely 
to remain, although they may be somewhat alleviated 
after treatment. 

As mentioned earlier, patients with severe depression 
and/or an extremely strong belief in the reality 
of the obsessive fear may not benefit from EX/RP. An 
additional factor that has been identified as a potential 
hindrance to the cognitive-behavioral and pharmacological 
treatment of OCD is concurrent schizotypal 
personality disorder (Jenike, Baer, Minichiello, 
Schwartz, & Carey, 1986). Although some questions 
have been raised about the method used to diagnose 
schizotypy (see Stanley, Turner, & Borden, 1990), therapists 
should be alerted to the probability that patients 
with schizotypal disorder may respond poorly to treatment 
for OCD. 

case stuDy 

In this section we demonstrate through verbatim material 
the process of gathering information relevant to 
treatment, planning the treatment program, and conducting 
exposure sessions. 

Case Description 

“June,” a 26-year-old married woman who had just 
completed her bachelor’s degree in nursing, sought 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

treatment for a severe washing and cleaning problem. 
She was extremely agitated in the first interview and 
described herself as “crying a whole lot” during the 
previous 6 weeks. She arrived in the company of her 
husband of 6 months and her sister-in-law, whom she 
considered a good friend. Previous treatment by systematic 
desensitization, antidepressants, tranquilizers, 
and cognitive restructuring had proven ineffective. 
June had been unable to seek employment as a nurse 
due to her symptoms. 

This information was collected at June’s initial 
evaluation for participation in EX/RP treatment. After 
ascertaining the absence of psychosis, drug and alcohol 
abuse, and organic disorders, June was assigned a 
therapist. 

Information Gathering 

Current Symptoms 

First, the therapist sought information from June about 
the obsessional content, including external and internal 
fear cues; beliefs about consequences; and information 
about passive avoidance patterns and types of rituals. 
Because rituals are the most concrete symptom, it is 
often convenient to begin the inquiry by asking for a 
description of this behavior. 

tHeraPist: I understand from Dr. F that you are having 
a lot of difficulty with washing and cleaning. Can 
you tell me more about the problem? 

June: I can’t seem to control it at all recently. I wash too 
much. My showers are taking a long time, and my 
husband is very upset with me. He and my sister-inlaw 
are trying to help, but I can’t stop it. I’m upset all 
the time and I’ve been crying a whole lot lately (on 
the verge of tears). Nothing seems to help. 

tHeraPist: I see. You look upset right now. Please try 
to explain what your washing has been like in the 
past few days, so I can understand. How much washing 
have you been doing? 

June: Much too much. My showers use up all the hot 
water. And I have to wash my hands, it seems like, 
all the time. I never feel clean enough. 

tHeraPist: About how long does a shower take? How 
many minutes or hours would you say? 
June: About 45 minutes, I guess. I try to get out sooner. 
Sometimes I ask Kenny to make me stop. 

tHeraPist: And how often do you take one? 

June: Usually only twice, once in the morning and 
once at night before bed, but sometimes, if I’m really 
upset about something, I could take an extra one. 

tHeraPist: And what about washing your hands? How 
much time does that take? 
June: You mean how many times do I wash? 

tHeraPist: How long does it take each time you wash 
your hands, and how often do you wash your hands 
in a day? 

June: Umm, maybe 20 times a day. It probably takes 
me 5 minutes each time, maybe more sometimes. I 
always have the feeling they’re not really clean, like 
maybe I touched them to the side of the sink after I 
rinsed and then I think they’re dirty again. 

The therapist now had some basic information about 
the most prominent rituals. Some further questioning 
clarified whether other compulsions were also in evidence. 


tHeraPist: Do you do anything else to make yourself 
feel clean? 
June: Yes, I alcohol things. I wipe with alcohol, like 
the car seat before I sit down. 

tHeraPist: Do you wipe yourself with alcohol? 

June: No, only things that I think are dirty. 

tHeraPist: Can you tell me how much you do that? 

June: I use about a bottle of alcohol a week. 

Here the therapist had to choose whether to inquire 
about what objects June cleans or to ask about possible 
additional rituals. The therapist chose to continue 
the inquiry about ritualistic actions, and to turn to the 
subject of “contaminants” as soon as the inquiry was 
completed. 

tHeraPist: OK, can you think of any other things that 
you do to clean yourself, or other things around you 
that you feel are dirty? 

June: That’s all I can think of right now. 

tHeraPist: What about other kinds of what we call 
“compulsive” type of activities? Do you have to 
check or repeat things over and over? 

June: No, except when I wash, if I don’t feel it’s enough. 
Then I wash again. 


Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder 

tHeraPist: No other repetitive actions besides washing? 


Since this patient did not appear to have multiple 
types of ritualistic behaviors, the therapist turned to the 
obsessional content. External cues are usually solicited 
first. 

tHeraPist: What are the things that make you feel you 
want to wash? For instance, why do you wipe the car 
seat with alcohol? 

June: I think that maybe I got dog dirt on it when I got 
in from before, or Kenny might have. 
tHeraPist: From your shoes? 

June: Yes, I also worry about the hem of my dress 
touching the seat. I’ve been worrying that my 
shoe could kick my skirt hem or when I step up a 
step, like to go in a building, the dress could touch 
the step. 

tHeraPist: A dress like this? June was wearing a dress 
that came to just below her knee. [The likelihood 
that it could have touched a curb or sole of her shoe 
was very slim.] 

June: Yes. 
tHeraPist: Has your skirt ever had dog dirt on it? 
June: I don’t think so, but in my mind I think that 

maybe it could have gotten some on it. I suppose it 
would be hard for that to happen, wouldn’t it? 

Thoughts that highly improbable events might have 
occurred are common in OCD. Such distortions may 
be the result of intense anxiety. Doubts about “safety” 
often lead to requests for reassurance or to rituals. Reassuring 
June that her dress is unlikely to be soiled 
would have been countertherapeutic because it perpetuates 
the neurotic fears. Rather, the therapist inquired 
further about the obsessional content. 

tHeraPist: Is dog “dirt” the most upsetting thing that 
you worry about? 
June: Probably. Yes, I think so, but bathroom germs 
are pretty bad, too. 
tHeraPist: What sort of germs? 
June: From toilets. You know, when you go to the bathroom. 
tHeraPist: Urine and feces? 

June: Yes, urine doesn’t bother me as much as the 
other. 

tHeraPist: Why? 

June: Because I learned in nursing school that it’s almost 
sterile. I had a hard time in the course about microbiology 
because it upset me to try to learn about 
bacteria and microorganisms. They make it sound 
like there are all kinds of germs everywhere that are 
real dangerous. I didn’t learn it very well; I tried to 
avoid thinking about it. 

June’s concerns with both dog dirt and bathroom 
germs suggested that her fear structure includes apprehension 
about potential illness. The therapist questioned 
her to better understand the nature of the feared 
consequences of contamination. 

tHeraPist: Are you afraid of diseases that could come 
from feces? 

June: Yes, I guess so. The thing of it is, though, I know 
other people don’t worry about it like I do. To them, 
you know, they just go to the bathroom and wash 
their hands and don’t even think about it. But I can’t 
get it out of my head that maybe I didn’t get clean 
enough. 

tHeraPist: If you didn’t wash enough, would you get 
sick or would you cause someone else to get sick? 
June: Mostly I worry that I’ll get sick, but sometimes I 
worry about Kenny, too. 

tHeraPist: Do you worry about a particular kind of 
disease? 
June: I’m not sure. Some kind of illness. 

It is not uncommon for patients who fear harm that 
may ensue from not ritualizing to be unable to identify 
a specific feared consequence. Patients with prominent 
checking rituals often fear they will forget or throw out 
something important, but they do not always know exactly 
what this will be. Repeaters may fear that something 
bad will happen to loved ones but often cannot 
specify what particular disaster will befall them. However, 
many individuals with OCD do fear specific consequences 
(e.g., blindness or leukemia). At this point, 
the therapist may choose either to complete the inquiry 
about external threat cues or pursue the investigation 
about the feared consequences and the belief that such 
harm is indeed likely to occur. The latter course was 
selected here. 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

tHeraPist: Let’s say that you did actually touch dog 
feces or human feces, and you weren’t aware of it, so 
you didn’t wash to remove it. What is the likelihood 
that you or Kenny would really get seriously ill? 

June: Well, I feel like it really could happen. 

tHeraPist: I understand that when it happens and you 
become very distressed, it feels like you will actually 
become sick, but if I ask you to judge objectively, 
right now, how likely is it that you will get sick from 
touching feces and not washing? For example, if you 
were to touch feces 10 times, how many times would 
you get sick? 

June: Oh, I know it’s pretty unlikely, but sometimes it 
seems so real. 

tHeraPist: Can you put a number on it? What’s the 
percent chance that if you touched a small amount of 
feces and didn’t wash that you’d get sick? 

June: I’d say low, less than 25%. 

tHeraPist: That means that one time in every four 
you’d get sick. 
June: No, that’s not right. I guess it’s really less than 
1%. 

From this dialogue it is clear that June did not 
strongly believe that her feared disasters would actually 
occur, although her initial estimate of the likelihood 
was high. A person with poor insight regarding 
the senselessness of his/her OCD symptoms would 
have assigned higher probabilities (usually over 80%) 
and would insist on the accuracy of his/her estimate 
even in the face of persistent questioning. Note also that 
this exchange is an example of the informal cognitive 
restructuring accompanying EX/RP that we discussed 
earlier. The therapist may need to repeat this discussion 
during subsequent exposure sessions when June, highly 
anxious about confronting contaminants, readjusts her 
likelihood estimates when anxious. Strength of belief 
can change in a given patient but is stronger when the 
patient perceives threat. 

tHeraPist: OK. Now, besides disease, what else could 
happen if you got feces on you? 

June: I suppose I’m also afraid of what other people 
might think if I got dog feces on my shoe or on my 
dress. Somebody would see it or smell it and think 
it was really disgusting, and I was a dirty person. 
I think I’m afraid they would think I’m not a good 
person. 

The therapist then questioned June further about this 
feared consequence, inquiring about the possibility of 
others evaluating her character negatively because she 
had feces on her dress. The material regarding feared 
consequences was collected for later inclusion in the 
imaginal exposure scenes. To conclude the inquiry 
about the nature of the obsessions, the therapist further 
elucidated the external feared stimuli. 

tHeraPist: Besides dog and human feces and toilets, 
what else can “contaminate” you? Is it OK if I use 
the word “contaminated” to describe how you feel if 
you handle these things? 

June: Yes, it’s like I can feel it on my skin, even if I 
can’t see it. Umm, I also get upset if I see “bird doo” 
on my car. 

tHeraPist: Bird droppings? The whitish spots? 

June: Yeah, I have to hold my skirt close to me so that I 
don’t touch any of these spots with my clothes. 

tHeraPist: OK, bird doo, what else? 

June: Dead animals, like on the roadside. I feel like 
the germs, or whatever it is, get on the tires from the 
pavement and get on the car. Even if I don’t run over 
it. Like it’s spread around the street near it. 

tHeraPist: What do you do if you see a dead animal? 

June: I swerve wide around it. Once I parked the car 
and as I got out, I saw this dead cat right behind the 
car. I had to wash all my clothes and take a shower 
right away. It was really a mess that day. 

tHeraPist: It sounds like that was very difficult for 
you. Is there anything else besides dead animals that 
contaminates you? 

June: I can’t think of any. There are lots of places I 
avoid now, but that’s because of what we just talked 
about. 

The therapist questions June further about other 
items that are likely to be contaminated because of 
their potential relationship to the ones she has already 
noted. 

tHeraPist: What about trash or garbage? 

June: Yeah, that bothers me. And I also avoid gutters 
on the street. 

tHeraPist: What’s in the gutter that upsets you? 
June: Dead animals, I guess. And then the rain spreads 
the germs down the street. Also rotten garbage. It’s 


Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder 

really dirty. Sometimes the gutters are really disgusting. 
tHeraPist: Um hmm. Are you afraid you could get 
sick from dead animals and garbage? 
June: Yes, it’s like the toilets or dog dirt. 

To prepare for an exposure program in which objects 
are presented hierarchically with respect to their 
ability to provoke discomfort, June was asked to rank 
her major contaminants. Here she also provided information 
about avoidance behaviors associated with her 
contaminants. 

tHeraPist: Now, let’s make a list of the main things 
that upset you. I’m going to ask you how distressed 
you would be on a 0- to 100-point scale if you 
touched the thing I’ll name. Zero indicates no distress 
at all and 100 means you’d be extremely upset, 
the most you’ve ever felt. 

June: OK. 
tHeraPist: What if you touched dog dirt? 
June: And I could wash as much as I wanted? 
tHeraPist: No, let’s say you couldn’t wash for a while. 
June: 100. 
tHeraPist: A dead animal. 
June: Also 100. 
tHeraPist: Bird doo on your car. 
June: That depends on whether it is wet or dry. 
tHeraPist: Tell me for both. 
June: 100 wet and 95 dry. 
tHeraPist: Street gutter. 
June: 95. 
tHeraPist: Garbage in your sink at home. 
June: Not too bad. Only 50. But, the trash can outdoors 

would be 90. 
tHeraPist: Why the difference? 
June: Because the inside of the trash can is dirty from 

lots of old garbage. 
tHeraPist: I see. What about a public toilet seat? 
June: That’s bad. 95. 
tHeraPist: Car tires? 
June: Usually 90. But if I just passed a dead animal, 

they’d be 99. 

tHeraPist: What about a doorknob to a public bathroom? 


June: The outside knob is low, like 40. But the inside 
knob is 80 because people touch it right after they’ve 
used the bathroom, and I’ve seen that some don’t 
wash their hands. 

tHeraPist: I understand. How about grass in a park 
where dogs are around? 

June: If I did walk in the grass, it would be about 80 
or 85, but I don’t usually do it. I also have a lot of 
trouble on sidewalks. You know, the brown spots on 
the concrete. I guess most of it is just rust or other 
dirt, but I think maybe it could be dog dirt. 

tHeraPist: How much does that bother you? 
June: To step on a brown spot? About 90. I always walk 

around them. 

The therapist should continue in this manner until a 
list of 10–20 items is formed. More items may be necessary 
for patients with multiple obsessional fears or 
rituals. The items are ordered from low- to high-level 
fear in preparation for treatment by exposure. Items 
equivalent with regard to their level of disturbance are 
grouped together. Moreover, it is important to probe the 
rationale for one stimulus differing from another because 
it provides further information about the patient’s 
particular “OCD logic.” This information is highly relevant 
for the construction of the exposure hierarchy and 
for the informal cognitive discussions about risk assessment, 
responsibility, and so forth. 

Considerable information about avoidance patterns 
and rituals emerged from the previous interview about 
external threat cues. More details may be obtained by 
asking the patient to provide a step-by-step description 
of a typical day’s activities from the time he/she 
awakens until he/she goes to sleep. Usually, patients are 
not entirely accurate when describing their compulsive 
behaviors during the interview because, as one patient 
told us, they have not “thought of their OCD in that way 
before.” Thus, the self-monitoring tasks assist patients 
in raising their awareness about the OCD patterns and 
provide the therapist with more accurate data about 
rituals and avoidant behaviors. 

We were particularly concerned by June’s bathroom 
routines, her shower, use of the toilet, handling of towels 
and dirty clothes, and dressing and putting on shoes. 
Additional information about avoidance patterns may 
be ascertained by inquiring about other routine activi



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

ties, such as shopping, eating out, housecleaning, preparing 
meals, working, and so on. The following dialogue 
exemplifies the degree of detail desired. 

tHeraPist: June, for us to plan your treatment carefully, 
I need to know what you avoid in your daily 
routine. Why don’t you start by describing what you 
do first when you wake up. 

June: I go to use the bathroom first. 

tHeraPist: Nightgown on or off? 

June: I take off my nightgown because I don’t want it 
to touch the toilet. That way it’s clean at night after 
I shower. 

tHeraPist: Go on. 

June: I go to the toilet. I suppose I use a lot of toilet 
paper because I don’t want to get anything on my 
hand. Then I have to shower after a bowel movement. 

tHeraPist: How do you get ready to shower? 

June: I have to put a new towel on the rod near the 
shower. I don’t like it to touch anything before I use 
it. Oh, and I put my slippers facing the door, near the 
shower, so I can put them on without stepping on the 
bathroom floor when I get out of the shower. Then I 
get into the shower. 

tHeraPist: You said you shower for 45 minutes. Why 
does it take so long? 

June: I have to wash myself in a special order and I 
count how many times I wash each part. Like I wash 
my arm four times. That’s why it takes so long. 

tHeraPist: What is the order you use? 

June: First I wash my hands, then my face and hair, and 
then I go from the top down. 

tHeraPist: What about the genital and anal area? 
[This area should disturb this patient most because 
she fears contamination from fecal “germs.”] 

June: Oh yes, those are last, after my feet. 

Such a detailed description helps the therapist to 
anticipate possible avoidance by the patient during 
treatment and to plan specific exposure instructions. 
Supervision of normal washing behavior at the end of 
treatment will address June’s tendency to count and to 
order her washing. During the initial session of information 
gathering, June was instructed to self-monitor 
the frequency and duration of her compulsions. 

tHeraPist: Between now and our next session, I’d like 
you to record all the washing and cleaning that you 
do, including wiping things with alcohol. You can 
use this form (Hands her a self-monitoring of rituals 
form.) Please write down every time you wash, 
how long you washed, what made you wash, and how 
anxious you were before you washed. This kind of 
record will help us identify any sources of contamination 
you’ve forgotten to mention, and we can also 
use it to measure your progress during treatment. 

June: Do you want me to write in each space for each 
half-hour? 

tHeraPist: No, only when you wash or use alcohol. 

June: OK. 

History of Symptoms and Treatment History 

After assessing the patient’s current symptoms, the 
therapist sought information about the onset of the 
problem, with particular reference to the presence of 
specific stressors at the time and whether these stressors 
are still present. 

tHeraPist: How long have you been washing like this? 

June: It started about 2 years ago in my first year of 
nursing school. It wasn’t real bad right away. It started 
with the city. I had to go into the city to classes, 
and the city seemed real dirty. 

tHeraPist: Did nursing have something to do with it? 

June: Maybe. I was under a lot of tension. I had to quit 
working as a secretary, and it was pretty hard without 
an income and a lot of school bills. My mother 
and dad weren’t much help. And then we started to 
learn all the sterilizing techniques, and I already told 
you about the course in microbiology. 

tHeraPist: Did it gradually get worse? 

June: Mostly, but I did notice that it was a lot worse 
after a rotation on surgery, where I was really worried 
about germs contaminating the instruments. 
That’s when I started to wash more than usual. 

tHeraPist: Did you seek help at that time? 

June: I was already seeing Dr. W at the university, and 
he tried to help. 

tHeraPist: You were already in treatment with him? 
For what reason? 


Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder 

June: He was helping me with an eating problem. I had 
anorexia. I’d been seeing him for about a year when 
the washing started. 

tHeraPist: Anorexia? Did treatment help? 

June: Yes. I was down to 85 pounds and I’m up around 
105 now. He mostly asked me to increase my weight 
every week and he did “cognitive therapy,” I think 
it’s called. 

tHeraPist: I see. What about the washing problem? 

June: He tried the same type of therapy, but it didn’t 
work for that. That’s why I’m here. My sister-in-law 
heard about it, and Dr. W said I should come. 

tHeraPist: What about drugs? Were you ever given 
medication for this problem? 

June: Yes, I tried Anafranil [clomipramine] for a while 
and it helped a little, but it made me dizzy and sleepy, 
so I decided to stop taking it. Also, I heard that you 
can’t take the medication when you are pregnant, 
and Kenny and I want to have a baby soon. Before 
that, I took Xanax [alprazolam]; it calmed me down 
but didn’t stop the washing. 

tHeraPist: Have you tried any other treatments? 

June: Only for the anorexia. I went to another counseling 
center at the university for about a year, but that 
didn’t really help at all. 

June’s history was unusual only in the relatively recent 
onset of her symptoms. Typically, patients in our 
clinic present a much longer duration of symptoms, 
with the mean around 8 years. Other centers in England 
and Holland report similar figures. June’s treatment 
history of trying various psychotherapeutic and pharmacological 
treatments prior to seeking EX/RP was 
quite typical. Since previous failure with nonbehavioral 
treatments has not been found to influence outcome 
with EX/RP, the clinician should not be discouraged by 
such a history. However, because of a possible skeptical 
attitude about the value of treatment, the therapist 
should provide the patient with a clear rationale for EX/ 
RP treatment along the lines discussed earlier and demonstrated 
below. 

tHeraPist: Before I continue to collect more information 
about your problem, let me tell you about our 
treatment. 

June: Well, Dr. F told me something about it, but 

I’m still not sure what this treatment is going to be 
like. 

tHeraPist: The treatment is called exposure and ritual 
prevention. I’ll be asking you to confront situations 
and things that frighten you or make you feel contaminated. 
We will do this gradually, working up to 
the hardest things. For example, we may begin with 
the outside door handles of bathrooms and work our 
way up to toilet seats and bird doo. We’ll do this together, 
and I’ll be there to help you. The sessions will 
last 1½ or 2 hours, and we’ll meet every weekday. 
In addition, I’ll assign you homework to do similar 
things between the therapy sessions. 

June: You mean I have to touch them, even dog dirt? 

tHeraPist: Yes, to get over these kinds of fears, people 
must learn to confront what they’re afraid of and stay 
with it until the discomfort decreases. 

June: Even if I did, it would probably take me a year to 
get used to it. 

tHeraPist: Remember, you didn’t always feel like this 
about dog dirt. When you were younger, did you ever 
step in dog dirt and just wipe it off on the grass and 
go on playing? 

June: Yeah, I forget that. It seems such a long time ago. 
I used to not think twice about this stuff. 

tHeraPist: To get you back to how you used to feel, 
we need to expose you directly to what you’re afraid 
of. Now, there’s a second part to treatment. I’m also 
going to ask you not to wash for 3 days at a stretch. 
No handwashing or showering for 3 days. Then you 
can take a shower, but you will have to limit it to 10 
minutes. After the shower, you will have to contaminate 
yourself again, then wait another 3 days for your 
next shower. 

June: I can’t believe it! I’ll never be able to do that. If I 
could, I wouldn’t be here. How can I not wash? Every 
day I resolve to stop, but I always give in. You mean 
I wouldn’t be able to wash after I use the bathroom 
or before I eat? Other people wash after they use the 
toilet. Why can’t I just wash less, like normal people 
do? 

tHeraPist: Other people don’t have OCD. Remember, 
for you, washing makes you feel less “contaminated” 
and less anxious. Right? 

June: Yes. 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

tHeraPist: If you wash, even briefly, whenever you 
feel “contaminated,” you never get a chance to learn 
that the feeling of contamination would go away by 
itself without washing. If you are really very anxious, 
it might take a while, even several hours, before 
you feel better, but it will eventually happen. 
On the other hand, if you wash, even briefly, every 
few hours, it will reinforce your idea that you have to 
wash to feel better. 

June: But why 3 days? Couldn’t I shower once a day 
like other people? 

tHeraPist: For the same reason. You’d still feel relief, 
even if you waited 24 hours between washings. And 
that would strengthen your belief that you need to 
“decontaminate” by washing yourself. You must 
learn to use soap and water to feel clean and fresh 
but not to “decontaminate” yourself. 

June: I think I understand. I know I shower now to get 
the things I’m afraid of off my body. I used to shower 
just to get sweat and dirt off, and feel nice. I’m still 
not sure I could stand it though, not washing for that 
long. 

tHeraPist: The treatment is very demanding. Before 
we start the treatment program you will need to 
make a commitment to yourself that even though you 
will feel very uncomfortable and even quite upset at 
times, you won’t wash. I’ll try to help you as much 
as I can by planning the treatment so you know what 
to expect each day and by supporting you whenever 
you need it. Someone will have to be available to 
help supervise and support you any time you need 
it. Between sessions you can always call me here or 
at home if a problem comes up. I know the treatment 
won’t be easy for you, but I’m sure you can do it if 
you make up your mind. 

At this point, a firm commitment should not be requested. 
Rather, the patient should be made aware of 
what will be required so that he/she can adjust to these 
expectations and plan activities during the treatment 
period accordingly. The patient should make the arrangements 
necessary to attend daily treatment sessions 
for 3 to 4 weeks. As we discussed earlier, two to three 
sessions per week may be sufficient for patients with 
less severe symptoms. It is important that the therapist 
not minimize the difficulty of the treatment regimen, so 
that the patient is prepared to struggle and enters treatment 
with a readiness to mobilize inner resources and 
emotional support from family and friends. 

The history of the patient is usually taken in the first 
session. Because collecting histories of individuals 
with OCD does not differ from collecting histories of 
other psychiatric patients, details are not provided here. 

Treatment Planning 

The therapist began the second session by briefly reviewing 
the patient’s self-monitoring of rituals form. 
The remainder of the session was devoted to developing 
a treatment plan. 

tHeraPist: OK, now I want to discuss our plan for 
each day during the first week of therapy. We need 
to expose you both in imagination and in reality to 
the things that bother you, which we talked about in 
our first sessions. As I said already, we’ll also limit 
your washing. The scenes you imagine will focus 
on the harm that you fear will occur if you do not 
wash. The actual exposures will focus on confronting 
the things that contaminate you. Restricting your 
washing will teach you how to live without rituals. In 
imaginal exposure, you will picture yourself touching 
something you’re afraid of, like toilet seats, and 
not washing and then becoming ill. We can have 
you imagine going to a doctor who can’t figure out 
what’s wrong and can’t fix it. That’s the sort of fear 
you have, right? 

June: Yes, that and Kenny getting sick, and it being 
my fault. 

tHeraPist: OK, so in some scenes you’ll be sick, and 
in others Kenny will get sick. Should I add that other 
people blame you for not being careful? Is this what 
you’re afraid of? 

June: Yes, especially my mother. 

tHeraPist: OK. We’ll have her criticize you for not 
being careful enough. Can you think of anything 
else we should add to the image? 

June: No, that’s about it. 

tHeraPist: We can compose the scenes in detail after 
we plan the actual exposures. Let’s review the list 
of things you avoid or are afraid to touch and make 
sure that we have listed them in the right order. Then 
we’ll decide what to work on each day. OK? 

June: OK. 

June reviewed the list, which included items such as 
trash cans, kitchen floor, bathroom floor, public hall



Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder 

way carpet, plant dirt, puddles, car tires, dried dog 
“dirt,” and bird “doo.” Changes were made as needed. 

tHeraPist: Good. Now let’s plan the treatment. On the 
first day we should start with things that you rated 
below a 60. That would include touching this carpet, 
doorknobs that are not inside bathrooms, books on 
my shelves, light switches, and stair railings. On the 
second day, we’ll do the 60- to 70-level items, like 
faucets, bare floors, dirty laundry, and the things on 
Kenny’s desk. [The therapist continued to detail Sessions 
3 to 5, increasing the level of difficulty each 
day.] In the second week, we will repeat the worse 
situations like gutters, tires, public toilets, bird doo, 
and dog dirt, and we’ll also find a dead animal to 
walk near and touch the street next to it. 

On rare occasions, direct confrontation with a 
feared object (e.g., pesticides or other chemicals) may 
have some likelihood of producing actual harm. In 
such cases, the therapist’s judgment should be exercised 
to find a middle ground between total avoidance 
and endangerment. With chemicals, for example, patients 
are exposed to small quantities that are objectively 
nonharmful. In June’s case the therapist decided 
that direct contact with a dead animal was not called 
for, and that stepping on the animal’s fur with her shoe 
and then touching the shoe sole constituted sufficient 
exposure. In general, the therapist must weigh the level 
of obsessional distress that will be evoked by a given 
exposure with the objective risks entailed in completing 
that exposure. Patients with OCD have difficulty 
assessing such risks realistically; thus, it is the responsibility 
of the therapist to evaluate whether exposure 
is warranted. For example, patients with fears of contracting 
HIV would certainly be highly distressed if 
asked to handle a dirty hypodermic needle found in 
a city gutter, but because exposure to such stimuli is 
objectively risky, they should not be included on the 
treatment hierarchy. 

tHeraPist: How does this plan sound? 

June: The first week is OK, but I’m really scared about 
the second week. I’m not sure I’ll be ready to do the 
bathrooms and dog dirt by then. 

tHeraPist: Many people feel this way at the beginning, 
but by the end of the first week, you won’t be 
as frightened as you are now about touching tires or 
public toilets. Remember, I will be here to help you 

because it will probably be difficult in the beginning. 


June: Yes, I know it. I feel like I don’t really have a 
choice anyhow. This washing is crazy and I’m disgusted 
with myself. I suppose I’m as ready as I’ll 
ever be. 

tHeraPist: Good. Now remember, I’ll ask you to keep 
working on these things for 2 to 3 hours at home 
after each session, but you will already have done 
them with me, so I don’t think it will be too hard. I 
take it that you talked to Kenny about assisting us 
with supervising, since I saw him out in the waiting 
room. 

June: Yes, he said that’s fine. He wanted to know what 
he should do. 

tHeraPist: Let’s call him in. Did you talk to your 
sister-in-law about being available when Kenny is at 
work during the day? 

June: Yes, she was really good about it, but she couldn’t 
come today because of the kids. 

tHeraPist: If it’s difficult for her to come, I could talk 
to her on the phone. Why don’t you go get Kenny 
now? 

Treatment 

June was seen for 15 treatment sessions, held every 
weekday for 3 weeks. During the fourth week the therapist 
visited her twice at her home for 4 hours each time. 
During these visits, under the therapist’s supervision, 
June contaminated her entire house and exposed herself 
to objects at home and in her neighborhood that 
provoked distress. Thereafter, once-weekly follow-up 
sessions were instituted to ensure maintenance of gains 
and to address any other issues of concern to her. 

As discussed earlier, treatment begins with exposure 
to moderately difficult items on the hierarchy and progresses 
to the most disturbing ones by the beginning 
of the second week. The most distressing items are repeated 
during the remainder of the second and third 
weeks. The following sequence, which occurred on the 
sixth day of treatment, exemplifies this process. 

tHeraPist: How was your weekend? 

June: Not that great. I suppose it was as good as I could 
expect. I took my shower Sunday night and I was so 
nervous about finishing in time I don’t even know if 
I washed right. 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

tHeraPist: Most people feel the same way. Remember 
though, you aren’t supposed to wash “right,” just to 
wash. Did Kenny time it? 

June: Yes, he called out the minutes like you said, “5, 
7, 9,” and then “stop.” 

tHeraPist: You stopped when he said to? 

June: Yes, but it still wasn’t easy. 

tHeraPist: I know. I’m really pleased that you were 
careful to follow the rules. 

June: I have pretty much decided that this is my chance 
to get better, so I’m trying my best. 

tHeraPist: Good. I am glad you feel so positive. How 
was the homework? 

June: I touched the floor and the soles of my shoes and 
the cement. It is all written on the daily sheet there. 
On Saturday, I went to my sister’s, so I could play 
with the kids like we said. They stepped on me when 
I lay on the floor and I tried to touch their bottoms 
when I held them. On Sunday, Kenny and I went 
to the park. I didn’t sit in the grass but I did walk 
around and touched my shoes afterward. 

tHeraPist: The soles? 

June: Yeah. We also went downtown and I threw some 
things in the trash cans and pushed them down, and 
tried to touch the sides. It’s sort of hard because I felt 
conspicuous, but I did it anyway. 

tHeraPist: That sounds really good. I’m glad to hear 
it. How about your doormat and going into the garden? 


June: I did the doormat and I stood in the garden, but 
I couldn’t touch the dirt. The neighbor’s dog always 
runs all over. I know I should have touched it, but I 
just couldn’t get up the courage. 

tHeraPist: Well, you did do many other things. Let’s 
plan to go outside today and do it together, so it will 
be easier for you to walk in the garden when you go 
home. 

June: OK. 

June was very compliant with the treatment regimen. 
Some patients occasionally lapse on response prevention, 
particularly during the first week of the treatment 
program. The therapist should reinforce the patient for 
partial compliance but emphasize the need to comply 
fully with treatment instructions. With regard to expo


sure homework, it is not uncommon for patients to neglect 
completing some assignments. Again, they should 
be reinforced for what they have achieved and encouraged 
to complete all of the assignments. 

tHeraPist: How are you and Kenny doing? 

June: He got mad on Sunday night after the shower 
because I started to ask him how he showered and if 
I was clean enough. I think I nagged him too much, 
so he lost his temper. We just watched TV, and after 
a while we talked a bit and he sort of apologized for 
getting mad. But I understand; I ask too many questions. 
Otherwise, the rest of the weekend was OK. 

tHeraPist: Well, it’s unfortunate that Kenny got mad, 
but it’s good that he didn’t answer your questions. 
He’s not supposed to reassure you about cleanliness. 

June: I think he has a hard time knowing when to answer 
me and when not to. I am not real sure either. 
Could you talk to him before Wednesday when I 
shower again? 

tHeraPist: That’s a good idea. I’ll call him after we’re 
done with today’s session. Now, today we’ll start 
with the scene about you driving your car to an appointment 
with me, and you get a flat tire and have 
to change it. The cars splash water in the puddle near 
you, and it lands on the car and on you. Then you 
notice a dead animal when you walk behind the car, 
and it’s right behind you. You really feel contaminated. 
You walk to the gas station nearby to see if 
they can fix the tire and you have to urinate so badly 
that you have to use their restroom. They agree to fix 
the tire if you remove it and bring it to them because 
otherwise they are too busy. Of course, that means 
you will have to handle the tire that is contaminated 
by the dead animal. We’ll add some bird doo on the 
street and on the sidewalk, too. Then, later you start 
to feel sick, and you feel like it’s from the dead animal. 
Sound awful enough? 

June: Yeah. Ugh. That one is really bad. Do I have to? 
Never mind, I know the answer. 

tHeraPist: OK. I want you to close your eyes now and 
imagine that you are driving your car on West Avenue. 


Note that the therapist checked the patient’s assign


ment from the previous day to verify that she complet


ed it and did not engage in avoidance and rituals. This 


Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder 

provided an opportunity to reinforce efforts at selfexposure. 
It is important to keep track of completion of 
homework because patients do not always volunteer information 
about omissions. They will, however, admit 
failure to comply if directly asked and are likely to 
carry out the next assignment if reinforced adequately. 

With regard to the conflict between June and Kenny, 
it is our experience that, like Kenny, most family members 
are quite willing to help. Difficulty may, however, 
arise when they are unable to help without becoming 
upset, thereby increasing the patient’s tension. Providing 
them with an opportunity to ventilate their frustration 
by contacting the therapist, who also may coach 
them in alternative reactions, may reduce familial tension. 


That same session also included imaginal exposure 
to do a scenario planned in advance. Since that scenario 
had already been discussed in detail with the patient, 
it posed no surprises for her. It is presented for up to 1 
hour, or until a substantial decrease in anxiety is evident. 
Next, the patient is confronted in vivo with situations 
like those included in the fantasized scene. 

tHeraPist: It’s time to do the real thing now. I looked 
for a dead animal by the side of the road yesterday 
and I found one about a mile away. I think we should 
go there. 

June: Yuck, that’s terrific. Just for me you had to find it. 

tHeraPist: Today’s our lucky day. You knew we were 

going to have to find one today anyhow. At least it’s 

close. 

June: Great. 

Humor is encouraged and can be quite helpful if the 
patient is capable of responding to it. At the same time, 
it is important that the therapist laugh with rather than 
at the patient. Patients and therapists often develop a 
shorthand lexicon for discussing OCD and its treatment 
that is specific to them and aimed at promoting compliance 
with treatment. For example, one patient–therapist 
pair began to discuss exposure homework as “swallowing 
the frog,” based on a proverb that the patient introduced. 
When the therapist asked the patient if she had 
“swallowed the frog” that morning, it conveyed the difficulty 
of the exposure tasks she needed to do between 
sessions. It is important for the therapist to observe the 
patient’s interpersonal style to determine whether such 
banter is likely to promote the therapeutic goals. 

tHeraPist: (outside the office) There it is, behind the 
car. Let’s go and touch the curb and street next to it. I 
don’t think that you need to touch it directly because 
it’s a bit smelly, but I want you to step next to it, then 
touch the sole of your shoe. 

June: Yuck! It’s really dead. It’s gross! 

tHeraPist: Yeah, it is a bit gross, but it’s also just a 
dead cat if you think about it plainly. What harm can 
it cause? 

June: I don’t know. Suppose I get germs on my hand? 

tHeraPist: What sort of germs? 

June: Dead cat germs. 

tHeraPist: What kind are they? 

June: I don’t know. Just germs. 

tHeraPist: Like the bathroom germs that we’ve already 
handled? 

June: Sort of. People don’t go around touching dead cats. 

tHeraPist: They also don’t go running home to shower 
or alcohol the inside of their car. It’s time to get 
over this. Now, come on over and I’ll do it first. (June 
follows.) OK. Touch the curb and the street. Here’s 
a stone you can carry with you and a piece of paper 
from under its tail. Go ahead, take it. 

June: (looking quite uncomfortable) Ugh! 

tHeraPist: We’ll both hold them. Now, touch it to your 
front and your skirt, and your face and hair. Like 
this. That’s good. What’s your anxiety level? 

June: Ugh! 99. I’d say 100, but it’s just short of panic. If 
you weren’t here, it’d be 100. 

tHeraPist: You know from past experience that this 
will be much easier in a while. Just stay with it and 
we’ll wait here. You’re doing fine. 

June: (A few minutes pass in which she looks very 
upset.) Would you do this if it weren’t for me? 

tHeraPist: Yes, if this were my car and I dropped my 
keys here, I’d just pick them up and go on. 

June: You wouldn’t have to wash them? 

tHeraPist: No. Dead animals aren’t delightful, but 
they’re part of the world we live in. What are the 
odds that we’ll get ill from this? 

June: Very small, I guess. I feel a little bit better than at 
first. It’s about 90 now. 

tHeraPist: Good! Just stay with it now. 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

The session continued for another 45 minutes, or 
until anxiety decreased substantially. During this period 
conversation focused generally on the feared situations 
and the patient’s reaction to them. The therapist 
inquired about June’s anxiety level approximately 
every 10 minutes. It is important to note that June and 
the therapist have engaged in conversation throughout 
the exposure task, discussing issues such as habituation, 
risk, responsibility, and long-term outcomes. At 
the same time it is imperative to refocus the patient on 
the exposure task at hand to ensure that he/she remains 
engaged with it. Thus, asking for SUDS ratings serves 
two purposes: It provides data about fear reduction, 
and it refocuses the patient on the exposure. However, 
if the informal discussion serves as a distractor, helping 
the patient “not think about” what he/she is doing, the 
therapist should limit such conversations. 

tHeraPist: How do you feel now? 

June: Well, it is easier, but I sure don’t feel great. 

tHeraPist: Can you put a number on it? 

June: About 55 or 60, I’d say. 

tHeraPist: You worked hard today. You must be 
tired. Let’s stop now. I want you to take this stick 
and pebble with you so that you continue to be contaminated. 
You can keep them in your pocket and 
touch them frequently during the day. I want you to 
contaminate your office at work and your apartment 
with them. Touch them to everything around, including 
everything in the kitchen, chairs, your bed, and 
the clothes in your dresser. Oh, also, I’d like you to 
drive your car past this spot on your way to and from 
work. Can you do that? 

June: I suppose so. The trouble is going home with all 
of this dirt. 

tHeraPist: Why don’t you call Kenny and plan to 
get home after he does, so he can be around to help 
you. Remember, you can always call me if you have 
trouble. 

June: Yeah. That’s a good idea. I’ll just leave work 
after he does. See you tomorrow. 

This scenario illustrates the process of in vivo exposure. 
The therapist answered clearly the questions 
raised without detouring from the essential purpose of 
the session, exposure to the feared contaminant. After 
the initial increase, the anxiety may begin to drop rela


tively quickly for some patients and may require longer 
for others. As noted previously, it is advisable to 
continue the exposure until the patient appears visibly 
more at ease and reports a substantial decrease in anxiety 
(40 or 50%). 

After 10–15 sessions, the patient’s reported anxiety 
level is expected to decrease considerably. At the 
15th session, June reported a maximum discomfort of 
70 SUDs(still somewhat high, although reduced from 
99 SUDs), that lasted for a few minutes. Her minimal 
anxiety was 35 SUDs. Her average anxiety level during 
this session was 45 SUDs. Ideally, by the end of treatment 
the highest level should not exceed 50 SUDs and 
should drop below 20 SUDs at the end of the session. 
In June’s case, more follow-up sessions were required 
because her anxiety was still quite high. 

To facilitate a transition to normal washing and 
cleaning behavior, the therapist instituted a normal 
washing regimen during the third week of treatment. 
The patient was allowed one 10-minute shower daily 
and no more than five 30-second handwashes when 
there was visible dirt on her hands or when they were 
sticky. 

When the therapist arrived for a home treatment session 
the next week, the following conversation ensued: 

tHeraPist: How did it go over the weekend? 

June: Not too bad. But I got sort of upset Saturday. 
We went to a picnic and there were several piles of 
dog dirt around. I had on my flip-flops and I wanted 
to play volleyball. You can’t in flip-flops, so I went 
barefoot. 

tHeraPist: That’s great! I’m glad to hear it. 

June: Yeah, but then I got really upset about going 
home and carrying it into the apartment. I did it. I 
walked all over barefoot and with the flip-flops, but 
I worried about it for another whole day, until I talked 
to Kenny about my thoughts on Sunday around 
noon. I felt better when he said he wouldn’t worry 
about it. It seems like I feel guilty or something, like 
the house isn’t clean enough. But lately if he says it is 
clean, I’ve been able to take his word for it. 

tHeraPist: Well, in time you’ll be able to make this 
kind of judgment yourself. How about your washing 
and cleaning? 

June: It was all right. I washed for half a minute before 
I ate because I was dusty from playing volleyball. I 


Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder 

deliberately didn’t wash when I got home because I 
felt bad and I knew that if I did, it would be to “decontaminate” 
myself. I showered Saturday night and 
I did feel relieved, but I knew I should go and walk 
around barefoot and touch the floors I’d walked on. 
So I did that. 

tHeraPist: That’s great! It sounds like you handled it 
fine. I’m really pleased. You avoided washing when 
it would mean reducing feelings of contamination, 
and you exposed yourself when you felt concerned 
about germs. That’s excellent. Now, let’s go over the 
problem situations that still need work here at home. 
What things still disturb you? 

June: The basement. I haven’t done much with the kitty 
litter box and old shoes that I threw down there a 
year ago because they got contaminated. The closet 
still has some contaminated clothes. And I still 
worry about the backyard some. Also the porch. Pigeons 
have been perching on the roof and there are 
droppings on the railing now, so I thought I’d wait 
until you came to do that. 

tHeraPist: OK. Let’s start low and work up. Which 
is easiest? 
June: The basement and closets. 
tHeraPist: Fine, down we go. 

Exposure to contaminants during the home visit is 
conducted in the same manner as that during treatment 
sessions. Typically, home sessions last longer, from 2 to 
4 hours, until all “dirty” items are touched and “clean” 
places are contaminated. These visits should be repeated 
if the patient expresses considerable concern about 
his/her ability to adopt a permanent regimen of nonavoidance. 


Follow‑Up Sessions 

June was seen weekly for 3 months, until she experienced 
a setback following the development of a new obsession. 
She became concerned about hitting a pedestrian 
while driving. Thoughts that she “might have hit 
someone” intruded, particularly after turning a corner 
or glancing in the mirror to change lanes. Once evoked, 
they persisted for several hours. To overcome this new 
problem, the therapist directed her to increase her driving 
and refrain from retracing her path or looking in the 
mirror to check for casualties. June was told that she 

could stop her car only if she knew for certain that she 
hit someone. Thoughts that it “might” have occurred 
were to be ignored. To reduce June’s anxiety about having 
obsessions (e.g., “Oh, my God, here it is again. This 
is terrible”), she was advised to expect occasional recurrences 
of obsessive thoughts. The frequency of obsessions 
about hitting someone decreased from several 
each day to once weekly after 3 weeks of self-exposure; 
the associated anxiety diminished from 95 to 50 SUDs 
or less. 

Of June’s germ-related obsessions, only that of dog 
feces partially recurred. Fears of public bathrooms 
and dead animals remained low. The therapist felt that 
June’s fear of dog feces had received insufficient attention 
during treatment. To address this return of fear, 
June was seen three times a week for 1-hour exposure 
sessions, in which she touched brown spots on the sidewalk 
and walked near, and eventually stepped on, dog 
feces. Homework included going to parks, walking on 
sidewalks without looking, stepping on dog feces, and 
stepping on the grass where she thought dogs had been. 
This treatment continued for 4 weeks and was reduced 
to twice a week for an additional 3 weeks. Thereafter, 
June came once weekly for another 6 weeks, during 
which the therapist assigned self-exposure and dealt 
with June’s everyday concerns. News media coverage 
of herpes led to a brief concern about public toilets, but 
this dissipated within a few days. 

In the dialogue below, the therapist reviewed with 
June her progress at a 9-month follow-up. 

tHeraPist: I’d like to know how you feel compared to 
when you first came here 9 months ago. 

June: I’m definitely a lot better. But, I still have some 
bad days when I worry a lot about something, and I 
get down on myself. But when I remember how upset 
I was last summer and all that washing I did, it’s really 
a whole lot better. Maybe about 80% better. I’m 
not ready to be a floor nurse yet, but the job I got 
after treatment is pretty good for now. Kenny and I 
are doing fine, except he’s real sensitive if I bring up 
one of my fears. I wish he’d just listen and say “OK” 
or something instead of looking worried about me. 
It’s like he’s afraid I’m going to get upset again. It 
makes it hard for me to talk freely, but sometimes he 
does handle it fine. I really can’t complain. He’s been 
through a lot, too, when I was really a mess last year 
and before that. 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

tHeraPist: I’m glad to hear you feel so much better. 
You look a lot more at ease. You laugh more now. 
I don’t know if you recall, but you never did in the 
beginning. 

June: I remember. 

tHeraPist: What’s left now, the other 20%? 

June: Obsessions, I guess. I can still work on my fear 
of driving over someone. Mostly it lasts less than 15 
minutes, but now and then it hangs on through an 
evening. 

tHeraPist: How often? 

June: Once every week or two, I think. And I still 
have an urge to avoid walking on the grass in parks. 
Like I’m hyperalert. I do it pretty often, but I’m selfconscious. 


tHeraPist: You mean you have to remind yourself not 
to avoid dog feces? 

June: Yeah. And I tend to see things in black and white, 
all good or all bad. I catch myself feeling guilty for 
dumb things like eating dessert after a full meal. 
I can stop, but it’s like I’m out to punish myself or 
think badly about what I did. I have to watch out for 
it. Still, the thoughts are nothing like they used to be. 
I can have fun now. And work is pretty absorbing, so 
I can go whole days without getting down on myself 
for something. Will I always do that? 

tHeraPist: Maybe to some extent. We know that you 
have a tendency to obsess. Most people who have 
had an obsessive–compulsive problem say that the 
rituals and urges to do them decrease more quickly 
than the obsessive ideas. You might have disturbing 
thoughts for a while, but you can expect them to become 
less frequent if you’re careful not to attempt to 
control them through rituals or by avoiding things. 
Can you handle that? 

June: I suppose so. They’re not a lot of fun, but I feel 
like I’m living a normal life again. I suppose everyone 
has some problems to deal with. 

Rarely do patients report complete remission of all 
obsessions. It is unrealistic to lead a patient to expect 
that 4 weeks of treatment will result in a total absence 
of obsessions and rituals. Patients should expect some 
continued struggle with obsessions and urges to ritualize. 
Strategies for coping with such occasional difficulties 
should be rehearsed. 

coMPlicatioNs DuriNG 
Behavioral treatMeNt 

Obviously, difficulties may arise during implementation 
of EX/RP treatment for OCD. Several of these are 
described below and possible solutions are discussed. 

Noncompliance with Response Prevention 

Individuals with OCD often report engaging in rituals 
despite the response prevention instructions. In most 
cases these represent brief “slips” that the therapist addresses 
by reiterating the rationale for the treatment 
regimen and the need to follow the response prevention 
instructions strictly. The therapist also may offer ways 
the ritual might be “undone” (e.g., recontaminating or 
turning the stove on and off again). 

Sometimes the patient’s support person reports violations 
of response prevention to the therapist. The 
therapist should discuss the violations with the patient, 
emphasizing the fact that continued failure to comply 
with the response prevention instructions may result in 
treatment failure. The following is an example of how 
violations of response prevention may be presented to 
the patient. 

“I understand from your father that on three occasions 
this weekend he saw you checking the front 
door lock five or six times before you left the house. 
As we agreed in the first session, he called to inform 
me about your checking. I am sure you remember 
that we agreed that you would check the doors only 
once, and that if you had a problem, you would discuss 
it with your father or me right away, so we could 
help you overcome your urge to ritualize. Will you 
explain to me what happened?” 

If the patient acknowledges the slip and responds 
with a renewed agreement to follow instructions, the 
therapist need not pursue the issue further. However, 
if a second significant infraction of the response prevention 
instructions occurs, the therapist should again 
remind the patient of the therapy rules and the rationale 
for these rules, and “troubleshoot” with the patient how 
successfully to implement ritual prevention. During the 
course of this discussion, if it becomes evident that the 
patient is unwilling to consider these recommendations 
and remains committed to rituals and avoidance as a 
means to reduce obsessional distress, then the therapist 


Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder 

may broach the subject of discontinuing treatment unless 
the patient is ready to comply. 

“It seems that right now you aren’t able to stop ritualizing. 
For treatment to be successful, it is essential 
that you completely stop your rituals. Every time that 
you relieve your discomfort by ritualizing, you prevent 
yourself from learning that anxiety would have 
declined eventually without rituals, and you don’t 
permit your obsessional fears to be disconnected 
from distress and anxiety. Exposing you to feared 
situations without stopping your rituals won’t be 
helpful. If you cannot follow the no-rituals rule quite 
strictly, then we ought to stop treatment now and 
wait until you are really prepared to follow through 
with all the requirements. It is very hard for people 
to resist the urge to ritualize, and it may be that you 
are just not ready yet and will feel more able to do so 
in the future. It is much better for us to stop treatment 
now than to continue under conditions where you are 
unlikely to benefit from treatment. That would only 
leave you feeling more hopeless about future prospects 
for improvement.” 

As discussed earlier, patients sometimes replace 
identified rituals with less obvious avoidance patterns. 
For example, a patient may use hand lotion to 
“decontaminate” the hands instead of the excessive 
washing that was done originally. If this occurs, the 
therapist should immediately instruct the patient to 
stop the new ritual. Other examples of replacement 
washing rituals include brushing off one’s hands or 
blowing off “germs”; extensive checks are often replaced 
with quick glances. Direct questioning of the 
patient to solicit such information should proceed 
as follows: 

“Now that you’ve stopped your washing rituals, do 
you find yourself doing other things to relieve your 
anxiety? For example, some people start to wipe 
their hands with paper towels or tissues as a substitute 
for washing with soap and water. Are you doing 
anything like this?” 

If the answer is “yes,” the therapist should identify 
these new behaviors as rituals and instruct the patient 
to resist engaging in them in the same manner as he/she 
resists other compulsions. 

Continued Passive Avoidance 

Patients who continue to avoid situations likely to 
evoke obsessional distress are also likely to experience 
attentuated outcome in EX/RP. For example, a 
patient may put “contaminated” clothing back in the 
closet as instructed, but in doing so he/she may ensure 
that the contaminated clothes do not touch clean garments. 
Such avoidance reflects an ambivalent attitude 
toward treatment and hinders habituation of anxiety to 
feared situations. Because such processes may hinder 
outcome, the presence of continued and frequent avoidance 
behavior calls for the therapist and patient to reevaluate 
whether the patient should continue treatment. 

tHeraPist: Jim, let’s make sure that you are doing 
your homework the right way. I know that you had 
a problem putting your dirty underwear in with your 
other dirty clothes. How are you doing with it now? 

Patient: Well, I was afraid you might ask that. I still 
haven’t mixed them up. I was too scared to do it. 

tHeraPist: We discussed this several days ago and you 
were instructed to do it that night. It would have been 
better had you told me the next day that you weren’t 
able to. What I’d like you to do for tomorrow is to bring 
in some dirty clothes. Bring in the underwear and the 
other clothes in separate bags, and we will mix them 
here in the office. Are there any other things you have 
been avoiding that you haven’t told me about? 

Patient: I don’t think so. 

tHeraPist: I want you to pay careful attention to 
things you are doing, or not doing, and make a list 
of anything you are avoiding, particularly things that 
you are supposed to do for therapy. It is very important 
that you don’t protect yourself by avoiding distressing 
situations, since if you don’t face these situations, 
your obsessive–compulsive symptoms won’t 
get better. Let’s give it another try, but if you can’t 
bring yourself to confront these problematic situations 
without these little avoidances, perhaps you 
would be better off delaying your treatment to a later 
time when you will be more ready to comply with 
the treatment program. 

Arguments 

Some individuals who carry out the required exposure 
without ritualizing may attempt to engage the therapist 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

in arguments about the assignments. It is quite tempting 
to get involved in arguments with patients over 
what they will or will not do during treatment. To avoid 
this, it is important for the therapist and the patient to 
agree on some ground rules before the intensive program 
begins. Patients must agree to follow the treatment 
plan that they developed in conjunction with the 
therapist, and to expose themselves to the distressing 
situations without argument. New, feared situations 
that are discovered should be discussed, and a new exposure 
program should be developed and agreed to, before 
exposures to the new situations are carried out. If a 
patient balks at or attempts to alter a planned exposure, 
the therapist should acknowledge and empathize with 
the patient’s the discomfort, inquire about the reasons 
for the hesitation, and encourage the patient to proceed 
in the following manner: 

“I’m sorry to see that you are having so much trouble 
sitting on the floor. I know it’s difficult and that 
you’re frightened, but it won’t do you any good if we 
delay the exposure for another day or let you skip it 
all together. You really need to touch the floor, so 
let’s go ahead and do it now. We have agreed that 
today is the ‘floor’ day, and I wouldn’t be doing you a 
favor if I allowed you to avoid it. Remember, though, 
I am here to support you as much as I can when you 
become upset.” 

In some instances, difficulties may be overcome by 
first exposing the patient to similar items that generate 
a lower level of distress. For example, if a patient 
refuses to touch a toilet seat, then the therapist may ask 
him/her first to touch the bathroom floor or the door to 
the bathroom stall. Thereafter, the patient might touch 
the walls of the stall and the toilet handle before proceeding 
to the toilet seat itself. 

Emotional Overload 

Occasionally during treatment a patient will become 
overwhelmed by fear or another emotion that is not directly 
related to his/her OCD symptoms. For example, 
a patient may be upset by a recent event (e.g., the death 
of a relative) or by fears of facing future plans (e.g., 
living on one’s own or getting a job). Implementing exposure 
exercises is inadvisable when the patient is extremely 
upset because it is unlikely that the patient will 
adequately attend to the exposure stimulus; therefore, 
anxiety is unlikely to habituate. Instead, the therapist 

should discuss the distressing situation with the patient 
and proceed with exposure only when the patient is 
calmer. On rare occasions, exposure may be postponed 
altogether until the next day’s session. If this becomes a 
repetitive pattern, it may be advisable to interrupt treatment 
until the crisis is over. 

Nonanxious Reactions to Exposures 

Occasionally patients respond to exposures with emotions 
other than anxiety or distress, such as anger or depression. 
Clinical observations suggest that anger often 
serves as a means for the patient to avoid the distress or 
anxiety that is the target of exposure. If this happens, 
the anger should be viewed as an avoidance. The therapist 
should refocus the patient on the anxiety-evoking 
aspects of the situation and point out to the patient that 
the anger only stands in the way of progress. 

Sometimes during imaginal exposure, when a patient 
is exposed to the feared consequences of his/her 
behaviors, the patient becomes depressed. Such depression 
and other emotional reactions may reduce the efficacy 
of treatment, and the therapist needs to help the 
patient to focus on the anxiety-evoking cues. This may 
be done by directing the content of the imaginal exposure 
away from the feared consequences and toward 
the external threat cues. In some cases, such redirection 
does not resolve the problem, and the patient continues 
to display a depressive reaction to the exposure. When 
this happens, alternative scenarios that do not elicit depression 
should be developed. 

Emergent Fears and Rituals 

As mentioned earlier, sometimes patients develop 
“new” fears or rituals during treatment. Often, the 
content of these new symptoms is closely related to the 
original fears and may be treated by extending to these 
fears the EX/RP instructions given earlier in treatment. 
For example, following the successful implementation 
of response prevention for his compulsive handwashing, 
Mr. F began to rub his hands together to decontaminate 
them. The therapist identified this as another 
ritual and instructed Mr. F to resist the urge to rub his 
hands together. Next, Mr. F began subtly to rub his fingers 
against the palms of his hands to cleanse his hands 
and to reduce anxiety. The therapist asked Mr. F to stop 
this ritual as he had the others and was again successful. 

Some emergent fears may not be as clearly connected 
to the patient’s original fears. For example, the fear 


Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder 

that June developed of hitting someone while driving 
was not obviously related to her fears of contamination. 
Further assessment often results in the discovery 
of a conceptual link between the two reported fears. In 
June’s case, her fear of being blamed for causing someone 
to become ill or die, and her concern about being 
thought of as a “bad person” because she killed someone, 
or because she smelled of dog feces, may have 
been the connection between her two identified fears. 
In such cases, it is important for the therapist to develop 
exposures that include cues for this more general fear. 
June’s therapist might conduct imaginal exposures that 
include images of people criticizing June or blaming 
her for causing someone to die. 

Negative Family Reactions 

Because family members have typically experienced 
years of frustration with the patient’s symptoms, it is 
not surprising that some are impatient, expecting treatment 
to progress smoothly and to result in total symptom 
remission. It is not uncommon for family members 
to become disappointed or angry when they perceive 
that the symptoms are not subsiding quickly enough. In 
such cases, the therapist should assure family members 
that occasional strong anxiety reactions are to be expected 
and do not reflect failure. The family should be 
encouraged to respond calmly and be supportive should 
the patient experience a burst of anxiety. 

Often, families have developed patterns of behavior 
designed to reduce the patient’s distress. Some family 
members may continue these patterns either in an attempt 
to protect the patient from upsetting situations 
or because it is difficult to break habits established 
over years of accommodating the patient’s requests. 
For example, Mr. P, who was accustomed to entering 
his home through the basement, immediately removing 
his clothes, and showering for his wife’s sake, was 
instructed to enter through the front door and toss his 
overcoat on the couch. Similarly, family members may 
find themselves continuing to perform a variety of 
household activities that they have come to regard as 
their responsibility because of the patient’s wishes to 
avoid the distress that the activity caused. For instance, 
Mr. P was responsible for preparing all the family 
meals because his wife was distressed by the possibility 
that she might inadvertently contaminate the food. 
Because such familiar patterns may hinder progress in 
treatment, the therapist should ask both the patient and 
family members about such habits and prescribe appro


priate alternative behaviors that maximize the patient’s 
exposure and minimize avoidance. 

Functioning without Symptoms 

At the end of treatment, many individuals with OCD 
find themselves left with a considerable void in their 
daily routines. The fact that they no longer need to allocate 
a large portion of their day to performing rituals 
leaves them wondering what to do. The therapist 
should be sensitive to these issues and aid in planning 
new social or occupational goals to be achieved following 
therapy. If needed, the therapist should conduct 
additional sessions or refer the patient to another therapist 
who will focus on adjustment-related issues. It may 
also be the case that behavioral treatments such as acceptance 
and commitment therapy (ACT) are directly 
applicable to this problem given the explicit focus on 
functioning; patients with OCD might be especially 
vulnerable to the belief that they cannot move forward 
successfully in their lives unless their obsessions are 
gone, and ACT is particularly well suited to address 
these kinds of problems. Preliminary evidence from a 
case series suggested the applicability of ACT to OCD 
(Twohig, Hayes, & Masuda, 2006), and a randomized 
controlled trial now provides stronger evidence for the 
efficacy of ACT (Twhohig et al., 2010). 

Because they have spent years performing their rituals, 
patients may be unsure about what constitutes normal 
behavior. The therapist should offer guidelines for 
appropriate washing, checking, repeating, or ordering. 
If rituals are still present, the therapist needs to instruct 
patients to continue the response prevention of some 
behaviors to ensure maintenance of treatment gains. A 
patient may also develop a fear that the OCD symptoms 
will return. The therapist should reassure the patient 
that a single washing of his/her hands does not signal 
the beginning of a relapse. 

coNclusioN 

In this chapter we have reviewed the literature on OCD 
and its treatment, and provided verbatim dialogue from 
patient–therapist interactions to demonstrate how EX/ 
RP is implemented. Our review illustrates clearly that 
much is already known about CBT and pharmacotherapy 
for OCD. In our clinical practice with adults, we are 
guided by the empirical research summarized in this 
chapter, although not all of our clinical decisions are 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

unequivocally supported by empirical studies. For example, 
no controlled, direct comparison study has indicated 
that intensive EX/RP yields superior outcome to 
less intensive treatment, yet we typically provide intensive 
treatment to our adult patients with at least moderately 
severe OCD. Although our clinical experience 
suggests that weekly sessions are probably insufficient 
to produce meaningful gains in most adult patients with 
OCD, it has yet to be established whether two or three 
weekly sessions would yield results comparable to 
daily sessions both immediately after treatment and at 
follow-up. Future research should examine this important 
issue to establish a “dose–response” curve for EX/ 
RP; in our view clinically the patient’s initial severity, 
comorbidity, and motivational readiness to engage in 
the treatment influence our recommendations regarding 
the EX/RP visit schedule . Another important issue 
is how to best combine EX/RP with medication. Future 
research will allow us to identify the optimal treatment 
course for a particular patient. 

Empirical results and clinical observations converge 
to indicate that psychosocial treatment for OCD must 
involve both exposure and ritual prevention instructions, 
and that failure to conduct exposures to the most 
anxiety-evoking situations is likely to compromise outcome. 
With respect to the therapist-assisted versus selfexposure 
issue, we routinely choose therapist-assisted 
exposure in our clinical practice. At present, eliminating 
therapist assistance with exposure exercises seems 
premature because existing studies have methodological 
problems such as insufficient sample sizes, and a 
recently completed RCT in pediatric OCD indicated 
that EX/RP with in-session exposure was superior to 
a brief form of EX/RP that did not include this procedural 
element (Franklin et al., 2011). With respect to 
the role of cognitive interventions in the treatment of 
OCD, the EX/RP program described in this chapter is a 
“cognitive-behavioral” treatment in that it targets both 
cognitions and behaviors; however, we do not typically 
include formal cognitive restructuring. Future research 
needs to delineate which cognitive and behavioral procedures 
are most effective for correcting particular 
pathological emotions. Cognitive procedures may also 
be utilized in “readiness programs” designed to help 
patients who are highly ambivalent about EX/RP realize 
that the treatment is both tolerable and effective. 
Empirical research to date suggest that although antidepressant 
medications for OCD do not interfere with the 
efficacy of CBT, combination treatment is not necessarily 
more effective than EX/RP alone. However, the 

partial symptom reduction typically found in pharmacotherapy 
studies for OCD may render some patients 
more willing to tolerate the distress associated with 
EX/RP; thus, premedication may be helpful in promoting 
readiness in such cases. 

What factors seem to enhance long-term efficacy of 
EX/RP for OCD? Studies suggest that patients with 
OCD who show great improvement immediately after 
CBT are more likely to retain their gains at follow-up 
than those who make only moderate posttreatment 
gains (e.g., Simpson et al., 2004). Thus, emphasis on 
procedures that are likely to lead to maximal shortterm 
efficacy also serves to yield superior maintenance 
of gains. In our clinical experience, understanding of 
the treatment rationale, active engagement in exposure 
exercises, strict adherence to ritual prevention instructions, 
willingness to design and implement exposure 
exercises between sessions, and willingness to confront 
even the most difficult tasks on the fear hierarchy are 
all factors associated with positive treatment outcome. 
Thus, verbal reinforcement of patients when they accomplish 
these goals, and reinstruction when they do 
not, are important in promoting lasting improvement. 
In addition, relapse prevention techniques designed 
specifically for OCD have been found effective in promoting 
maintenance of gains at follow-up (Hiss et al., 
1994). In clinical practice we begin discussing relapse 
prevention procedures long before treatment is completed, 
and we focus on maintaining gains in the last 
few active treatment sessions. Some continuing contact 
with the treating clinician is also thought to be of benefit; 
thus, brief follow-up sessions are held in the first 
few months after the active treatment is completed, 
with contact as needed following the formal followup 
phase. As part of relapse prevention, we often ask 
our patients to plan EX/RP exercises for hypothetical 
obsessions they might encounter in the future (e.g., “If 
you became obsessed in 6 months that touching tree 
bark would result in your contracting a terrible illness, 
what exercises should you do?”) to encourage them to 
problem-solve around OCD issues for themselves rather 
than relying on the therapist’s instruction. We also 
emphasize that the occasional occurrence of obsessions 
should not be a cause of great alarm, provided that 
patients implement EX/RP to combat these recurring 
obsessions and urges to ritualize. The patients who are 
accepting of this reality are often the ones most able to 
apply what they have learned in treatment, and this process 
enables them to keep their OCD symptoms under 
control long after treatment has terminated. 


Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder 

referenCes 

Abramowitz, J. S. (1996). Variants of exposure and response 
prevention in the treatment of obsessive compulsive 
disorder: A meta-analysis. Behavior Therapy, 27, 583– 
600. 

Abramowitz, J. S., & Foa, E. B. (2000). Does major depressive 
disorder influence outcome of exposure and response 
prevention for OCD? Behavior Therapy, 31, 795–800. 

Abramowitz, J. S., Foa, E. B., & Franklin, M. E. (2003). Exposure 
and ritual prevention for obsessive–compulsive 
disorder: Effects of intensive versus twice-weekly sessions. 
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 71, 
394–398. 

Abramowitz, J. S., Franklin, M. E., & Foa, E. B. (2002). Empirical 
status of cognitive-behavioral therapy for obsessive 
compulsive disorder: A meta-analytic review. Romanian 
Journal of Cognitive and Behavior Psychotherapies, 2, 
89–104. 

Abramowitz, J. S., Franklin, M. E., Street, G. P., Kozak, M. 
J., & Foa, E. B. (2000). Effects of comorbid depression on 
response to treatment for obsessive–compulsive disorder. 
Behavior Therapy, 31, 517–528. 

Allen, J. J., & Tune, G. S. (1975). The Lynfield Obsessional/ 
Compulsive Questionnaire. Scottish Medical Journal, 20, 
21–24. 

American Psychiatric Association. (1994). Diagnostic and 
statistical manual of mental disorders (4th ed.). Washington, 
DC: Author. 

American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and 
statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.). Arlington, 
VA: Author. 

Angst, J. (1993). Comorbidity of anxiety, phobia, compulsion 
and depression. International Clinical Psychopharmacology, 
8(Suppl. 1), 21–25. 

Anderson, R. A., & Rees, C. S. (2007). Group versus individual 
cognitive-behavioural treatment for obsessive– 
compulsive disorder: A controlled trial. Behaviour Research 
and Therapy, 45(1), 123–137. 

Antony, M. M., Downie, F., & Swinson, R. P. (1998). Diagnostic 
issues and epidemiology in obsessive–compulsive 
disorders. In R. P. Swinson, M. M. Antony, S. Rachman, 
& M. A. Richter (Eds.), Obsessive–compulsive disorder: 
Theory, research and treatment (pp. 3–32). New York: 
Guilford Press. 

Asbahr, F. R., Castillo, A. R., Ito, L. M., Latorre, R. D., 
Moreira, M. N., & Lotufo-Neto, F. (2005). Group 
cognitive-behavioral therapy versus sertraline for the 
treatment of children and adolescents with obsessive– 
compulsive disorder. Journal of the American Academy 
of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 44(11), 1128–1136. 

Bachofen, M., Nakagawa, A., Marks, I. M., Park, J., Greist, J. 
H., Baer, L., et al. (1999). Home self-assessment and selftreatment 
of obsessive compulsive disorder using a manual 
and a computer-conducted telephone interview: Replica


tion of a UK–US study. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 
60, 545–549. 

Barrett, P., Farrell, L., Dadds, M., & Boulter, N. (20050. 
Cognitive-behavioral family treatment of childhood 
obsessive–compulsive disorder: Long-term follow-up and 
predictors of outcome. Journal of the American Academy 
of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 44, 1005–1014. 

Barrett, P., Healy-Farrell, L., & March, J. S. (2004). 
Cognitive-behavioral family treatment of childhood 
obsessive–compulsive disorder: A controlled trial. Journal 
of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent 
Psychiatry, 43, 46–62. 

Barsky, A. J., & Ahern, D. (2004). Interventions for hypochondriasis 
in primary care: In reply. Journal of the American 
Medical Association, 292(1), 42–43. 

Basoglu, M., Lax, T., Kasvikis, Y., & Marks, I. M. (1988). 
Predictors of improvement in obsessive–compulsive disorder. 
Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 2, 299–317. 

Beck, A. T. (1976). Cognitive therapy and the emotional disorders. 
New York: International Universities Press. 

Bellodi, L., Scuito, G., Diaferia, G., Ronchi, P., & Smeraldi, 

E. (1992). Psychiatric disorders in the families of patients 
with obsessive–compulsive disorder. Psychiatry Research, 
42(2), 111–120. 
Bogels, S. M., & Bodden, D. (2005, November). Family versus 
child CBT for childhood anxiety disorders: Short and 
long-term results of a multicenter study. In S. M. Bogels 
(Chair), Family-Based Prevention and Treatment of Childhood 
Anxiety Disorders Symposium presented at the annual 
meeting of the Association for Behavioral and Cognitive 
Therapies, Washington, DC. 

Brown, T., Campbell, L., Lehman, C., Grisham, J., & Mancill, 

R. (2001). Current and lifetime comorbidity of the DSM-
IV anxiety and mood disorders in a large clinical sample. 
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 110(4), 585–599. 
Carr, A. T. (1974). Compulsive neurosis: A review of the literature. 
Psychological Bulletin, 81, 311–318. 
Comings, D. E. (1990). Tourette syndrome and human behavior. 
Duarte, CA: Hope Press. 

Constans, J. I., Foa, E. B., Franklin, M. E., & Mathews, A. 
(1995). Memory for actions in obsessive compulsives with 
checking rituals. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 33, 
665–671. 

Cottraux, J., Mollard, L., Bouvard, M., Marks, L., Sluys, M., 
Nury, A. M., et al. (1990). A controlled study of fluvoxamine 
and exposure in obsessive–compulsive disorder. International 
Clinical Psychopharmacology, 5, 17–30. 

Cottraux, J., Note, I., Yao, S. N., Lafont, S., Note, B., Mollard, 
E., et al. (2001). A randomized controlled trial of cognitive 
therapy versus intensive behavior therapy in obsessive 
compulsive disorder. Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics, 
70(6), 288–297. 

De Araujo, L. A., Ito, L. M., Marks, I. M., & Deale, A. (1995). 
Does imaginal exposure to the consequences of not ritualising 
enhance live exposure for OCD?: A controlled 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

study: I. Main outcome. British Journal of Psychiatry, 
167, 65–70. 

de Haan, E., Hoogduin, K. A., Buitelaar, J. K., & Keijsers, G. 

P. (1998). Behavior thearpy versus clomipramine for the 
treatment of obsessive–compulsive disorder. Journal of 
the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 
37, 1022–1029. 
Denys, D., Tenney, N., van Megen, J. G., de Geus, F., & Westenberg, 
H. G. (2004). Axis I and II comorbidity in a large 
sample of patients with obsessive–compulsive disorder. 
Journal of Affective Disorders, 80, 155–162. 

DeVeaugh-Geiss, J., Landau, P., & Katz, R. (1989). Treatment 
of OCD with clomipramine. Psychiatric Annals, 19, 
97–101. 

Diniz, J. B., Rosario-Campos, M. C., Shavitt, R. G., Curi, M., 
Hounie, A. G., Brotto, S. A., et al. (2004). Impact of age 
at onset and duration of illness on the expression of comorbidities 
in obsessive–compulsive disorder. Journal of 
Clinical Psychiatry, 65, 22–27. 

Dollard, J., & Miller, N. L. (1950). Personality and psychotherapy: 
An analysis in terms of learning, thinking and 
culture. New York: McGraw-Hill. 

Dougherty, D. D., Rauch, S. L., & Jenike, M. A. (2002). Pharmacological 
treatments for obsessive compulsive disorder. 
In P. E. Nathan & J. M. Gordon (Eds.), A guide to treatments 
that work (2nd ed., pp. 387–410). New York: Oxford 
University Press. 

Eisen, J. L., Phillips, K. A., Baer, L., Beer, D. A., Atala, K. 
D., & Rasmussen, S. A. (1998). The Brown Assessment of 
Beliefs Scale: Reliability and validity. American Journal 
of Psychiatry, 155, 102–108. 

Ellis, A. (1962). Reason and emotion in psychotherapy. New 
York: Lyle Stuart. 

Emmelkamp, P. M. G., & Beens, H. (1991). Cognitive therapy 
with obsessive–compulsive disorder: A comparative evaluation. 
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 29, 293–300. 

Emmelkamp, P. M. G., de Haan, E., & Hoogduin, C. A. L. 
(1990). Marital adjustment and obsessive–compulsive disorder. 
British Journal of Psychiatry, 156, 55–60. 

Emmelkamp, P. M. G., & van Kraanen, J. (1977). Therapistcontrolled 
exposure in vivo: A comparison with obsessive– 
compulsive patients. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 
15, 491–495. 

Emmelkamp, P. M. G., Visser, S., & Hoekstra, R. J. (1988). 
Cognitive therapy vs. exposure in vivo in the treatment of 
obsessive–compulsives. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 
12, 103–114. 

Fals-Stewart, W., Marks, A. P., & Schafer, J. (1993). A comparison 
of behavioral group therapy and individual behavior 
therapy in treating obsessive compulsive disorder. 
Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 181, 189–193. 

Farrell, L. J., Waters, A., Milliner, E., & Ollendick, T. (2012). 
Comorbidity and treatment response in pediatric OCD: A 
pilot study of group cognitive-behavioral treatment. Psychiatry 
Research, 199, 115–123. 

Flament, M., Koby, E., Rapoport, J. L., Berg, C., Zahn, T., 
Cox, C., et al. (1990). Childhood obsessive compulsive 
disorder: A prospective follow-up study. Journal of Child 
Psychology and Psychiatry, and Allied Disciplines, 31, 
363–380. 

Flament, M., Whitaker, A., Rapoport, J. L., Davies, M., Berg, 
C., Kalikow, K., et al. (1988). Obsessive compulsive disorder 
in adolescence: An epidemiological study. Journal of 
the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 
27, 764–771. 

Foa, E. B., Abramowitz, J. S., Franklin, M. E., & Kozak, M. 

J. (1999). Feared consequences, fixity of belief, and treatment 
outcome in patients with obsessive compulsive disorder. 
Behavior Therapy, 30, 717–724. 
Foa, E. B., Franklin, M. E., & Moser, J. (2002). Context in the 
clinic: How well do CBT and medications work in combination? 
Biological Psychiatry, 51, 989–997. 

Foa, E. B., Huppert, J. D., & Cahill, S. P. (2006). Emotional 
processing theory: An update. In B. O. Rothbaum (Ed.), 
Pathological anxiety: Emotional processing in etiology 
and treatment (pp. 3–24). New York: Guilford Press. 

Foa, E. B., Huppert, J. D., Leiberg, S., Langner, R., Kichic, R., 
& Hajcak, G., et al. (2002). The Obsessive–Compulsive 
Inventory: Development and validation of a short version. 
Psychological Assessment, 14(4), 485–495. 

Foa, E. B., & Kozak, M. J. (1985). Treatment of anxiety disorders: 
Implications for psychopathology. In A. H. Tuma 
& J. D. Maser (Eds.), Anxiety and the anxiety disorders 
(pp. 421–452). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. 

Foa, E. B., & Kozak, M. J. (1986). Emotional processing of 
fear: Exposure to corrective information. Psychological 
Bulletin, 99, 20–35. 

Foa, E. B., & Kozak, M. J. (1996). Psychological treatments 
for obsessive compulsive disorder. In M. R. Mavissakalian 
& R. P. Prien (Eds.), Long-term treatments of anxiety 
disorders (pp. 285–309). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric 
Press. 

Foa, E. B., Kozak, M. J., Goodman, W. K., Hollander, E., Jenike, 
M. A., & Rasmussen, S. (1995). DSM-IV filed trial: 
Obsessive compulsive disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 
152, 90–96. 

Foa, E. B., Kozak, M. J., Steketee, G., & McCarthy, P. R. 
(1992). Treatment of depressive and obsessive–compulsive 
symptoms in OCD by imipramine and behavior therapy. 
British Journal of Clinical Psychology, 31, 279–292. 

Foa, E. B., Liebowitz, M. R., Kozak, M. J., Davies, S. O., 
Campeas, R., Franklin, M. E., et al. (2005). Treatment 
of obsessive compulsive disorder by exposure and ritual 
prevention, clomipramine, and their combination: A randomized, 
placebo-controlled trial. American Journal of 
Psychiatry, 162, 151–161. 

Foa, E. B., Steketee, G., Grayson, J. B., Turner, R. M., & 
Latimer, P. (1984). Deliberate exposure and blocking of 
obsessive–compulsive rituals: Immediate and long-term 
effects. Behavior Therapy, 15, 450–472. 


Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder 

Foa, E. B., Steketee, G., Turner, R. M., & Fischer, S. C. 
(1980). Effects of imaginal exposure to feared disasters in 
obsessive–compulsive checkers. Behaviour Research and 
Therapy, 18, 449–455. 

Franklin, M. E., Abramowitz, J. S., Bux, D. A., Zoellner, L. 
A., & Feeny, N. C. (2002). Cognitive-behavioral therapy 
with and without medication in the treatment of obsessive 
compulsive disorder. Professional Psychology: Research 
and Practice, 33, 162–168. 

Franklin, M. E., Abramowitz, J. S., Furr, J., Kalsy, S., & 
Riggs, D. S. (2003). A naturalistic examination of therapist 
experience and outcome of exposure and ritual prevention 
for OCD. Psychotherapy Research, 13, 153–167. 

Franklin, M. E., Abramowitz, J. S., Kozak, M. J., Levitt, J., 
& Foa, E. B. (2000). Effectiveness of exposure and ritual 
prevention for obsessive compulsive disorder: Randomized 
compared with non-randomized samples. Journal of 
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 68, 594–602. 

Franklin, M. E., Kozak, M. J., Cashman, L., Coles, M., Rheingold, 
A., & Foa, E. B. (1998). Cognitive behavioral treatment 
of pediatric obsessive compulsive disorder: An open 
clinical trial. Journal of the American Academy of Child 
and Adolescent Psychiatry, 37, 412–419. 

Franklin, M., Sapyta, J., Freeman, J., Khanna, M., Compton, 
S., Almirall, D., et al. (2011). Cognitive behavior therapy 
augmentation of pharmacotherapy in pediatric obsessive– 
compulsive disorder: The Pediatric OCD Treatment Study 
II (POTS II). Journal of the American Medical Association, 
306, 1224–1232. 

Freeman, J. B., Choate-Summers, M. L., Moore, P. S., Garcia, 
A. M., Sapyta, J. J., Leonard, H. L., et al. (2007). 
Cognitive behavioral treatment of young children with 
obsessive compulsive disorder. Biological Psychiatry, 61, 
337–343. 

Freeman, J. B., Garcia, A. M., Fucci, C., Karitani, M., Miller, 
L., & Leonard, H. L. (2003). Family-based treatment 
of early-onset obsessive–compulsive disorder [Special 
issue]. Journal of Child and Adolescent Psychopharmacology, 
13(2), 71–80. 

Freeston, M. H., Ladouceur, R., Gagnon, F., Thibodeau, 
N., Rhéaume, J., Letarte, H., et al. (1997). Cognitivebehavioral 
treatment of obsessive thoughts: A controlled 
study. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 65, 
405–413. 

Gershuny, B. S., Baer, L., Jenike, M. A., Minichiello, W. E., 
& Wilhelm, S. (2002). Comorbid posttraumatic stress 
disorder: Impact on treatment outcome for obsessive– 
compulsive disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 
159, 852–854. 

Goodman, W. K., Price, L. H., Rasmussen, S. A., Mazure, 
C., Delgado, P., Heninger, G. R., et al. (1989a). The Yale– 
Brown Obsessive–Compulsive Scale: II. Validity. Archives 
of General Psychiatry, 46, 1012–1016. 

Goodman, W. K., Price, L. H., Rasmussen, S. A., Mazure, C., 
Fleischmann, R. L., Hill, C. L., et al. (1989b). The Yale– 

Brown Obsessive–Compulsive Scale: I. Development, 
use, and reliability. Archives of General Psychiatry, 46, 
1006–1011. 

Greist, J. H. (1990). Treatment of obsessive–compulsive disorder: 
Psychotherapies, drugs, and other somatic treatments. 
Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 51, 44–50. 

Greist, J. H. (1992). An integrated approach to treatment of 
obsessive compulsive disorder. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 
53(Suppl.), 38–41. 

Greist, J. H., Jefferson, J. W., Kobak, K. A., Katzelnick, D. 
J., & Serlin, R. C. (1995). Efficacy and tolerability of serotonin 
reuptake inhibitors in obsessive compulsive disorder: 
A meta-analysis. Archives of General Psychiatry, 46, 
53–60. 

Hanna, G. L. (1995). Demographic and clinical features of 
obsessive compulsive disorder in children and adolescents. 
Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent 
Psychiatry, 34, 19–27. 

Himle, M. B., Olufs, E., Himle, J., Tucker, B., & Woods, D. 

W. (2010). Behavior therapy for tics via Videoconference 
Delivery: An initial pilot test in children. Cognitive & Behavioral 
Practice, 17, 329–337. 
Hiss, H., Foa, E. B., & Kozak, M. J. (1994). A relapse prevention 
program for treatment of obsessive compulsive disorder. 
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 62, 
801–808. 

Hodgson, R. J., Rachman, S., & Marks, L. M. (1972). The 
treatment of chronic obsessive–compulsive neurosis: 
Follow-up and further findings. Behaviour Research and 
Therapy, 10, 181–189. 

Hohagen, F., Winkelmann, G., Rasche-Raeuchle, H., Hand, 
I., Konig, A., Munchau, N., et al. (1998). Combination of 
behaviour therapy with fluvoxamine in comparison with 
behaviour therapy and placebo: Results of a multicentre 
study. British Journal of Psychiatry, 173, 71–78. 

Insel, T. R., & Akiskal, H. (1986). Obsessive–compulsive disorder 
with psychotic features: A phenomenologic analysis. 
American Journal of Psychiatry, 12, 1527–1533. 

Jaycox, L. H., Foa, E. B., & Morral, A. R. (1998). Influence of 
emotional engagement and habituation on exposure therapy 
for PTSD. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 
66, 185–192. 

Jenike, M., Baer, L., Minichiello, W., Schwartz, C., & Carey, 

R. (1986). Concomitant obsessive–compulsive disorder 
and schizotypal personality disorder. American Journal of 
Psychiatry, 143, 530–532. 
Kazarian, S. S., Evans, D. L., & Lefave, K. (1977). Modification 
and factorial analysis of the Leyton Obsessional 
Inventory. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 33, 422–425. 

Keijsers, G. P., Hoogduin, C. A., & Schaap, C. P. (1994). Predictors 
of treatment outcome in the behavioural treatment 
of obsessive–compulsive disorder. British Journal of Psychiatry, 
165, 781–786. 

Kessler, R. C., Demier, O., Frank, R. G., Olfson, M., Pincus, 

H. A., Walters, E. E., et al. (2005). Prevalence and treat

CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

ment of mental disorders, 1990 to 2003. New England 
Journal of Medicine, 352(24), 2515–2523. 

Koran, L. M. (2000). Quality of life in obsessive–compulsive 
disorder. Psychiatric Clinics of North America, 23, 509– 
517. 

Kozak, M. J., & Foa, E. B. (1994). Obsessions, overvalued 
ideas, and delusions in obsessive compulsive disorder. Behaviour 
Research and Therapy, 32, 343–353. 

Kozak, M. J., Foa, E. B., & Steketee, G. (1988). Process 
and outcome of exposure treatment with obsessive– 
compulsives: Psychophysiological indicators of emotional 
processing. Behavior Therapy, 19, 157–169. 

Kurlan, R., Como, P. G., Miller, B., Palumbo, D., Deeley, C., 
Andersen, E. M., et al. (2002). The behavioral spectrum 
of tic disorders: A community-based study. Neurology, 59, 
414–420. 

Ladoucer, R., Rhéame, J., Freeston, M. H., Aublet, F., Jean, 
K., Lachance, S., et al. (1995). Experimental manipulations 
of responsibility: An analogue test for models of 
obsessive–compulsive disorder. Behaviour Research and 
Therapy, 33, 937–946. 

Lang, P. J. (1979). A bio-informational theory of emotional 
imagery. Psychophysiology, 6, 495–511. 

Leckman, J. F., & Chittenden, E. H. (1990). Gilles de la Tourette 
syndrome and some forms of obsessive–compulsive 
disorder may share a common genetic diathesis. 
L’Encephale, 16, 321–323. 

Leckman, J. F., Denys, D., Simpson, H. B., Mataix-Cols, D., 
Hollander, E., Saxena, S., et al. (2010). Obsessive compulsive 
disorder: A review of the diagnostic criteria and 
possible subtypes and dimensional specifiers for DSM V. 
Depression and Anxiety, 27, 507–527. 

Ledley, D. R., Pai, A., & Franklin, M. E. (2007). Treating 
comorbid presentations: Obsessive compulsive disorder, 
anxiety, and depression. In M. M. Antony, C. Purdon, & 

L. Summerfeldt (Eds.), Psychological treatment of OCD: 
Fundamentals and beyond (pp. 281–293). Washington, 
DC: American Psychological Association Press. 
Lelliott, P. T., Noshirvani, H. F., Basoglu, M., Marks, I. M., & 
Monteiro, W. O. (1988). Obsessive–compulsive beliefs and 
treatment outcome. Psychological Bulletin, 18, 697–702. 

Leon, A. C., Portera, L., & Weissman, M. M. (1995). The 
social costs of anxiety disorders. British Journal of Psychiatry, 
166(Suppl.), 19–22. 

Lindsay, M., Crino, R., & Andrews, G. (1997). Controlled 
trial of exposure and response prevention in obsessive 
compulsive disorder. British Journal of Psychiatry, 171, 
135–139. 

Lochner, C., & Stein, D. J. (2003). Heterogeneity of 
obsessive–compulsive disorder: A literature review. Harvard 
Review of Psychiatry, 11(3), 113–132. 

Lovell, K., Cox, D., Haddock, G., Jones, C., Raines, D., Garvey, 
R., et al. (2006). Telephone administered cognitive 
behaviour therapy for treatment of obsessive compulsive 

disorder: Randomised controlled non-inferiority trial. 
British Medical Journal, 333, 883. 

March, J. S., Franklin, M. E., Leonard, H., Garcia, A., Moore, 
P., Freeman, J., et al. (2007). Tics moderate the outcome of 
treatment with medication but not CBT in pediatric OCD. 
Biological Psychiatry, 61, 344–347. 

Marks, I. M., Lelliott, P., Basoglu, M., Noshirvani, H., Monteiro, 
W., Cohen, D., et al. (1988). Clomipramine selfexposure, 
and therapist-aided exposure for obsessive– 
compulsive rituals. British Journal of Psychiatry, 152, 
522–534. 

Marks, I. M., Stern, R. S., Mawson, D., Cobb, J., & McDonald, 
R. (1980). Clomipramine and exposure for obsessive– 
compulsive rituals: I. British Journal of Psychiatry, 136, 
1–25. 

Masellis, M., Rector, N. A., & Richter, M. A. (2003). Quality 
of life in OCD: Differential impact of obsessions, compulsions, 
and depression comorbidity. Canadian Journal of 
Psychiatry, 48(2), 72–77. 

Mataix-Cols, D., Marks, I. M., Greist, J. H., Kobak, K. A., 
& Baer, L. (2002). Obsessive–compulsive symptoms dimensions 
as predictors of compliance with and response to 
behaviour therapy: Results from a controlled trial. Psychotherapy 
and Psychosomatics, 71, 255–262. 

Mathews, A. M., Johnston, D. W., Shaw, P. M., & Gelder, M. 

G. (1974). Process variables and the prediction of outcome 
in behavior therapy. British Journal of Psychiatry, 125, 
256–264. 
Matsunaga, H., Kiriike, N., Matsui, T., Oya, K., Okino, K., 
& Stein, D. (2005). Impulsive disorders in Japanese adult 
patients with obsessive–compulsive disorder. Comprehensive 
Psychiatry, 46, 43–49. 

McLean, P. L., Whittal, M. L., Thordarson, D. S., Taylor, S., 
Sochting, I., Koch, W. J., et al. (2001). Cognitive versus 
behavior therapy in the group treatment of obsessive– 
compulsive disorder. Journal of Consulting and Clinical 
Psychology, 69, 205–214. 

Mehta, M. (1990). A comparative study of family-based and 
patients-based behavioural management in obsessive– 
compulsive disorder. British Journal of Psychiatry, 157, 
133–135. 

Meyer, V. (1966). Modification of expectations in cases with 
obsessional rituals. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 4, 
273–280. 

Meyer, V., & Levy, R. (1973). Modification of behavior in 
obsessive–compulsive disorders. In H. E. Adams & P. 
Unikel (Eds.), Issues and trends in behavior therapy 
(pp. 77–136). Springfield, IL: Thomas. 

Meyer, V., Levy, R., & Schnurer, A. (1974). A behavioral 
treatment of obsessive–compulsive disorders. In H. R. 
Beech (Ed.), Obsessional states. London: Methuen. 

Mowrer, O. H. (1939). A stimulus–response analysis of anxiety 
and its role as a reinforcing agent. Psychological Review, 
46, 553–565. 


Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder 

Mowrer, O. H. (1960). Learning theory and behavior. New 
York: Wiley. 

Neziroglu, F., Stevens, K. P., Yaryura-Tobias, J. A., & McKay, 

D. (2000). Predictive validity of the Overvalued Ideas 
Scale: Outcome in obsessive–compulsive and body dysmorphic 
disorder. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 39, 
745–756. 
Öst, L. G. (1989). One-session treatment for specific phobias. 
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 27, 1–7. 

O’Sullivan, G., Noshirvani, H., Marks, I., Monteiro, W., & 
Lelliott, P. (1991). Six-year follow-up after exposure and 
clomipramine therapy for obsessive–compulsive disorder. 
Journal of Clinical Archives, 52, 150–155. 

Pato, M. T., Zohar-Kadouch, R., Zohar, J., & Murphy, D. L. 
(1988). Return of symptoms after discontinuation of clomipramine 
in patients with obsessive–compulsive disorder. 
American Journal of Psychiatry, 145, 1521–1525. 

Pauls, D. L., Towbin, K. E., Leckman, J. F., Zahner, G. E., & 
Cohen, D. J. (1986). Gilles de la Tourette syndrome and 
obsessive–compulsive disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry, 
43, 1180–1182. 

Pediatric OCD Treatment Study Team. (2004). Cognitivebehavioral 
therapy, sertraline, and their combination for 
children and adolescents with obsessive–compulsive disorder: 
The Pediatric OCD Treatment Study (POTS) randomized 
controlled trial. Journal of the American Medical 
Association, 292, 1969–1976. 

Peris, T. S., Sugar, C. A., Bergman, L., Chang, S., Langley, 
A., & Piacentini, J. (2012). Family factors predict treatment 
outcome for pediatric obsessive-compulsive disorder. 
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 80, 
255–263. 

Piacentini, J., Bergman, R. L., Jacobs, C., McCracken, J. T., 
& Kretchman, J. (2002). Open trial of cognitive behavior 
therapy for childhood obsessive–compulsive disorder. 
Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 16, 207–219. 

Purdon, C., & Clark, D. A. (2002). The need to control 
thoughts. In R. Frost & G. Steketee (Eds.), Cognitive 
approaches to obsessions and compulsions: Theory, research, 
and treatment (pp. 29–43). Oakland, CA: New 
Harbinger. 

Rabavilas, A. D., Boulougouris, J. C., & Perissaki, C. (1979). 
Therapist qualities related to outcome with exposure in 
vivo in neurotic patients. Journal of Behavior Therapy and 
Experimental Psychiatry, 10, 293–299. 

Rachman, S. (1998). A cognitive theory of obsessions: Elaborations. 
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 36, 385–401. 
Rachman, S., & DeSilva, P. (1978). Abnormal and normal ob


sessions. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 16, 233–248. 
Rachman, S., Thordarson, D. S., Shafran, R., & Woody, S. 

R. (1995). Perceived responsibility: Structure and significance. 
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 33(7), 779–784. 
Rapoport, J. L., Swedo, S. E., & Leonard, H. L. (1992). Childhood 
obsessive compulsive disorder (144th Annual Meet


ing of the American Psychiatric Association: Obsessive 
Compulsive Disorder: Integrating Theory and Practice 
[1991, New Orleans, LA]). Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 
53(Suppl. 4), 11–16. 

Rasmussen, S. A., & Eisen, J. L. (1989). Clinical features and 
phenomenology of obsessive–compulsive disorder. Psychiatric 
Annals, 19, 67–73. 

Rasmussen, S. A., & Eisen, J. L. (1990). Epidemiology of 
obsessive–compulsive disorder. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 
51, 10–14. 

Rasmussen, S. A., & Tsuang, M. T. (1986). Clinical characteristics 
and family history in DSM III obsessive– 
compulsive disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 
1943, 317–382. 

Reed, G. E. (1985). Obsessional experience and compulsive 
behavior: A cognitive structural approach. Orlando, FL: 
Academic Press. 

Rhéaume, J., Freeston, M. H., Dugas, M. J., Letarte, H., & 
Ladouceur, R. (1995). Perfectionism, responsibility, and 
obsessive compulsive symptoms. Behaviour Research and 
Therapy, 36, 385–402. 

Riggs, D. S., Hiss, H., & Foa, E. B. (1992). Marital distress 
and the treatment of obsessive–compulsive disorder. Behavior 
Therapy, 23, 585–597. 

Rothbaum, B. O., & Shahar, F. (2000). Behavioral treatment 
of obsessive–compulsive disorder in a naturalistic setting. 
Cognitive and Behavioral Practice, 7, 262–270. 

Rowe, M. K., & Craske, M. G. (1998). Effects of an 
expanding-space vs. massed exposure schedule on fear 
reduction and return of fear. Beahviour Research and 
Therapy, 36, 701–717. 

Rubenstein, C. S., Peynircioglu, Z. F., Chambless, D. L., & 
Pigott, T. A. (1993). Memory in sub-clinical obsessive– 
compulsive checkers. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 
31(8), 759–765. 

Salkovskis, P. M. (1985). Obsessional compulsive problems: 
A cognitive-behavioral analysis. Behaviour Research and 
Therapy, 23, 571–583. 

Sher, K. J., Frost, R. O., & Otto, R. (1983). Cognitive deficits 
in compulsive checkers: An exploratory study. Behaviour 
Research and Therapy, 21, 357–364. 

Simpson, H. B., Liebowitz, M. R., Foa, E. B., Kozak, M. J., 
Schmidt, A. B., Rowan, V., et al. (2004). Post-treatment effects 
of exposure therapy and clomipramine in obsessive– 
compulsive disorder. Depression and Anxiety, 19, 225– 
233. 

Simpson, H. B., Zuckoff, A. M., Maher, M. J., Page, J. R., 
Franklin, M. E., & Foa, E. B. (2010). Challenges using 
motivational interviewing as an adjunct to exposure therapy 
for obsessive–compulsive disorder. Behaviour Research 
and Therapy, 48, 941–948. 

Stampfl, T. G., & Levis, D. J. (1967). Essentials of implosive 
therapy: A learning-based psychodynamic behavioral 
therapy. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 72, 496–503. 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

Stanley, M. A., Turner, S. M., & Borden, J. W. (1990). Schizotypal 
features in obsessive–compulsive disorder. Comprehensive 
Psychiatry, 31, 511–518. 

Steketee, G., Chambless, D. L., & Tran, G. Q. (2001). Effects 
of Axis I and II comorbidity on behavior therapy outcome 
for obsessive–compulsive disorder and agoraphobia. Comprehensive 
Psychiatry, 42, 76–86. 

Steketee, G., Eisen, J., Dyck, I., Warshaw, M., & Rasmussen, 

S. (1999). Predictors of course in obsessive-compulsive 
disorder. Psychiatry Research, 89, 229–238. 
Steketee, G. S., Foa, E. B., & Grayson, J. B. (1982). Recent 
advances in the treatment of obsessive–compulsives. Archives 
of General Psychiatry, 39, 1365–1371. 

Stein, D. J., Fineberg, N. A., Bienvenu, O. J., Denys, D., Lochner, 
C., Nestadt, G., et al. (2010). Should OCD be classified 
as an anxiety disorder in DSM V? Depression and 
Anxiety, 27, 495–506. 

Storch, E., Geffken, G., Merlo, L., Mann, G., Duke, D., Munson, 
M., et al. (2007). Family-based cognitive-behavioral 
therapy for pediatric obsessive–compulsive disorder: 
Comparison of intensive and weekly approaches. Journal 
of American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 
46, 469–478. 

Storch, E. A., Merlo, L. J., Larson, M. J., Geffken, G. R., 
Lehmkuhl, H. D., Jacob, M. L., et al. (2008). Impact of 
comorbidity on cognitive-behavioral therapy response in 
pediatric obsessive–compulsive disorder. Journal of the 
American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 
47, 83–92. 

Storch, E. A., Khanna, M., Merlo, L. J., Loew, B. A., Franklin, 
M., et al. (2009). Children’s Florida Obsessive Compulsive 
Inventory: Psychometric properties and feasibility 
of a self-report measure of obsessive–compulsive symptoms 
in youth. Child Psychiatry and Human Development, 
40(3), 467–483. 

Swedo, S. E., Leckman, J. F., & Rose, N. R. (2012). From 
research subgroup to clinical syndrome: Modifying 
the PANDAS criteria to describe PANS (pediatric acuteonset 
neuropsychiatric syndrome). Pediatric Therapeutics, 
2, 2. 

Swedo, S. E., Leonard, H. L., Garvey, M., Mittleman, B., 
Allen, A. J., Perlmutter, S., et al. (1998). Pediatric autoimmune 
neuropsychiatric disorders associated with streptococcal 
infections: Clinical description of the first 50 cases. 
American Journal of Psychiatry, 155, 264–271. 

Swedo, S. E., Rapoport, J. L., Leonard, H. L., Lenane, M., 
& Cheslow, D. (1989). Obsessive compulsive disorder in 
children and adolescents: Clinical phenomenology of 70 
consecutive cases. Archives of General Psychiatry, 46, 
335–341. 

Thoren, P., Asberg, M., Chronholm, B., Jornestedt, L., 
& Traskman, L. (1980). Clomipramine treatment of 
obsessive–compulsive disorder: I. A controlled clinical 
trial. Archives of General Psychiatry, 37, 1281–1285. 

Tolin, D. F., Maltby, N., Diefenbach, G. J., Hannan, S. E., & 
Worhunsky, P. (2004). Cognitive-behavioral therapy for 
medication nonresponders with obsessive–compulsive 
disorder: A wait-list-controlled open trial. Journal of 
Clinical Psychiatry, 65, 922–931. 

Tukel, R., Polat, A., Ozdemir, O., Aksut, D., & Turksov, N. 
(2002). Comorbid conditions in obsessive–compulsive 
disorder. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 43, 204–209. 

Twohig, M. P., Hayes, S. C., & Masuda, A. (2006). Increasing 
willingness to experience obsessions: Acceptance and 
commitment therapy as a treatment for obsessive compulsive 
disorder. Behavior Therapy, 37, 3–13. 

Twohig, M., Hayes, S. C., Plumb, J., Pruitt, L. D., Collins, A. 
B., Hazlett-Stevens, H., et al. (2010). A randomized controlled 
trial of acceptance and commitment therapy versus 
progressive relaxation training for obsessive compulsive 
disorder. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 
78, 705–716. 

Valderhaug, R., Larsson, B., Gotestam, K. G., & Piacentini, 

J. (2007). An open clinical trial of cognitive-behaviour 
therapy in children and adolescents with obsessive– 
compulsive disorder administered in regular outpatient 
clinics. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 45, 577–589. 
Valleni-Basille, L. A., Garrison, C. Z., Jackson, K. L., Waller, 

J. L., McKeown, R. E., Addy, C. L., et al. (1994). Frequency 
of obsessive–compulsive disorder in a community sample 
of young adolescents. Journal of the American Academy 
of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 33, 782–791. 
van Balkom, A. J., de Haan, E., van Oppen, P., Spinhoven, 
P., Hoogduin, K. A., Vermeulen, A. W. A., et al. (1998). 
Cognitive and behavioral therapies alone and in combination 
with fluvoxamine in the treatment of obsessive compulsive 
disorder. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 
186, 492–499. 

van Minnen, A., & Hagenaars, M. (2002). Fear activation 
and habituation patterns as early process predictors of response 
to prolonged exposure treatment in PTSD. Journal 
of Traumatic Stress, 15, 359–367. 

Verdellen, C. W., Keijsers, G. P., Cath, D. C., & Hoogduin, 

C. A. (2004). Exposure with response prevention versus 
habit reversal in Tourette syndrome: A controlled study. 
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 42, 501–511. 
Vogel, P. A., Stiles, T. C., & Götestam, K. G. (20040. Adding 
cognitive therapy elements to exposure therapy for 
obsessive–compulsive disorder: A controlled study. Behavioural 
and Cognitive Psychotherapy, 32, 275–290. 

Warren, R., & Thomas, J. C. (2001). Cognitive-behavior therapy 
of obsessive–compulsive disorder in private practice: 
An effectiveness study. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 15, 
277–285. 

Warwick, H. M., Clark, D. M., Cobb, A. M., & Salkovskis, 

P. M. (1996). A controlled trial of cognitive-behavioural 
treatment of hypochondriasis. British Journal of Psychiatry, 
169(2), 189–195. 

Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder 

Watts, F. N. (1973). Desensitization as an habituation phenomenon: 
II. Studies of interstimulus interval length. Psychological 
Reports, 33, 715–718. 

Weissman, M. M., Bland, R. C., Canino, G. J., Greenwald, S., 
Hwu, H. G., Lee, C. K., et al. (1994). The cross national 
epidemiology of obsessive compulsive disorder: The Cross 
National Collaborative Group. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 
55(Suppl.), 5–10. 

Whittal, M. L., Thordarson, D. S., & McLean, P. D. (2005). 
Treatment of obsessive–compulsive disorder: Cognitive 
behavior therapy vs. exposure and response prevention. 
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 43, 1559–1576. 

Whittal, M. L., Woody, S. R., McLean, P. D., Rachman, S., 
& Robichaud, M. (2010). Treatment of obsessions: A randomized 
controlled trial. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 
48, 295–303. 


CHaPter 5 

An Acceptance‑Based 
Behavioral Therapy 
for generalized Anxiety Disorder 

lizaBeth roeMer 
susaN M. orsillo 


generalized anxiety disorder (gAD) has been called the “basic” anxiety disorder, in the 
sense that generalized anxiety is, by definition, a component of other anxiety and related 
disorders. indeed, gAD, although characterized by marked fluctuations, is chronic. 
some have even considered that generalized anxiety might be better conceptualized as a 
personality disorder, since many individuals with this problem cannot report a definitive 
age of onset; rather, they note that it has been with them all their lives. Psychological and 
drug treatments, although often evaluated, have not produced the robust results evident 
with some other anxiety disorders. for this reason, further study of new treatment protocols 
is all the more pressing. The protocol presented in this chapter, recently developed 
by Drs. roemer and orsillo at our Center, illustrates a cutting‑edge, acceptance‑based approach 
to gAD that has achieved a high rate of success in initial trials. This protocol also 
illustrates, more so than any other chapter in this edition, principles associated with the 
so‑called “third‑wave” cognitive‑behavioral approach to psychological disorders. Clinicians 
and students interested in how this approach is actually implemented will find the 
case study of “Hector” particularly fascinating.—D. H. B. 

generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) is a chronic 
anxiety disorder, centrally defined in DSM-IV and 
DSM-5, where criteria are unchanged, by excessive 
anxiety and worry more days than not over a period of 
at least 6 months (American Psychiatric Association, 
1994, 2013). Clients who meet criteria for GAD also 
report difficulty controlling the worry they experience, 
as well as three or more associated symptoms (muscle 
tension, irritability, restlessness or feeling keyed up, 
difficulty concentrating or mind going blank, being 
easily tired, and difficulty sleeping). Epidemiological 

studies reveal a lifetime prevalence of 5.7% for GAD 
using DSM-IV criteria (Kessler et al., 2005). 

GAD is associated with high levels of comorbidity 
with other psychological disorders. Over 90% of 
individuals who meet criteria for GAD during their 
lifetimes also meet criteria for at least one additional 
disorder (Bruce, Machan, Dyck, & Keller, 2001), and 
prospective studies indicate that GAD is a specific risk 
factor for the development of other mental health disorders, 
particularly major depression (Bruce et al., 2001). 
GAD is also associated with significantly reduced 

206 

###CUT###
Generalized Anxiety Disorder 

quality of life (Hoffman, Dukes, & Wittchen, 2008). 
Furthermore, individuals with GAD have more annual 
medical visits than other patients (Belanger, Ladouceur, 
& Morin, 2005) and are more likely to seek medical, 
rather than mental health, care for their symptoms 
(Wang et al., 2005). In fact, GAD is the most common 
anxiety disorder found among primary care patients 
(Ballenger et al., 2001), and the mean annual medical 
cost of GAD is $2,138 higher than for other anxiety disorders 
(mean = $6,475; Revicki et al., 2012). Given that 
GAD is associated with a host of physical complaints 
and conditions, including painful physical symptoms 
(Romera et al., 2010), gastrointestinal symptoms (Mussell 
et al., 2008), and cardiological complaints (Logue, 
Thomas, Barbee, & Hoehn-Saric, 1993), it is not surprising 
that patients with GAD have a tendency to overutilize 
medical (Ballenger et al., 2001), and underutilize 
psychiatric (Kennedy & Schwab, 1997) services. 

Although earlier diagnostic criteria for GAD incorporated 
symptoms of autonomic arousal (e.g., accelerated 
heart rate), several lines of research converged to 
support removal of these criteria for DSM-IV. A largescale 
study of reported associated symptoms indicated 
that autonomic symptoms were more rarely endorsed 
than symptoms of muscle tension, vigilance, and scanning, 
such as those described earlier (Marten et al., 
1993). Furthermore, physiological studies revealed that 
GAD was more accurately characterized by reduced 
heart rate variability than by increased autonomic 
arousal (e.g., Thayer, Friedman, & Borkovec, 1996). Finally, 
experimental studies of worry revealed that worrying 
prior to exposure to a feared stimulus leads to less 
autonomic arousal than relaxation prior to exposure to 
a feared stimulus (e.g., Borkovec & Hu, 1990). Taken 
together, these studies suggest that autonomic arousal 
is not a necessary feature of GAD. 

Instead, the central defining feature of GAD is excessive 
worry, or repeatedly thinking about worst case 
scenarios involving potential future events. Studies reveal 
that worry content does not differ between individuals 
who meet criteria for GAD and those who do 
not, except that those with GAD report worrying about 
miscellaneous topics, particularly minor matters, more 
than those who do not meet criteria (e.g., Roemer, Molina, 
& Borkovec, 1997). As noted earlier, individuals 
with GAD report difficulty stopping their worry once 
it starts, and clients often note that worrying about one 
topic can lead to worry about another. These findings 
and observations suggest that worry is a cognitive habit, 
with clients who meet criteria for GAD getting “stuck” 

in cycles of worry about a wide range of topics that are 
difficult to stop once started. All cognitive-behavioral 
treatments for GAD emphasize interrupting this cycle, 
although methods for doing so vary. 

Descriptive studies of GAD and worry have revealed 
affective, cognitive, and interpersonal correlates that 
may have important treatment implications. Borkovec’s 
seminal research revealed that worry serves an avoidant 
function, by its perceived association with decreasing 
the likelihood of already low base rate negative 
events, and by the reduction in physiological arousal 
noted earlier (Borkovec, Alcaine, & Behar, 2004), as 
well as distraction from more emotional topics by selfreport 
(Borkovec & Roemer, 1995). Mennin and others 
have demonstrated that GAD is associated with both 
self-reported deficits in emotion regulation (e.g., Mennin, 
Holaway, Fresco, Moore, & Heimberg, 2007) and 
limits in implicit regulation of emotional processing 
(Etkin & Schatzberg, 2011). Studies in this area have 
also revealed that GAD is associated with the fear or 
distress of anxiety (and other emotions; Lee, Orsillo, 
Roemer, & Allen, 2010; Mennin et al., 2007), worry 
about worry (or metaworry; Wells, 2005), and habitual 
avoidance of internal experiences (i.e., experiential 
avoidance; Lee et al., 2010). Furthermore, in a clinical 
sample, both worry and GAD were uniquely associated 
with perceived uncontrollability of emotional reactions, 
beyond shared variance with other known cognitive 
predictors of GAD (Stapinski, Abbott, & Rapee, 
2010). Extensive research also documents an association 
between GAD and intolerance of uncertainty (the 
tendency to respond negatively to uncertain events 
and situations; Gentes & Ruscio, 2011), including an 
experimental study showing that manipulated uncertainty 
leads to increased worry (Ladouceur, Gosselin, 
& Dugas, 2000). GAD is also associated with interpersonal 
problems (Przeworski et al., 2011), including 
increased marital distress (Whisman, 2007). 

overview of eviDeNce 
for Psychosocial treatMeNts of GaD 

Meta-analyses reveal that cognitive-behavioral therapies 
(CBTs) are efficacious for GAD, with large effect 
sizes that are maintained over follow-up periods (Borkovec 
& Ruscio, 2001; Covin, Ouimet, Seeds, & Dozois, 
2008), and evidence of comparative efficacy over nondirective 
therapy (Borkovec & Costello, 1993). Within 
CBTs, a meta-analysis revealed comparable effects 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

of cognitive therapy and relaxation therapy in treating 
GAD (Siev & Chambless, 2007). However, GAD 
remains one of the least successfully treated of the 
anxiety disorders (Waters & Craske, 2005), with most 
studies indicating that fewer than 65% of clients meet 
criteria for high end-state functioning at posttreatment 
(Ladouceur et al., 2000; Newman et al., 2011). 

As briefly reviewed earlier, recent research has refined 
and expanded our understanding of GAD in an 
effort to identify causal and maintaining factors to 
target in therapy and improve its efficacy (see Behar, 
DiMarco, Hekler, Mohlman, & Staples, 2009, for an 
extensive review). Recent randomized controlled trials 
(RCTs) informed by these models indicate that targeting 
the interpersonal and emotion-focused aspects 
of GAD (Newman et al., 2011), and intolerance of 
uncertainty (Dugas et al., 2010), yield effects comparable 
to existing CBTs for GAD. A small pilot study 
found that targeting metacognition (e.g., metaworry) 
in GAD (Wells et al., 2010) produced better outcomes 
than applied relaxation; however, the very low rates of 
response to applied relaxation, coupled with the small 
sample size, indicate a need for further research to confirm 
this finding. A trial examining the efficacy of emotion 
regulation therapy for GAD is currently under way 
(Mennin & Fresco, in press). 

We developed the acceptance-based behavioral therapy 
described in this chapter (which explicitly targets 
reactivity to [distress about] internal experiences, and 
experiential and behavioral avoidance, as described 
below) in an effort to better target GAD and comorbid 
disorders. We use the term “acceptance-based behavior 
therapy” (ABBT; Roemer & Orsillo, 2009) to 
refer to the broad class of therapies based in cognitivebehavioral 
theory but that explicitly incorporate methods 
to promote acceptance of internal experiences (e.g., 
acceptance and commitment therapy [ACT; Hayes, 
Strosahl, & Wilson, 2012]; dialectical behavior therapy 
[DBT; Linehan, 1993]; mindfulness-based cognitive 
therapy [MBCT; Segal, Williams, & Teasdale, 2002]). 
This ABBT for GAD, which draws from these treatments, 
as well as Borkovec’s CBT for GAD (Borkovec 
& Sharpless, 2004), has been examined through an 
open trial and two RCTs. The open trial revealed significant, 
large effects on clinician-rated GAD severity, 
self-reported worry, anxiety, and depressive symptoms 
(Roemer & Orsillo, 2007). A wait-list RCT similarly 
revealed significant, large effects on clinician and selfreported 
GAD symptoms, as well as depressive symptoms 
(Roemer, Orsillo, & Salters-Pedneault, 2008). 

Marginally significant, medium effects emerged on 
clinician-rated additional diagnoses and self-reported 
quality of life. Significant large effects also emerged on 
self-reported experiential avoidance and mindfulness, 
two proposed mechanisms of change in the treatment. 
All effects were maintained at 9-month follow-up. Of 
those treated, 77% met criteria for high end-state functioning 
(falling within normative range on the majority 
of anxiety measures) at posttreatment; this proportion 
increased slightly (nonsignificantly) over time. In this 
trial, ABBT produced a significant increase in engagement 
in valued, or personally meaningful, activities 
(Michelson, Lee, Orsillo, & Roemer, 2011). Moreover, 
ABBT significantly impacted outcome variables proposed 
in other models to be central to GAD (emotion 
regulation deficits, intolerance of uncertainty, and perceived 
control over anxiety-related events; Treanor, 
Erisman, Salters-Pedneault, Roemer, & Orsillo, 2011). 
A recently completed RCT comparing ABBT with applied 
relaxation, an empirically treatment for GAD, 
revealed comparable effects on clinician-rated and 
self-reported GAD symptoms, clinician-rated comorbid 
diagnoses, and self-reported depressive symptoms 
and quality of life (Hayes-Skelton, Roemer, & Orsillo, 
2013). A large proportion of clients in both conditions 
met criteria for high end-state functioning (some of the 
highest rates reported in the literature in each condition) 
and gains were maintained at 6-month follow up. 
Finally, there is evidence that ABBT works through 
its proposed mechanisms. Session-by-session changes 
in acceptance of internal experiences and engagement 
in meaningful activities predicted outcome above and 
beyond change in worry (Hayes, Orsillo, & Roemer, 
2010). 

A recent study that examined the relative efficacy of 
ACT compared to CBT for a mixed-anxiety sample revealed 
comparable effects across the full sample (Arch 
et al., 2012). Although the small size of the GAD subsample 
precluded within-subgroup analyses, examination 
of means suggests that ACT was effective in reducing 
clinician-rated and self-reported GAD symptoms in 
this study. 

Taken together, these findings suggest that psychosocial 
treatments for GAD are efficacious, and adaptations 
of CBT that specifically target empirically determined 
features of GAD are promising. As with all 
treatments based in behavioral theory, a well-developed 
case conceptualization is a necessary starting point to 
use evidence-based treatments effectively with a specific 
client. 


Generalized Anxiety Disorder 

aN accePtaNce‑BaseD Behavioral 
MoDel of GaD 

An acceptance-based behavioral model of GAD is 
grounded in behavioral learning theory. Consistent 
with other theories, we propose that individuals with 
GAD develop the habit of worry, repeatedly anticipating 
potential dangers and threats. These habits are 
strengthened through repetition and reinforcing consequences. 
This worry process is negatively reinforced 
by both the nonoccurrence of feared outcomes and the 
reduced physiological activation that is a positive consequence 
of engaging in worry (Borkovec et al., 2004). 

Moreover, individuals with GAD come to associate 
universal, functional human states such as fear, anxiety, 
other emotional responses, and even worry with 
negative personal characteristics. As a result, individuals 
with GAD respond to anxiety-related thoughts and 
emotional states with self-criticism and judgment. In 
an attempt to avoid or escape the uncomfortable, unwanted 
experience of worry, and the associated negative 
self-evaluation, individuals with GAD engage in a 
variety of potentially problematic behaviors. Although 
these behaviors interfere with quality of life, they provide 
short-term relief from arousal and negative affect. 

Drawing from decades of research on GAD, other 
anxiety disorders, and broader models of psychopathology 
(e.g., Hayes et al., 2012), we hypothesize that the 
following three learned behaviors contribute to the development 
and maintenance of GAD. 

Reacting to Internal Experiences 
with Distress, Criticism, and Judgment 
(Leading to Entanglement/Fusion) 

One of the most formative, consistent findings to 
emerge in the field of anxiety disorders has been that 
the experience of anxiety or fear in and of itself (e.g., 
sensations of panic, worrisome thoughts, catastrophic 
images, recurrent painful memories) is not evidence of 
a disorder. Instead, reactions to these symptoms, or “reaction 
to our reactions” (Borkovec & Sharpless, 2004) 
exacerbate their intensity and duration, cause distress, 
and interfere with quality of life, leading to the anxiety 
disorder diagnosis. The centrality of “reactions to reactions” 
to the concept of psychological disorders was 
recently documented in a treatment trial. Changes in 
reactivity to emotions predicted unique variance in all 
outcome variables over and above changes in frequency 
of emotional responses in a study of the unified proto


col for emotional disorders (Sauer-Zavala et al., 2012; 
see Payne, Ellard, Farchione, Fairholme, & Barlow, 
Chapter 6, this volume). 

A growing body of research documents that individuals 
with GAD report increased anxiety sensitivity 
(i.e., fear of anxiety-related bodily sensations; Olatunji 
& Wolitzky-Taylor, 2009), negative reactivity to their 
emotional responses (e.g., Lee et al., 2010; Mennin et 
al., 2007), and worry about their own worry (Wells, 
2005). Furthermore, anxiety leads to a narrowed focus 
of attention (both external and internal) toward potential 
threat (Cisler & Koster, 2010), which likely both 
exacerbates these reactions and is strengthened by reactivity, 
further perpetuating cycles of anxious responding. 
These reactions can lead individuals to become 
entangled with (Germer, 2005) or “hooked” on (Chodron, 
2007) their experiences of anxiety and worry, so 
that the anxiety comes to seem self-defining and allencompassing. 
Instead of viewing anxiety as a response 
that is elicited in a particular context, individuals can 
come to define themselves as “anxious,” fusing their 
identity with these experiences (e.g., Hayes et al., 2012). 
Thus, negative reactivity to emotions can evolve into 
negative personal judgments (“I’m so weak!”; “Other 
people don’t worry the way I do”), which in turn can 
increase anxiety and worry. 

Becoming entangled or fused with internal experiences 
makes it much harder to see the ways that 
thoughts, feelings, and sensations naturally rise, fall, 
and change over time. It can also interfere with one’s 
ability to understand and respond effectively to emotional 
states, leading to diffuse experiences of distress 
that do not provide clear motivational information. 
When fear, anxiety, and worry are perceived as distressing, 
defining, and unrelenting, they naturally elicit 
attempts to escape and avoid. 

Rigid Attempts to Avoid Internal Distress 

Trying not to think about or feel or remember something 
distressing is a natural response. 

All people use strategies to turn their attention away 
from internal distress at times, in order to bring attention 
to the task at hand. Yet experimental studies show 
that rigid, repeated efforts to put thoughts, feelings, 
sensations or memories out of our minds (e.g., experiential 
avoidance; Hayes, Wilson, Gifford, Follette, & 
Strosahl, 1996) are often unsuccessful and can actually 
increase distressing thoughts, feelings, or sensations 
(e.g., Gross, 2002; Levitt, Brown, Orsillo, & Barlow, 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

2004; Najmi & Wegner, 2008). Furthermore, instructed 
effort not to think of situations can increase reported 
anxiety associated with the target situation (Roemer & 
Borkovec, 1994), suggesting that experiential avoidance 
increases distress about thoughts and emotions. 
Taken together, these studies suggest that rigid efforts 
to avoid distressing thoughts, feelings, sensations, and 
memories can increase the frequency of these experiences, 
as well as the distress associated with them, 
further strengthening the cycle of reactivity and avoidance. 
Efforts at experiential avoidance are likely to 
reduce distress in the short term at least sometimes, 
leading to immediate negative reinforcement, further 
strengthening this habitual response. 

Reports of experiential avoidance are associated with 
GAD diagnoses, even beyond shared variance with depressive 
symptoms (Lee et al., 2010). Furthermore, as 
described earlier, experimental studies demonstrate 
that worry itself serves an experientially avoidant function 
by reducing physiological arousal in response to 
feared stimuli and distracting individuals from more 
distressing topics (Borkovec et al., 2004). 

Behavioral Avoidance/Constriction 

Reactions to internal experiences and rigid experiential 
avoidance not only feed on each other in a continually 
escalating cycle, but also naturally lead to avoidance 
of contexts that elicit anxiety or other experiences of 
distress. Behavioral avoidance is a core feature of other 
anxiety disorders, but it has generally been overlooked 
in GAD. However, individuals with GAD often avoid 
certain situations, spend extensive time preparing for 
situations, procrastinate or put off decision making, or 
seek reassurance, all in an effort to avoid distress, anxiety, 
and/or uncertainty (Andrews et al., 2010). Clients 
with GAD report engaging in valued actions (i.e., doing 
what they find personally meaningful) less than do control 
participants (Michelson et al., 2011). 

Clinically, clients with GAD show a range of avoidance 
behaviors. Sometimes avoidance is overt, such 
as when a client does not pursue dating or a promotion 
at work due to anxiety, fears of being rejected, or 
worry. Other times, clients who seem to be engaging in 
a wide range of behaviors that are important (e.g., taking 
on challenges at work, being involved in activities 
with their children) may report that they are constantly 
worrying about what is ahead rather than attending to 
what they are doing in the moment. Borkovec notes this 

focus on the future instead of the present as a core characteristic 
of GAD (e.g., Borkovec & Sharpless, 2004), 
and research indicates that GAD and worry are associated 
with reports of reduced mindfulness (awareness 
in the present moment; Roemer et al., 2009). This continual 
focus on what might go wrong in the future can 
lead clients to feel like spectators in their own lives: 
behaviorally, but not emotionally, engaged in actions 
that matter to them. 

This conceptual model highlights three targets for 
intervention when treating clients with GAD and other 
comorbid disorders: (1) problematic ways of relating to 
internal experiences, (2) rigid strategies aimed at experiential 
avoidance, and (3) constriction or avoidance of 
meaningful actions. Based on this model, the goals of 
an ABBT for GAD are (1) to cultivate an expanded (as 
opposed to narrowed) awareness and a compassionate 
(as opposed to critical and judgmental), decentered (as 
opposed to entangled and fused) stance toward internal 
experiences; (2) to increase acceptance of/willingness 
to have internal experiences; and (3) to engage mindfully 
in personally meaningful behaviors. 

aPPlyiNG aBBt 

Context for Therapy 

Our first case study of ABBT took place in group format 
(Orsillo, Roemer, & Barlow, 2003). Although clients 
benefited from the group context in some ways, they 
reported that they wanted more individualized focus 
to help them clarify their values (i.e., what matters to 
them) and apply the treatment to their specific contexts. 
As a result, all of our subsequent trials have used individual 
therapy. However, we think that the modality of 
treatment can be adjusted to better fit specific settings. 
In fact, a recent study found that a group version of our 
protocol led to significant reductions in self-reported 
anxiety, worry, and GAD symptoms in a community 
setting (Heatherington et al., 2013). Furthermore, several 
elements of ABBT (e.g., psychoeducation, mindfulness 
practice, commitment to valued action) have 
been effectively conducted in group settings in other, 
related treatment approaches (e.g., Evans et al., 2008; 
Kocovski, Fleming, & Rector, 2009). 

Given the prevalence of GAD in primary care contexts, 
we are interested in adapting treatment so it can 
be used as part of integrative primary care. We wrote 


Generalized Anxiety Disorder 

a self-help book that may be beneficial in this context 
(Orsillo & Roemer, 2011), but no studies to date have 
examined its effectiveness. Briefer workshops (e.g., 
Blevins, Roca, & Spencer, 2011; Brown et al., 2011) may 
also be a useful modality for delivery of the conceptual 
model and suggestions for mindfulness and valued action 
practices in contexts where individual therapy is 
less feasible due to economic or time constraints. 

Therapist Characteristics 

A central aspect of ABBT involves modeling acceptance 
of intense emotional experiences. Therefore, 
successful ABBT therapists are able to tolerate intense 
emotions and convey acceptance to their clients. Similarly, 
ABBT therapists continually validate and express 
compassion toward clients in distress, providing for clients 
an example of how they might respond differently 
to their own experiences and reduce the cycle of reactivity 
and avoidance that contributes to maintenance of 
their symptoms. These characteristics, combined with 
a clear understanding of the model and how to apply 
it to specific cases, help therapists to develop a strong, 
positive working alliance, which significantly predicted 
outcome in our most recent trial (Sorenson, Hayes-
Skelton, Roemer, & Orsillo, 2012). 

As we describe more fully below, ABBT is meant 
to be applied flexibly, with therapists adapting their 
approach, strategies used, and between-session assignments 
to meet the presentation and context of clients. 
As such, flexibility may be an important therapist characteristic. 
In a small qualitative study, as part of our 
most recent RCT, we interviewed clients who identified 
with marginalized backgrounds in terms of race, 
ethnicity, sexual orientation, socioeconomic status, or 
religion. Clients identified the flexibility of their therapist 
as an important factor in how helpful they found 
treatment and how well it fit with their particular context 
(Fuchs et al., 2012). 

Client Characteristics 

In the studies we have conducted on ABBT for GAD, 
we have had very few exclusion criteria in order to 
maximize the generalizability of our findings. Clients 
frequently present with comorbid diagnoses, most 
commonly major depressive disorder, social anxiety 
disorder, and other anxiety disorders. Because ABBT 
targets mechanisms that are likely to underlie these 

other disorders as well, treatment may positively impact 
these comorbid conditions (e.g., Roemer et al., 
2008). However, outside the constraints of protocol 
therapy, we would recommend integrating elements of 
evidence-based methods (e.g., behavioral activation, 
exposure) when indicated. The disorders we have ruled 
out in our RCTs, primarily because they warrant specific 
treatments, include substance dependence, bipolar 
disorder, schizophrenia, and autism spectrum disorders. 
Thus, we cannot determine the impact of ABBT 
on these comorbid presentations. 

To date, we have only preliminarily explored potential 
predictors of response to ABBT. To date, our data 
suggest that gender, age, GAD severity, frequency and 
intensity of worry, depressive symptoms, and comorbid 
diagnoses do not significantly predict outcome (Orsillo, 
Roemer, & Salters-Pedneault, 2008). 

As with most evidence-based treatments, considerably 
more research is needed to determine the ways an 
ABBT for GAD might be beneficial for people from 
marginalized or nondominant cultural backgrounds. A 
meta-analysis indicated promising results for ABBTs 
more broadly (Fuchs, Lee, Roemer, & Orsillo, 2013). 
Our small qualitative study revealed that clients from 
marginalized backgrounds generally found ABBT 
helpful (Fuchs et al., 2012). Clients particularly noted 
that therapist flexibility and the focus on valued living 
helped them engage in treatment and find it relevant. 
However, some clients reported that therapist inflexibility 
or not connecting to specific mindfulness exercises 
was a barrier. 

A commonly expressed concern is that mindfulness 
may not be accepted by clients who identify strongly 
with a non-Buddhist religion. However, mindfulness 
exercises can be adapted to match specific religious 
practices (Sobczak & West, 2013) because mindfulness 
is part of many religious traditions, for instance, 
Western Christian contemplative practice (Dimidjian 
& Linehan, 2009). More work is needed to explore 
how best to adapt ABBT for clients from different 
backgrounds, and also how to use ABBT strategies to 
address contextual sources of stress such as discrimination 
and lack of resources (Lee, Fuchs, Roemer, & 
Orsillo, 2009; Sobczak & West, 2013). 

Concurrent Pharmacological Treatment 

Although medication is the most common mode of 
treatment for GAD (Issakidis, Sanderson, Corry, An



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

drews, & Lapsley, 2004) and is often considered a 
first-line treatment option (Katzman, 2009), evidence 
for the sustained clinical impact of pharmacotherapy 
is limited (Davidson, Bose, Korotzer, & Zheng, 2004; 
Gelenberg et al., 2000; Rickels et al., 2003). The magnitude 
of change in GAD symptoms associated with 
pharmacological treatment ranges from moderate to 
poor (Hidalgo, Tupler, & Davidson, 2007). Moreover, 
pharmacological interventions may produce adverse 
side effects (Katzman, 2009) and are less cost-effective 
than psychotherapeutic approaches such as CBT (Heuzenroeder 
et al., 2004). 

Clients who were stable on medications were enrolled 
in our clinical trials. Within ABBT, medications are conceptualized 
as one of several ways to reduce the intensity 
of internal reactions, so that it is easier to accept them, 
have compassion for oneself, and engage in meaningful 
actions. In this way, a nonexperientially avoidant function 
for medication can be highlighted (medication helps 
one to engage more fully in life and accept whatever 
comes), so that it is consistent with the rest of treatment. 

Overview of Treatment Elements 

In our clinical trials, we have followed a 16-session, 
weekly individual protocol for ABBT, with the last 
two sessions tapered (every other week) and focused 
on relapse prevention. The first seven sessions focus on 
psychoeducation and skills building, while the remaining 
sessions focus on application of skills while the client 
engages in personally meaningful, valued actions. 
Here we provide a brief overview of each element of 
treatment, followed by a composite case example to illustrate 
the way each element is addressed across the 
course of therapy. Those interested in more details on 
our approach should consult our book for therapists 
(Roemer & Orsillo, 2009) and our self-help book (Orsillo 
& Roemer, 2011). 

Clinical Assessment to Develop an 
Acceptance-Based Behavioral Conceptualization 

To develop a case conceptualization that guides flexible 
application of treatment elements, we assess symptoms, 
context, and the three components of the model. 

syMPToMs 

Assessing the client’s anxiety and related symptoms 
provides useful information about targets for change, 

while also supporting the therapeutic goal of changing 
a client’s relationship with anxiety. Assessment of 
anxiety-related thoughts, feelings, physical sensations, 
and behaviors, the contexts in which anxiety typically 
occurs, and the frequency and severity of symptoms 
helps clients begin to observe more accurately specific 
elements of their anxiety responses. Ongoing 
self-monitoring of daily anxiety symptoms, as well as 
guided imaginal recall, can provide a more accurate 
assessment of specific symptoms than general report 
given that clients who engage in habitual avoidance or 
suppression of their anxiety often do not have an accurate 
perception of its frequency, duration, or variability 
over time. Brief but specific self-report measures (e.g., 
the Depression Anxiety Stress Scales; Lovibond & Lovibond, 
1995, or the trait and weekly Penn State Worry 
Questionnaires (Meyer, Miller, Metzger, & Borkovec, 
1990; Stöber & Bittencourt, 1998), can also be used, 
both to obtain baseline measures of symptoms and to 
track weekly fluctuations in symptoms. 

Semistructured clinical interviews such as the Anxiety 
Disorders Interview Schedule (Di Nardo et al., 
1994) can be used to determine both principal and comorbid 
disorders to guide the selection and emphasis of 
specific treatment strategies. Depression is an important 
target of assessment, as are other clinical presentations, 
such as eating disorders and substance-use disorders, 
which may indicate specific avoidance strategies 
that need to be targeted in treatment. 

reACTions To inTernAl exPerienCes 

Assessing how clients respond to their anxiety symptoms, 
as well as to internal experiences (e.g., thoughts, 
emotions, sensations, memories) more generally, contributes 
to case conceptualization. Therapists may ask 
questions such as “When you notice you are worrying, 
what thoughts, feelings and sensations do you experience 
next?”; “Do you find yourself having critical 
thoughts about your experiences of anxiety?”; and 
“What kinds of thoughts do you have?” or use selfreport 
measures that capture these constructs. Selfcriticism, 
judgment, and reactivity that arise for clients 
in response to their own thoughts and feelings 
are important targets for intervention. Measures such 
as the Affective Control Scale (Williams, Chambless, 
& Ahrens, 1997), a measure of distress in response to 
anxiety, depression, anger, and positive emotions, and 
the Self-Compassion Scale (Neff, 2003) can help to 
identify reactivity to emotions and self-criticism. 


Generalized Anxiety Disorder 

exPerienTiAl AVoiDAnCe 

Therapists also assess the strategies that clients use in 
an attempt to suppress, avoid, or change internal experiences 
(Hayes et al., 1996). Experiential avoidance 
strategies may be internal, such as thought or emotion 
suppression (Gross & Levenson, 1997; Najmi & Wegner, 
2008), or external, such as using substances, engaging 
in self-harm, or restricting eating. Therapist can 
ask clients what they do to try to manage their distress 
or anxiety, then listen for avoidant strategies. Efforts 
in which clients engage automatically or rigidly are 
most likely to lead to paradoxical increases in distress 
and symptoms. Therapists need to distinguish between 
efforts to modulate or regulate emotional distress and 
rigid efforts to avoid it; often the difference is evident 
in what happens after the strategy is engaged. The former 
are likely to be beneficial and may be strengths 
on which to build in therapy, if used flexibly, whereas 
the latter are more likely to lead to increased distress 
and interference. For instance, one client with whom 
we worked reported going for walks to try to clear her 
head of worry. When her therapist asked what she did 
when she returned, she reported that she was more able 
to focus on being with her children and enjoy their time 
together. On the other hand, another client who described 
regularly watching TV in order to distract herself 
from her worries said that as soon as she turned off 
the TV, her worried thoughts flooded back, so that she 
found herself watching TV for hours at a time rather 
than doing activities she had planned during the day. 
Whereas the first client’s walks might be incorporated 
into treatment as a way to care for herself and help her 
engage more effectively with her children, the second 
client’s therapist might help her develop alternative 
ways of responding to her anxiety. The Acceptance and 
Action Questionnaire (Bond et al., 2011) can help to 
identify experientially avoidant strategies; the Difficulties 
in Emotion Regulation Scale (Gratz & Roemer, 
2004) assesses emotion regulation more broadly. 

BeHAViorAl ConsTriCTion 

Therapists should also assess how clients are functioning 
in their daily lives and the ways that anxiety and 
worry are interfering. Drawing from ACT (Wilson & 
Murrell, 2004), we focus particularly on the degree to 
which clients are doing what is important to them (i.e., 
what they value). We assess this with the Valued Living 
Questionnaire (Wilson, Sandoz, Kitchens, & Rob


erts, 2010), while also inviting clients to write about the 
ways anxiety interferes with their relationships, work– 
school–household management, self-nourishment, and 
community involvement. This provides not only important 
information about current functioning but also a 
target and motivation for treatment to help clients live 
fuller, more meaningful lives. This assessment often 
provides an important first step toward shifting the goal 
of therapy from anxiety reduction to enhancement of 
life. 

ConTexT AnD HisTory 

As with all treatment approaches, assessing the context 
surrounding a client is important. Therapists need 
to learn how the client (as well as family and friends) 
understands his/her anxiety, in addition to the client’s 
history of anxiety symptoms and other presenting problems. 
Therapists should also explore the client’s cultural 
identity, with attention to culturally specific sources 
of coping and strength, as well as contextual stressors 
that the client may face. This helps to establish rapport 
and validate the client’s experience, and to build the 
strength of the therapeutic alliance. This information 
also helps the therapist to ensure that therapy proceeds 
in a culturally sensitive and responsive way (D. W. Sue 
& Sue, 2012; S. Sue, 1998). 

This comprehensive assessment sets the stage for 
treatment elements aimed at (1) cultivating an expanded 
(as opposed to narrowed) awareness and a compassionate 
(as opposed to critical and judgmental), decentered 
(as opposed to entangled and fused) stance toward internal 
experiences; (2) increasing acceptance/willingness 
to have internal experiences; and (3) mindfully 
engaging in personally meaningful behaviors. 

Therapeutic Relationship 

The therapeutic relationship provides an important 
context for therapeutic change. In ABBT, the therapist 
provides acceptance and compassion that allows clients 
to begin to react differently toward their own internal 
experiences. Therapists explicitly validate the humanness 
and naturalness of all responses clients share, emphasizing 
the way one’s biological makeup and learning 
history can easily lead to anxious responses and 
other emotional reactions, and the way that even apparently 
“irrational” thoughts can be learned from social 
and family influences. For instance, when a client noted 
in session that he knew he should not be anxious about 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

a job interview, his therapist responded that anxiety before 
an interview is a very natural response given that 
he really wants the position, and that we are hardwired 
to fear social rejection. This response modeled a different 
reaction to his anxiety and was the first step toward 
cultivating a new, less self-critical response. 

It can be challenging to empathize with and validate 
some clients, particularly when they are hostile or 
unresponsive. Understanding the learning history and 
context that produces and maintains these difficult, but 
also in some ways functional, behaviors helps therapists 
cultivate compassion. When a therapist expresses 
genuine compassion toward a client, often the client’s 
reactions change, at least slightly, providing more opportunities 
for connection, validation, empathy, and 
further change. 

Another challenge to the therapeutic alliance can 
stem from differences between client and therapist in 
aspects of identity (e.g., age, gender, race, religion, ethnicity, 
sexual orientation, immigration status, or social 
class; Hays, 2008; D. W. Sue & Sue, 2012). Initiating 
a discussion of potential differences early in therapy 
provides an opportunity for open communication about 
potential sources of misunderstanding and may make a 
client feel more comfortable bringing up any issues that 
emerge throughout the course of therapy. Therapists 
take responsibility for learning about a client’s cultural 
context on their own, while remaining sensitive to each 
client’s individual experiences and life contexts, so that 
he/she can consider how cultural and systemic factors 
may play a role in the client’s responses and can be used 
to promote growth and positive adaptation. Communicating 
awareness of, and sensitivity to, the therapist’s 
own areas of relative privilege can also contribute to a 
stronger therapeutic alliance. 

Psychoeducation 

Similar to other CBTs, psychoeducation is an important 
component of this ABBT. Therapists present concepts, 
using handouts, particularly during the first half 
of therapy (then revisit these concepts as needed in 
the second, application phase of treatment). For each 
concept, therapists draw examples from the client’s life 
(using monitoring forms, assessment material, or asking 
the client specifically for examples) to ensure that 
the material is relevant. 

Psychoeducation begins with a discussion about the 
nature of fear, anxiety, and worry (including a discus


sion of the function of worry), followed by exploration 
of the function of emotions more broadly, emphasizing 
the habitual nature of our emotional responding 
and how repetition strengthens these habits, while interruption 
can weaken them. Therapists teach clients 
about the natural inclination to avoid painful or threatening 
cues, as well as the challenges and costs associated 
with trying to rigidly control internal experiences 
and avoid anxiety-eliciting situations. Therapists draw 
a distinction between clear emotions (that provide information 
about a response to a current context) and 
muddy emotions (that may be diffuse, confusing, left 
over, or longer lasting). Therapists also describe mindfulness 
skills, specifically noting the ways these skills 
can be used to clarify emotional responses and enhance 
participation in valued life activities. 

Psychoeducation provides a rationale for the rest of 
treatment, encouraging engagement in behaviors that 
take significant time (e.g., mindfulness practice) or effort 
(e.g., engaging in valued actions). Psychoeducation 
can also help to promote a new relationship to internal 
experiences on its own. Realizing how one’s emotions 
become muddy and overwhelming as a result of a series 
of understandable processes (e.g., not getting enough 
sleep, still feeling upset about an earlier fight with a 
partner) can reduce self-criticism and judgment, which 
in turn can reduce muddiness and reactivity. For some 
clients, psychoeducation alone leads to engagement in 
new behaviors and to new learning that promotes accepting 
responses to internal experiences and increased 
engagement in life. However, experiential learning is 
often needed to supplement this clinical strategy. 

Many challenges can arise when presenting psychoeducational 
material. First, it can be difficult to attend 
to specific client concerns while also presenting extensive 
new information. Using client examples as you 
teach and frequently asking clients to share their reactions 
can help to balance these competing demands. 
Also, sometimes clients disagree with material being 
presented. For instance, clients may insist that avoidance 
is an effective strategy. Arguing with clients is 
rarely productive, and it can weaken the therapeutic 
relationship. Furthermore, case conceptualizations are 
only a hypothesis based on the literature and clinical 
observation, so it is important not to cling rigidly to 
them. We find it useful, in this situation, to ask whether 
clients are willing simply to observe the concept over 
the next few weeks to see whether they can learn anything 
new about their experience. This promotes a col



Generalized Anxiety Disorder 

laborative approach to treatment and helps to engage 
clients, while also encouraging valuable feedback on 
our conceptualization. 

Mindfulness Skills Development 

“Mindfulness” (Kabat-Zinn, 2003), or attending to the 
present moment with openness, curiosity, and compassion, 
is a central skill clients can use to change the 
nature of their relationship with their internal experiences 
(e.g., beginning to see thoughts as thoughts, or 
“decentering”), increase their willingness to have any 
reactions that arise, and promote engagement in fulfilling, 
meaningful lives. We use a wide range of methods 
to help clients bring their awareness to the present 
moment, and we greet their experiences with curiosity, 
kindness, and compassion. 

self‑MoniToring 

Self-monitoring is a common method used in all CBTs. 
Similar to these approaches, therapy begins with clients 
monitoring situations in which worry arises. Each 
week, based on what is covered in session, new aspects 
of experience are added (e.g., emotions, efforts 
to avoid experience, engagement in valued actions). 
The process of monitoring worry, other internal experiences, 
and behaviors helps to promote awareness and 
decentering; clients turn toward their internal experiences 
rather than habitually turning away, and they see 
each aspect of their experience rather than blending the 
components together (e.g., noticing thoughts, emotions, 
and behaviors separately). As clients begin to notice 
the distinction between emotion and behavior, they are 
more able to consider the variety of behavioral options 
available to them even when strong emotions arise. 

Self-monitoring can be challenging for some clients. 
They may forget to complete monitoring forms, see 
them as a “homework” requirement done only at the 
therapist’s request, or finish them in the waiting room as 
opposed to completing them in the moment. Therapists 
can help clients to see the usefulness of the practice 
by clearly communicating the rationale for monitoring, 
underscoring that it is a skill that can be used to clarify 
emotions, reduce distress, and increase engagement in 
valued activities, and reviewing the monitoring each 
session and connecting observations to treatment goals. 
Therapists can also flexibly adapt monitoring assignments 
to fit with the client’s life while emphasizing the 

importance of doing some monitoring in the moment 
that a reaction occurs to facilitate the development of 
awareness as anxious habitual patterns unfold. For instance, 
clients could monitor only one situation a day, 
or use phones or audio recorders for monitoring rather 
than paper and pen. 

forMAl MinDfUlness PrACTiCe 

Mindfulness is a skill; therefore, practicing it regularly 
can be extremely helpful. Therapists help clients to determine 
when that they can set aside some amount of 
time in which to draw their awareness, again and again, 
to some aspect of their experience, such as the breath, 
physical sensations, or thoughts. Mindfulness-based 
treatments such as MBCT have clients practice for 45 
minutes a day; we generally use shorter mindfulness 
practices and allow clients to choose the length of their 
practice. We do have all clients practice an adapted progressive 
muscle relaxation in which clients tense and 
release a series of muscle groups, noticing the sensations 
they experience.1 This gives anxious clients an 
extended exposure to mindfulness, while providing a 
focus for attention that may facilitate more prolonged 
practice. Clients vary in how much they keep up this 
particular practice versus other, shorter practices. 

In our approach, therapists teach clients a progression 
of practices across the course of treatment, beginning 
with focus on the breath and body, moving to awareness 
of taste and sounds, then on to more challenging 
practices of awareness of emotions and thoughts. Clients 
and therapists practice together first in session, 
then discuss the client’s experience with the exercise. 
Initially, clients often label the practice as “good” or 
“bad,” “relaxing” or “stressful.” Therapists help clients 
move toward simply observing and describing their experience 
during the practice, recognizing that all practice 
is useful and so-called “bad” practice can teach a 
lot about how active one’s mind is and how repeatedly 
to bring awareness back to the moment despite a wandering 
mind. 

When discussing in-session practice, therapists draw 
connections between the practice and clients’ presenting 
problems. For instance, one client reported that 
when she practiced mindfulness of her breath, her mind 
kept wandering to her frustration with her roommate, 
and it was clear that she was bad at mindfulness and 
was not ever going to get better. Her therapist related 
these self-critical thoughts and negative predictions to 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

those that often arose when the client took on a new 
task at work. The therapist suggested that if she practiced 
observing critical thoughts with compassion and 
curiosity during formal mindfulness, she might be able 
to carry these same skills into challenging work situations. 


Clients often have trouble setting aside time to 
practice mindfulness regularly. Traditional problemsolving 
strategies can be used to find moments (during 
a subway commute, just after putting the kids to bed) 
to practice. Therapists also point out that practicing 
mindfulness may help the client become more efficient 
and alert throughout the day, so it may be worth some 
time. Clients can also use mindfulness as an avoidance 
strategy, particularly if they initially find the practice 
relaxing. Therapists need to attend to the function of 
practice behavior to be sure that clients are not using it 
to avoid unwanted internal experiences. 

inforMAl MinDfUlness PrACTiCe 

Although setting aside time to practice can be an excellent 
way to develop any skill, the goal is always to use 
the skill while engaging in life. Clients practice mindfulness 
informally by engaging mindfully in daily tasks 
such as washing the dishes (Nhat Hanh, 1992), eating, 
showering, or folding laundry. They gradually begin to 
practice in more challenging contexts, such as during 
conversations, dates, meetings at work, or community 
events. Therapists initially help clients to remember to 
practice mindfulness during sessions; over time clients 
begin to remind themselves to come back to the present 
moment while engaging in therapy, strengthening this 
skill so they can use it more effectively in their lives. 

lAngUAge ConVenTions 

Another way to help clients cultivate a decentered 
awareness of their experiences is to bring attention to 
their language and introduce a few strategies (drawn 
from ACT) that help one disentangle from one’s 
thoughts. One is to say (and think) “I’m having the 
thought that . . . ” or “I’m having the feeling that . . . 
” as opposed to reporting thoughts as facts. Therapists 
model this and begin to reframe clients’ reports using 
this convention, gradually encouraging clients to make 
this change themselves. Similarly, therapists encourage 
clients to consider whether replacing “but” with “and” 
more accurately captures different situations. For instance, 
rather than saying, “I would really like to go 

on this date, but I’m too anxious,” a client might say, “I 
would like to go on this date, and I’m also experiencing 
anxiety.” This highlights that feelings and thoughts do 
not have to lead to avoidance or escape behaviors. 

Engaging in Actions 

Finally, therapists help clients turn their attention and 
effort away from trying to control their internal experiences 
and instead focus on engaging more fully in 
their lives. Clients begin exploring what is important 
to them through a series of writing assignments. First, 
they describe how anxiety has gotten in the way of their 
lives in several domains (relationships, work–school– 
household management, and self-nourishment and 
community involvement). Next they write about how 
they would like to be in these areas, if they did not have 
any anxiety. From there, therapists help clients identify 
specific areas on which they want to focus. Therapy, 
then, involves making behavioral plans each week to 
do something the client values, such as making a social 
connection, asserting oneself at work, or joining 
a community organization. For each behavioral action, 
therapists emphasize the importance of choosing an action 
regardless of the thoughts and feelings that arise, 
and clients apply their mindfulness skills, so that they 
are able to do what matters to them even while anxious. 

Shifting from habitual avoidance to engagement is 
a long, ongoing process. Some clients have difficulty 
articulating their values because all of their attentional 
and behavioral resources have been directed toward 
anxiety management for so long. Once clients have 
clarified what they find important, approaching these 
actions can be extremely anxiety provoking and hard to 
do. However, encouragement from the therapist, cultivation 
of mindfulness skills, and breaking tasks down 
into specific manageable pieces (e.g., asking a coworker 
to lunch, or having one open conversation with a 
parent) can help a client become willing to make these 
first important behavioral changes even though anxiety 
will inevitably be present. Over time, the experience of 
engaging in valued activities can be naturally reinforcing. 
Nonetheless, continued awareness and practice is 
needed so as not to fall back into old, natural patterns 
of avoidance due to anxiety. 

Many challenges arise in pursuing valued actions. 
First, as Hayes and colleagues (2012) note, clients often 
think in terms of goals (e.g., finding a partner, losing 15 
pounds) as opposed to values (e.g., being emotionally 
intimate, being physically healthy). Focusing on want



Generalized Anxiety Disorder 

ing to lose 15 pounds can lead to self-criticism in the 
moment, which might interfere with that goal. On the 
other hand, a person can take actions in the moment 
that are consistent with wanting to be physically healthy 
(e.g., going to the gym or eating a healthy lunch) that in 
turn also help with a goal. Therapists work to help clients 
identify the values and meaning that underlie any 
stated goals, so that they can engage in actions in the 
moment that will be fulfilling and meaningful. 

Therapists need to take care not to impose their own 
values onto clients. Cultural sensitivity is particularly 
important in this aspect of treatment. For instance, one 
client we treated with ABBT described a value of being 
able to provide financially for his parents, leading him 
to choose a profession that to him was less intrinsically 
interesting but would allow him to support his family. 
His therapist came from a more individualistic background 
and had an initial reaction that choosing a more 
intrinsically rewarding profession was important. However, 
the therapist recognized that this would impose 
his own values on the client rather than help the client 
to make choices consistent with his own values. 

Therapists also need to be sensitive to the real-world 
constraints that can keep clients from engaging in actions 
that matter to them. External constraints such as 
limited resources, inequities, and family contexts need 
to be validated and accounted for in developing treatment 
assignments. Relatedly, clients may want others 
in their lives to act differently. Although this is a very 
reasonable desire, changing other people is not always 
possible. Clients can request changes in others or take 
steps to address injustices in different contexts, but 
therapists cannot guarantee that these things will lead 
to the changes for which the client is hoping. Instead, 
the therapist can help the client make the best choices 
possible in the face of these constraints, which can certainly 
include asking for changes and also leaving situations 
when possible, if necessary. 

Relapse Prevention 

Anxiety is a natural, habitual response, as is reactivity 
to internal experiences and experiential avoidance. 
Therapists help clients develop a plan for maintaining 
the practices they have found most helpful in treatment, 
and to prepare for potential “lapses” in the future. 
Clients are encouraged to refer to their handouts 
and monitoring sheets when difficulties arise, and to 
revisit concepts and practices they found helpful in 
treatment. 

case stuDy 

This composite case is largely based on a single client 
but with details from other clients added to illustrate 
certain points. Identifying information is altered to protect 
confidentiality. 

Background Information 

Héctor was a 24-year-old Latino man who presented 
for treatment after being placed on academic probation. 
Although Héctor had an extremely strong academic 
record as an undergraduate, he was struggling to 
keep up with the course demands in his first semester 
of medical school. Héctor initially sought treatment 
from his primary care provider for a wide variety of 
stress-related symptoms, including frequent headaches, 
muscle tension, and gastrointestinal distress. However, 
she urged him to seek therapy for what she believed to 
be an anxiety disorder. 

In the initial assessment, Héctor endorsed symptoms 
consistent with GAD. He described a long history of 
worry that started in elementary school. His worry focused 
centrally on his academic demands. He reported 
worrying constantly about the quality of his work, the 
sufficiency of his knowledge, and his ability to meet 
his, and others, academic-related expectations. Héctor 
was the first person in his family to graduate from 
college, and his entire extended family was extremely 
proud of him and significantly invested in Héctor earning 
a medical degree. Héctor’s mother had secured a 
second job to help meet his rising tuition costs, one of 
his uncles offered to co-sign on a loan, and his cousin 
offered him a place to live rent-free. While he was extremely 
grateful for their support, Héctor constantly 
worried about disappointing them. 

Héctor was also troubled by worries about his mother’s 
health and well-being. He was concerned that she 
was overextending herself with two jobs, and he worried 
that she might have a heart attack or fall asleep 
when driving home and die in a car accident. Héctor 
also worried a fair amount about his two nephews. In 
his view, they spent far too much time watching television 
and playing video games, and needed more structure 
and guidance than his brother was providing. 

Héctor described a number of aches and pains that 
he attributed to his constant, high level of physical tension. 
He noted that he had considerable difficulty falling 
asleep each night, as his mind constantly cycled 
through a variety of potential, negative outcomes the 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

next day might bring. Not surprisingly, he described 
having a very difficult time concentrating, especially 
while he was in class and when he attempted to do his 
assigned reading. When his anxiety and worry became 
too severe, he would skip class and head to the gym. 
In the past, when he exercised long enough he would 
become so physically fatigued that he would fall asleep 
immediately when his “head hit the pillow.” Unfortunately, 
that coping strategy recently was becoming less 
and less effective. First, he found that he was skipping 
class for the gym more and more frequently, to the 
point that he was unable to keep up his grades. Moreover, 
although he was still falling asleep fairly quickly 
postexercise, recently, he would awaken after only 1 or 
2 hours of sleep. 

When he was in secondary school and college, Héctor 
also found that spending time with friends and 
family kept his GAD symptoms in check. However, 6 
months earlier, he had left his support network behind 
in Miami and relocated to Boston for medical school. 
Although he initially went to out to eat with some of 
his classmates and occasionally attended study sessions 
with them, he never felt entirely comfortable at these 
events. He worried that his classmates did not think 
he belonged at such a prestigious medical school, and 
Héctor was acutely aware that he was one of very few 
ethnic/minority students. 

Engagement Session 

In this session, Héctor disclosed that his family did 
not know that he was in therapy, and that he was too 
ashamed to tell them about his academic issues. Héctor 
acknowledged that keeping these secrets was painful 
and distressing, particularly because it required him to 
distance himself even further from his main source of 
social support. 

Although Héctor had attended a few counseling sessions 
in his first semester of college, he had no other 
history of psychotherapy. Héctor described his brief 
course of previous therapy as primarily supportive. He 
noted that meeting a few times with his Latino male 
therapist, mostly to talk about academic stressors, had 
been extremely helpful in his transition to college. This 
experience made him cautiously optimistic about the 
current course of therapy, although he acknowledged a 
fear that his problems might now be too severe to overcome 
completely. 

Given the considerable outside-of-therapy demands 
associated with ABBT, the therapist asked Héctor about 

potential barriers to treatment. Although Héctor had a 
slightly reduced schedule because of his academic probation, 
he was still taking three courses and working 
20–30 hours a week. The therapist validated Héctor’s 
existing commitments, but she also wanted to be realistic 
in describing the additional time commitment 
that would be required, particularly in the first six to 
eight sessions of therapy. The therapist used the training 
for a marathon analogy to convey the importance of 
setting aside sufficient time for out-of-therapy assignments. 
She noted that Héctor’s worry habit was deeply 
ingrained, and that learning new methods of responding 
would require some commitment to practice. An 
athlete training for a marathon cannot keep the same 
work/life schedule while adding in training sessions. 
Instead, he/she needs to make some temporary accommodations 
to make time to run. Similarly, a client with 
GAD cannot develop new habits while maintaining the 
same busy schedule. Some time and attention must be 
allocated temporarily to reflecting on the treatment and 
practicing new ways of responding. 

Finally, the (white) therapist explored how her gender 
and ethnicity might affect treatment. 

tHeraPist: It sounds like one of the best things about 
your previous course of therapy was that you really 
felt understood by your therapist. 

Héctor: Yes, I was surprised that I felt so comfortable 
with him. I expected that my counselor would be a 
woman and I was a little hesitant about talking with 
a man at first. . . . I thought he might think of me as 
weak for seeking therapy. 

tHeraPist: I think most of us go to therapy with expectations 
about our therapist. We might expect a 
therapist to be older or younger, male or female, or 
of a particular ethnicity. Depending on whether or 
not the therapist meets our expectations, we may 
be more or less comfortable, feel more or less understood. 
Did you have any expectations coming in 
today? 

Héctor: Honestly? I knew I was seeing a woman because 
of your name. And I wasn’t sure of your ethnicity. 
But frankly, I didn’t really expect to have a 
Latina therapist based on the providers I have seen 
at this center. 

tHeraPist: Do you have any thoughts or concerns 
about working with me that you would like to talk 
about? 


Generalized Anxiety Disorder 

Héctor: Not really . . . 

tHeraPist: My hope is that we can work really well 
together, but it would be understandable if you didn’t 
necessarily trust me or feel comfortable with me 
right off the bat. You don’t know me at all, and it 
can be really difficult to open up to a stranger. Also, 
I know that for some people it might matter that I’m 
not Latina, I’m white. Sometimes that can make 
someone feel like I can’t understand some kinds of 
experiences, like those related to being a minority 
or a person of color. But my goal is to do whatever 
I can to be sensitive to, and understanding of, your 
unique experiences. I bring some general expertise 
about anxiety to our work, including ways that experiences 
with discrimination can relate to anxiety, 
sometimes in subtle ways, but you are the expert on 
your own experience. So I will always try to check 
in with you about the ways in which the things we 
discuss and the suggestions I make fit with your experience. 
Please feel free to let me know if I say or 
do something insensitive, or if you feel like I am not 
fully understanding what you are telling me. I am 
definitely not perfect, but my intention is to try and 
help you as best I can achieve your goals for therapy. 

The therapist ended the engagement session by providing 
some activities for Héctor to complete before 
the next session. First, she explained a monitoring form 
used throughout treatment (although the domains to 
monitor are changed over time as new session material 
is introduced, this version includes only date, situation, 
and worry topic as columns) and asked him to begin to 
notice when he engaged in worry. She also gave him a 
copy of the Valued Living Questionnaire to complete 
with the following instructions: 

“Sometimes anxiety and worry can prevent us from 
taking some actions that are consistent with our 
values. For example, you mentioned that you skip 
class when you feel too anxious, even though you 
also noted that you care deeply about being a good 
student. Anxiety and worry can also make people 
feel as if they are on automatic pilot, or that their 
lives are consumed by things they must do rather 
than things they choose to do. This questionnaire is 
a first step toward identifying some of the ways in 
which anxiety and worry might be interfering with 
your life. Sometimes it is painful to think about the 
ways our lives are not as we would wish them to be. 

But this awareness is a first step toward making a 
change. So, notice any feelings that arise as you fill 
out the forms, and we will be sure to talk about them 
next week.” 

Session 1 

The goal of Session 1 is to provide an overview of the 
treatment structure (client and therapist roles, betweensession 
assignments, etc.) and to plan and discuss the 
rationale for treatment that is informed by a personalized 
ABBT conceptualization of the client’s presenting 
problems. The therapist asked Héctor to engage in an 
experiential exercise that involved imagining himself 
back in one of the anxiety-provoking situations he 
noted on his monitoring form. Using guided imagery, 
the therapist helped Héctor to notice that his experience 
of anxiety was characterized by an interrelated cycle of 
thoughts (worries), physiological sensations (tightness 
in his shoulders and chest), and behaviors (leaving class 
early, heading to the gym). 

Héctor: I didn’t realize so much was happening when 
I am anxious. Usually as soon as I notice I am anxious 
I just do whatever I can to prevent it from escalating. 


tHeraPist: That doesn’t surprise me. You have developed 
a strong habit. When you get anxious, you immediately 
try and distract your attention from your 
experience and seek out ways to control or dampen 
your emotions. How difficult was it to imagine yourself 
back in class on Monday? 

Héctor: It was surprisingly easy. I definitely felt just 
as anxious remembering how I felt as I did sitting in 
the classroom. 

tHeraPist: That is a great thing to notice. Something 
that is uniquely human is our ability to remember 
and imagine events vividly. Like other animals, 
we are hardwired to experience fear in the face of 
a threat—as if a predator were charging at us. But 
humans can also simply imagine a threat in their 
minds and experience the same hardwired response 
to threat. Do you have any idea what you were imagining 
in class that day? 

Héctor: On Monday, my mind just went from 0 to 
100—I was barely aware of what I was thinking. But 
when we went through the exercise today, I noticed 
a series of pictures in my mind. First I thought, I am 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

not prepared for class. Then I imagined the professor 
yelling at me, my classmates laughing at me, my 
family’s disappointment . . . 

tHeraPist: Hmm . . . if you imagined all those people 
rejecting you at the same time, it is not surprising 
that you would feel afraid. We are hardwired to seek 
social approval. If the entire academic community, 
your friends, and family all rejected you, you would 
have a pretty good reason for feeling afraid. Unfortunately, 
our minds don’t distinguish present threats 
from imagined ones. 

The therapist and Héctor discussed the model of 
fear, anxiety, and worry guiding ABBT for GAD. The 
therapist explained that fear and anxiety serve adaptive 
functions. Anxiety allows us to imagine future threats 
and prepare for them. Fear energizes us to avoid and 
escape danger. In both of these states, our attention narrowly 
focuses on the threat and our escape plan, blocking 
out other information. 

Unfortunately, our ability to think, imagine (the future), 
and remember (the past) allows us to imagine 
endless threats and to respond with fear even when no 
threat is present (i.e., our mental representations develop 
the same emotional properties as the events themselves, 
leading us to respond to threats that do not exist in the 
environment). Moreover, although we are hardwired to 
escape or avoid threat, sometimes in order to do the 
things that matter to us, we have to approach situations 
that will likely elicit anxiety (e.g., allow ourselves to be 
vulnerable in order to gain intimacy, take a risk at work 
in order to successfully negotiate a challenge). Many of 
us respond to this conundrum by harshly judging our 
natural responses and doing everything in our power to 
avoid experiencing them. 

The therapist and Héctor also discussed the function 
of worry. Although worry is associated with clear 
negative consequences (interferes with concentration, 
results in tension and fatigue), it too serves a function. 

Héctor: As much as my worry bothers me, in some 
ways, I am afraid to give it up. Sometimes it feels 
like the only thing I can do to control the uncontrollable. 


tHeraPist: Interesting observation. Tell me more 
about that. 
Héctor: Well, sometimes it feel like if I stop worrying 
about my mother’s health, she will have a heart at


tack. Or I believe that if I don’t worry about a test, I 
won’t actually study. 

tHeraPist: Some people notice that worrying about 
minor, everyday matters takes their mind off more 
painful thoughts and emotions. Have you ever noticed 
anything like that? 

Héctor: (beginning to tear up) Sometimes I think 
worrying about tests, or being late to class, or what 
I should wear to a school event is the only thing that 
keeps me from noticing how lonely I am. Sometimes 
I feel like if I stopped worrying, I would become so 
sad and depressed I might never get out of bed. 

Near the end of the session, the therapist summed up 
her conceptualization and plan for treatment. 

“Anxiety and worry narrow our focus and pull our attention 
toward the future. This cycle happens outside 
of our awareness and can be difficult to change. In 
this treatment, we will use mindfulness skills to address 
this habit. Mindfulness increases and expands 
our present-moment focus and allows us to notice and 
break this cycle. We also have a tendency to judge 
and control our emotions because we think they are 
preventing us from having a satisfying life. In this 
treatment we will explore whether that reaction to 
our emotional responses is helpful or harmful, and 
we will consider alternative ways of responding. Finally, 
worry is anticipatory; thus, it prevents us from 
engaging in activities that could be threatening. But 
sometimes we want to approach these situations— 
especially if they will help us to live the kind of life 
we value. In this treatment, we will learn to become 
more flexible—to consider different behavioral 
responses—rather than automatically avoiding potentially 
anxiety-provoking situations.” 

At the end of Session 1, the therapist led Héctor in a 
mindfulness of breath exercise. She began by guiding 
him to notice the way he was sitting in the chair, then 
drew his attention to where he could feel his breath in 
his body. The therapist then guided Héctor to gently 
redirect his awareness back to the sensations of his inhalations 
and exhalations over the next several minutes, 
while deepening his breath, no matter how many times 
his mind wandered to other things. After the therapist 
and Héctor discussed his experience of this exercise, 
she asked him to practice it daily between sessions. 


Generalized Anxiety Disorder 

Session 2 

Session 2 primarily focuses on an introduction to mindfulness. 
The therapist led Héctor in a mindfulness of 
breath exercise, then engaged him in a debriefing. 

tHeraPist: What did you notice? 

Héctor: Well, I am pretty stressed out today. So the 
exercise didn’t work as well as it did when I practiced 
this week. 

tHeraPist: Tell me more about that. How are you defining 
“worked”? 

Héctor: I used the breathing almost every night this 
week to fall asleep. And it actually seemed to help. 
At least it calmed me down, so I could get to sleep 
quicker. But today, I just felt more stressed out. 

tHeraPist: What is really interesting about that is that 
although there is no “goal” to mindfulness, sometimes 
we do start to expect that it will bring a certain 
state of being. But actually, this exercise is about 
noticing and accepting whatever state we are in. So 
we notice the focus of our attention, guide it to the 
breath, notice when it wanders, and guide it back. 
Sometimes that process can be pleasant and calming, 
but other times it can be frustrating and painful. 
But observing that process, whatever the process 
happens to be, is practicing mindfulness. 

Héctor: Really? I was certain I was supposed to try 
and relax. 

tHeraPist: We are naturally goal-oriented beings. So 
our tendency is to look for the goal in mindfulness. 
Fortunately, mindfulness allows us to give up goals, 
at least for a moment, and just be. What else did you 
notice? 

Héctor: I couldn’t keep my attention on my breath. It 
was all over the place. I am not sure I have the personality 
needed to be mindful. 

tHeraPist: What a great observation. First, you noticed 
your attention was pulled in different directions. 
I’ll bet that happens at other times in the day 
as well. It is useful to get to know just how busy our 
minds are. 

Héctor: I never thought of it like that. I guess it makes 
sense that I struggle to concentrate in class if I am 
having so many different thoughts all the time. 

tHeraPist: Also, I didn’t actually suggest that you 
should keep your attention on your breath. Just that 

you should notice where your attention is and continually 
guide it back to the breath. It is so interesting 
how quickly our minds judge whether we are doing 
something “right” or “wrong,” isn’t it? 

Héctor: (laughing) I sort of know what you are going 
to say here, but I also felt like I was breathing the 
wrong way. I kept breathing out of my mouth and it 
sounded so loud compared to your breath. 

tHeraPist: (smiling) Great observation. If our minds 
are so judgmental about something as simple and 
natural as breathing, just imagine what judgmental 
thoughts are present when we are in class, at work, 
with friends. It sounds like you really used this exercise 
as an opportunity to get to know the habits of 
your mind. 

The therapist also led Héctor in the Raisin Exercise, 
which simply involves the practice of eating one raisin 
mindfully. Following this exercise, she focused on 
the mindfulness skill of “beginners mind,” essentially 
highlighting the ways in which “knowing” what to expect 
sometimes prevent us from accurately observing 
different experiences. The session ended with the therapist 
leading Héctor through a slightly modified progressive 
muscle relaxation that was aimed at helping him to 
practice observing sensations and letting go of tension 
(rather than reduce anxiety). 

Session 3 

The therapist began Session 3 with the Mindfulness 
of Sounds mindfulness exercise. Héctor was able to 
see the similarity between this practice and the Raisin 
Exercise in Session 2. Specifically, he noticed that it 
was difficult for his mind to observe the pitch, tone, 
and volume of the sounds around him without trying to 
label (a truck backing up) and judge (“That is loud and 
annoying”) his experience. The therapist was careful to 
normalize this response and to highlight the utility of 
becoming aware of what we are all naturally inclined 
to do. 

After reviewing Héctor’s monitoring and mindfulness 
homework, the therapist introduced a new psychoeducational 
topic—the function of emotions. Héctor 
quickly provided an example of the ways in which emotions 
such as fear can serve a communicative function. 
He described an incident when he was walking home 
from the library late at night. Although he did not hear 
or see anything out of the ordinary, Héctor had a sense 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

that he was in danger, so he took a number of precautionary 
steps: He took his headphones off, crossed the 
street to be in an environment with more lighting, and 
called his roommate on his cell phone. The next morning, 
Héctor read that there was a mugging the previous 
night on campus, and he was convinced that the fear 
signals he received protected him from being a victim. 
The therapist provided an example of the consequences 
of ignoring the messages our emotions provide. 

tHeraPist: Imagine you are experiencing sadness and 
disappointment because your current job is not fulfilling. 
That sadness is uncomfortable, so you naturally 
want to get rid of it. You might spend your evenings 
zoning out watching television alone, trying to 
“relax,” or you might start staying out late at night 
with friends, drinking and trying to have a good 
time so you don’t notice that you’re feeling sad in 
that area of your life. You might start finding reasons 
to miss work or start daydreaming when you’re at 
work. These strategies are all aimed at reducing your 
sadness. And they might work in the short term, but 
none of them resolves the problem. What is worse 
is that those strategies might even create new problems 
as you start sleeping less, doing less well at 
work, and running into more conflicts at work. Even 
though you are doing everything you can to avoid 
feeling sad, the sadness is there for a reason. The first 
step to moving forward in that situation is noticing 
that you are feeling sad and recognizing that your 
work situation is eliciting these emotions. Only then 
can you decide what actions to take. 

Héctor: That makes sense. But what about the fear I 
feel when I think about asking a classmate to study 
with me? 

tHeraPist: What do you think your fear is telling you 
in that situation? 

Héctor: That he might think up some excuse to reject 
me and say no. 

tHeraPist: Absolutely. As humans we are hardwired 
to seek social support and approval. It can absolutely 
be risky to put ourselves out there to be accepted or 
rejected. But here is the thing. While it is important 
to acknowledge the message our emotions are sending, 
we don’t always have to follow their advice. 
Emotions are associated with action tendencies— 
when we feel fear, we are prepared to flee, when we 
feel anger, we are prepared to fight. But our emotions 

don’t actually control our behavior. And often when 
we consider taking an action that could be really 
meaningful—opening up and appearing vulnerable 
to someone or taking on an academic challenge— 
our emotions will warn us that such a step is risky. 
In these cases, we need to acknowledge the message 
we are receiving, yet we can still choose to take the 
valued action. 

Héctor: I guess that makes sense. I certainly knew 
that moving away from my family and starting medical 
school was risky. I felt a lot of fear, but I did it 
anyways because it is important to my family that 
I succeed. My abuela [grandmother] always says 
courage is acting with heart. Being afraid, but doing 
something anyways, because of love or passion. 

However, Héctor also struggled a bit as he tried to 
determine the function of his emotions in some other 
contexts. 

Héctor: I can see how emotions sometimes can serve 
a function. But other times the function seems much 
less clear to me. For example, I know a little test 
anxiety can be helpful and motivating, but why do I 
feel terrified some nights when I am studying. I get 
so scared and anxious that I become paralyzed. My 
problem is that most of the time I am confused by my 
emotions and their intensity. 

tHeraPist: We make the distinction between what we 
call “clear” and “muddy” emotions. Clear emotions 
refer to when we have a very strong emotional response 
to a particular situation; for instance, we feel 
strong fear when a car approaches us on the street, 
which is what we might call a “clear” emotional response. 
Emotions that are complex, confusing, or too 
intense and long-lasting for the situation are what we 
call “muddy.” 

Together, Héctor and his therapist reviewed how failures 
in self-care (e.g., not getting enough sleep or eating 
well, not exercising regularly) increase the likelihood 
of muddy emotions. They also considered ways that 
worry (which involves the ability to imagine things that 
have not yet happened) and rumination (which involves 
repeatedly remembering past events) both can elicit 
emotions that are not at all related to whatever is unfolding 
in the present moment. Finally they discussed 
the way our “reactions to our reactions” can muddy our 
emotional responses. 


Generalized Anxiety Disorder 

“Another thing that can make our emotions confusing 
and muddied is that often when we have an emotional 
response, we don’t just have that one response— 
we have a series of responses that are triggered by 
that first emotion. For instance, we may feel scared, 
then angry that we got scared, then afraid the feeling 
will grow stronger, then ashamed that we are afraid, 
and so on. We may also have thoughts that come up 
as responses to a clear emotion, such as “I shouldn’t 
feel this way,” “This is a sign that I am a weak person.” 
One reaction that we often have is to try to control 
emotional responses. We will talk more about 
that in the next session. Finally, emotional responses 
can also seem much more intense when we start to 
feel defined by our emotions—when we see them 
as stable traits that represent our personality rather 
than natural human responses to events that come 
and go.” 

Normally Session 3 would end with a review of 
the first completed writing assignment (i.e., writing 
about how anxiety and worry interferes with relationships, 
work–school–household management, and selfnourishment 
and community involvement). However, 
Héctor admitted that he had not finished it. He noted 
that it had been a busy week with exams and that he 
found it hard to set aside time for himself. Together, 
Héctor and his therapist brainstormed ways he could 
schedule in the values writing. However, she also noted 
that sitting down and considering the ways that anxiety 
is interfering with the things that matter most could be 
a very painful exercise. The therapist suggested that 
Héctor recognize that the pain served a function (letting 
Héctor know that changes were needed for him to 
live a more personally fulfilling life), and she pointed 
out that seeking therapy was a sign that he acknowledged 
that pain and was willing to make some changes. 
The therapist also gave Héctor new monitoring forms 
that added a column for emotions, so he could begin 
to monitor his emotional responses in addition to his 
worry. 

Session 4 

Héctor presented to Session 4 visibly upset. He had just 
returned from a visit back home to Miami, and he was 
extremely upset over his interactions with his brother. 
As he began to describe the situation, the therapist gently 
interrupted. 

“Excuse me for interrupting you, Héctor, but I have an 
important question. I can tell this visit was very upsetting 
for you and we will be sure to devote a good 
part of today’s session to talking about it. But if you 
are willing, I would like us to start out our session 
as we always do, with a brief mindfulness practice. 
It can really be challenging to practice when you are 
experiencing a lot of emotions and thoughts, yet it 
can also be extremely helpful. If you are willing, 
I would like us to start by becoming aware of the 
physical sensations we are currently experiencing. I 
would like to hear about your visit, and then there is 
another mindfulness exercise that might help us further 
explore what you are feeling right now. Would 
that be all right with you?” 

Héctor agreed and the therapist introduced a mindfulness 
exercise that involved increasing awareness of 
physical sensations. During the debriefing of the practice, 
Héctor admitted that he found it particularly challenging 
to keep redirecting his attention from images 
of his visit to his physical sensations in the moment. 
However, he noted that it became easier over time. The 
therapist remarked that Héctor seemed more centered 
than he had when he first walked in. Héctor replied that 
he did feel more present and ready to discuss his concerns. 


tHeraPist: Did you use your monitoring sheet this 
weekend to help you work through some of the challenges 
that arose during your visit home? 

Héctor: Absolutely, I was so upset that I needed to 
get my thoughts down on paper. As I wrote here, on 
Saturday, when I was at my parent’s house but only 
my brother and his sons were home, I was flooded 
with worries. My nephews used to be such sweet 
little boys, but now they will barely make eye contact 
with me when I greet them. They spend all their 
time glued to their electronic devices playing violent 
video games. And my brother completely ignores 
them—all he wants to do is talk to me about his latest 
dating adventures. 

tHeraPist: Did you notice the specific worries you 
were experiencing? 

Héctor: Yes, I wrote I am worried that my brother and 
nephews are too much for my mother to handle. I 
am worried that they are draining her health and finances. 
I am worried that my nephews will not get a 
good education, and that they will get involved in the 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

wrong crowd. And I am worried my brother is drinking 
too much and that he is too selfish. 

tHeraPist: Good job observing your responses. How 
about your emotions? Were you able to identify what 
emotion or emotions were present? 

Héctor: I was very upset. Mostly angry I think. I don’t 
know—this is one of those situations where I felt 
confused about my feelings. 

The therapist suggested that Héctor try a mindfulness 
practice aimed at observing his emotional responses. 
She asked him to close his eyes and vividly imagine 
his interaction with his brother, and she instructed him 
to notice visual and auditory stimuli, to focus on the 
physical sensations in his body, to bring his attention 
to the thoughts running through his mind and finally 
to his emotions. She reminded him simply to notice his 
experience, bringing curiousness and compassion to 
what he was experiencing, observing what happened 
when he was feeling strong emotions, without altering 
or judging them. She reminded him to notice whether 
more than one emotion was present, and to observe any 
rise and fall in his emotions. After several moments, 
she asked him to open his eyes. 

tHeraPist: What did you notice? 

Héctor: At first, all I felt was angry. Then I noticed 
I was feeling afraid. But what really surprised me 
is that I felt extremely sad. It’s interesting because 
at the time I thought I was just straight up angry, 
but thinking back on it I noticed that my emotions 
seemed to ebb and flow. I guess another thing that 
was interesting is that I started out just feeling the 
emotions. But throughout the exercise I started to 
notice I was observing them. It was really helpful 
to get some distance—before that I think I just felt 
consumed with emotion. 

tHeraPist: Great observations. Tell me a bit more 
about your responses to those emotions. And any 
thoughts you have about their function. 

Héctor: I think I felt angry because I disagree with 
how my brother is raising his sons. But then I got 
mad at myself for feeling angry. My brother hasn’t 
had the opportunities that I have. Thinking about 
that made me feel guilty. 

tHeraPist: Did you notice any responses to your feelings 
of guilt? 
Héctor: I hate feeling guilty. It feels like a tremendous 

weight on my chest. I think I tried to distract myself 
from that feeling and then I just started imagining 
all the problems that could result from my brother’s 
screwups and I got consumed with fear and worry. 
But then, when you prompted me, I returned back to 
observing my emotions. And then the more I focused 
on my emotions, I started to realize I felt really, really 
sad. But what was interesting was I think I just 
accepted it was a sad situation. Usually I can’t stand 
feeling sad, I am afraid it means I am going to get 
depressed and retreat into my own world. But I think 
I recognized that this is just a sad situation. I miss 
my family. I wish I could fix my brother’s problems, 
but I can’t. 

The therapist tied Héctor’s experience to the topic 
of clear and muddy emotions. She pointed out that 
anger is a natural response that arises when someone 
acts against your wishes. And sadness is a normal response 
to a painful situation. She also helped Héctor 
identify why his anger was initially so intense. In addition 
to being angry about the situation on Saturday, he 
was also having anger about the many times in the past 
when his brother upset him. Héctor was also imagining 
that his brother would continue to “screw up,” which 
further fueled his anger. The “reactions to reactions” 
Héctor experienced also increased the intensity of his 
response. For example, when Héctor judged the feeling 
of anger as unacceptable, he started to feel guilty. And 
when the feeling of guilt was too painful, he distracted 
himself with multiple worries about the future. 

Next, the therapist spent some time on the main concept 
of the session—the limits and consequence of internal 
control efforts. She asked Héctor to engage in a 
number of experiential exercises aimed at demonstrating 
the often paradoxical effects of efforts to control 
internal experiences such as thoughts, emotions, and 
images. For example, the therapist asked Héctor to 
imagine that he “had to get a good night’s sleep” before 
a big test. She asked him what might happen if, alarmed 
by the late hour, he purposefully tried to induce a state 
of sleepiness. Héctor noted that this frequently happened, 
and the more he tried, the more distressed and 
awake he became. 

Finally, the therapist spent some time going over 
Héctor’s values assignment. Héctor easily identified 
many ways in which his anxiety was interfering 
with school and work. He noted that it was harder 
and harder to concentrate both during class and while 
doing his homework because his mind was consumed 


Generalized Anxiety Disorder 

with worries—worries about failing class, about letting 
down his family, and about his family’s health and 
well-being. Héctor also noted that when his anxiety 
about his family became too intense, he would call or 
plan a visit with them. But he found that when he did 
make the time to talk with or be with his family, he 
was consumed with worry about the time he was taking 
away from his schoolwork. Héctor wrote about his 
fear that he would never find a life partner. He was far 
too busy with school and his family to date, and he believed 
it was his destiny to end up alone. He was terrified 
about this possibility because he described himself 
as extremely family-oriented. 

As the session ended, the therapist gave Héctor a 
monitoring form that added a column for “efforts to 
control,” so that he could begin to notice these as they 
occurred throughout the week. She also provided for 
Héctor a second values assignment to complete for the 
next session. The therapist noted that often our attempts 
to avoid anxiety, worry, and stress cause us to make 
subtle shifts in our behavior, so that we begin doing 
whatever we are “supposed” to be doing and lose track 
of what we want to be doing, or what personally matters 
to us as individuals. The therapist reviewed the distinction 
between values and goals, emphasizing the importance 
of identifying the direction that Héctor wants 
to move in rather than solely the goals to achieve. The 
therapist noted that this next assignment was aimed 
at further exploring three areas of living to see what 
changes might be necessary to improve Héctor’s quality 
of life. 

“Choose two or three relationships that are important 
to you. You can either pick actual relationships (your 
relationship with your brother) or relationships you 
would like to have (“I would like to be part of a couple,” 
“I would like to make more friends”). Briefly 
write about how you would like to be in those relationships. 
Think about how you would like to communicate 
with others (e.g., how open vs. private you 
would like to be, how direct vs. passive you would 
like to be in asking for what you need and in giving 
feedback to others). Think about what sort of 
support you would like from other people and what 
sort of support you can give without sacrificing your 
own self-care. I also would like you to write briefly 
about the sort of work you would like and why that 
appeals to you. Next write about the student you 
would like to be with respect to your work habits and 
your relationships with your professors and peers. 

What is important to you about the product of your 
work/studies. How would you like to communicate 
to others about your work? How would you like to 
respond to feedback? What additional challenges 
would you like to take on? Finally, I would like you 
to briefly write about the ways in which you would 
like to spend your free time. What would you like to 
do to better nourish yourself (e.g., nutrition, exercise, 
spirituality) or contribute to your community?” 

Sessions 5–7 

In Sessions 5–7 of treatment, the focus is on encouraging 
the client to consider moving from a stance of 
resistance and avoidance to one of willingness. A number 
of mindfulness and other experiential exercises are 
used to help clients practice observing their thoughts, 
emotions, and physical sensations as transient events. 
For example, Héctor practiced imagining that his 
thoughts and feelings were going by on a movie screen 
in front of him. Once clients are able to defuse or decenter 
from their internal experiences, and they no longer 
feel defined or threatened by them, they are often 
more willing to approach and engage in a variety of 
activities. 

Like many clients, Héctor initially struggled a bit 
with the concept of willingness. At first Héctor thought 
the therapist was suggesting that he should come to 
view his anxiety in a more positive light. Or that he 
should learn to accept his anxiety because it was what a 
“strong man” needed to do. Using a metaphor adapted 
from ACT, his therapist tried to clarify the concept of 
willingness, likening it to one’s willingness to wade 
through a swamp on a journey to a beautiful mountain. 

“Taking a stance of willingness suggests that you will 
accept and move forward with the thoughts and feelings 
(rational or irrational) that appear as you make 
your way through life, taking the actions that will 
help you obtain the things in life that you value. For 
instance, let’s say that you want to ask your classmates 
if you can join their study group. To do so will 
likely elicit feelings of fear, thoughts about possible 
rejection. However, you can be willing to experience 
those thoughts and feelings, if they are what arise 
when you take actions consistent with your value 
to engage in your schoolwork. You may not like the 
feelings, you may wish it could be another way, but 
you can be willing to experience whatever comes up 
in order to take a valued action. 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

“It is as if you are on a journey to a beautiful 
mountain. But along the way you come to a disgusting, 
murky swamp. You don’t want to walk through 
the swamp, and it may not seem fair that you need 
to do so. But you can choose to walk through if you 
decide that the journey to the mountain is worth it 
to you. 

“Now if the swamp is to the side of your path, you 
do not necessarily need to go through it. And, you 
don’t have to dive into the swamp and roll around in 
it. And you can put on boots, or walk across a plank, 
in an effort to avoid getting dirty. Yet you might still 
trip and fall in the swamp, and willingness means 
you accept that possibility as you move forward on 
the journey of your choosing.” 

Several values assignments are used to help clients 
set their course or mountain “journey.” As noted earlier, 
Héctor was asked to write about his values in three specific 
domains. This can be a challenging assignment, 
and often clients confuse values with goals, describe 
values that suggest the need for control or perfection, 
or focus on what they perceive to be insurmountable 
obstacles to living consistently with their values. Thus, 
often several sessions are devoted to discussing the 
values assignment, and it is not uncommon for clients 
to revise their values multiple times in session and for 
homework. For example, Héctor’s initial writing assignment 
produced some values that could have been 
problematic for him to pursue. 

Héctor: My value in the schoolwork domain is to 
achieve the highest grades in all of my coursework. I 
want to be the top student in my graduating class so 
that I can make my family proud. 

tHeraPist: Would aiming to receive a perfect score on 
an exam be an example of a value or a goal? 
Héctor: Right, grades are outcomes, so I guess those 
are goals. 

tHeraPist: Imagine that you are working as a physician. 
You are surfing the Internet and you stumble 
upon a webpage where patients rate, and leave comments 
about, their doctor. What would you want the 
page to say? My doctor scores well on standardized 
tests? 

Héctor: (chuckling) Well, no. I guess I would want 
them to say that I was caring and compassionate. 
And that I was willing to stick with a health problem 

until I came up with the right diagnosis and the best 
treatment I could provide. 

tHeraPist: Great, those sound a bit more like values. 
So, would it be fair to say you want to be engaged 
with the material you are learning? And that you 
want to be kind and compassionate toward your patients 
and committed to their health? 

Héctor: Yes, that is what I value. I keep thinking my 
grades matter most, but I know in my heart that is 
not why I am in medical school. I am not here to 
impress my instructors and classmates. I want to be a 
doctor who makes a difference in the lives of others. 

Héctor also struggled a bit with articulating his relationship 
values: 

Héctor: I wrote that I always wanted to be available 
to my mother, whenever she needed me. I want to 
be her rock. I get so angry at myself when I am too 
tired to return her phone calls at night. Or when she 
needs something to be fixed, like the leaky faucet in 
the kitchen, and I can’t take care of it because I am 
here in Boston and she is in Miami. Also, I feel bad 
when she is lonely. I want to prevent her from having 
to experience any more pain than she already has. 

tHeraPist: I know you care deeply for your mother. 
And I can completely understand your desire to care 
for her. And yet, much like it is humanly impossible 
to prevent yourself from feeling emotions, I think it 
is humanly impossible to ensure that our loved ones 
are never in pain or in need. Even if you dropped out 
of medical school and moved back home, there are 
limits to what you can do for her. And that can be a 
very difficult and painful thing to accept. It sounds 
to me like the value is that you want to maintain a 
strong, caring relationship with your mother. Would 
you agree? 

Héctor: Absolutely. 

tHeraPist: And fixing a faucet and returning a call 
are actions that are consistent with those values. Are 
there other actions you can take that reflect your values? 
In other words, if you are in Boston and she is 
in Miami, can you care for her without fixing her 
faucet? 

Héctor: Well, I could talk to her about it. She appreciates 
when I listen to her vent about her problems. 

tHeraPist: Great, what else? 


Generalized Anxiety Disorder 

Héctor: I guess I could call a repair man for her. Or 
ask my brother to help. 

tHeraPist: Wonderful. The point is, there are many 
actions one can take that are consistent with a value. 
If we define valued action as just one or two responses, 
and for whatever reason, we can’t respond 
in those ways, we can end up feeling stuck and miserable. 
Living consistently with one’s values means 
flexibly considering multiple options to act in ways 
that are meaningful to us. 

Héctor also struggled with articulating his values in 
relation to his brother and nephews: 

Héctor: I want to be close to my brother and his sons, 
but I can’t. It doesn’t matter how I treat them, they 
are selfish and they never want to spend time with 
me. 

tHeraPist: One of the most complicated things about 
relationship values is that we only have control over 
half of the relationship. You cannot control how your 
brother acts; you can only choose how you want to 
approach him. 

Héctor: Are you saying I should just let my brother 
live his life the way he currently does? Allow him to 
raise his sons to be disrespectful and rude? 

tHeraPist: It is so painful for you to watch your brother 
make choices that are inconsistent with your values. 
And I know if you could control his behavior 
you would. It seems like you keep trying and trying 
to figure out how to control a situation that just might 
be out of your control. Sometimes mindfulness skills 
can help us to clearly accept the reality of a situation. 
And by “accept” I mean recognize the reality of the 
situation—I don’t mean that you should like or support 
his approach. But you may need to accept the 
reality that you only have control over some parts of 
this very painful situation. It seems to me that you 
can control how you choose to define your values 
regarding how you relate to your brother. But you 
can’t control his behavior. If you act lovingly toward 
him and try to establish a close relationship, your 
brother may respond in kind. And that bond might 
allow you to talk with him about your parenting concerns. 
Or you might end up with a closer relationship 
and he could continue with his current habits. Or he 
may completely reject your efforts to become closer. 
Choosing our actions is like aiming an arrow. We 

can make choices about how we aim and when we 
release the arrow. We don’t have control over where 
the arrow lands. However, we may notice where it 
lands and use that information to inform the way we 
aim or when we shoot the next time. In a similar way, 
we can choose the actions we want to take repeatedly, 
although we don’t have control over the consequences 
of our actions. 

Héctor continued to work on defining his values, until 
he felt that he could clearly articulate what mattered to 
him in the domains of relationship, schoolwork, selfnourishment, 
and community involvement. Although 
it is necessary for clients to achieve this milestone so 
that they can move into the next phase of treatment, it 
is important to recognize that values articulation is a 
dynamic process. Having defined values is helpful in 
guiding the final nine sessions of treatment, but what is 
most important is for clients to adopt the general perspective 
that valuing can provide a compass for directing 
behavior and improving quality of life. 

During these sessions, Héctor was given a final version 
of the monitoring form that represented an application 
of the full model. This included columns for 
date/time, situation, first reactions (thoughts, feelings, 
sensations), second reactions (efforts to control, muddiness, 
willingness, acceptance), and actions/responses 
(e.g., avoidance, valued action, application of mindfulness 
skills). 

Sessions 8–12 

The goal of Sessions 8–12 was to personalize the concepts 
introduced in the first phase of treatment and help 
Héctor to apply mindfulness and engagement in valued 
activities to his daily life. At the beginning of each session, 
Héctor and the therapist worked together to pick a 
mindfulness practice. Each week they purposely chose 
exercises, including ones that Héctor found particularly 
challenging, those he found most useful, and those that 
seemed to best fit his needs given the particular struggle 
he was facing (see Table 5.1). 

The bulk of these sessions were focused using the 
mindfulness and acceptance strategies introduced during 
Phase I to increase Héctor’s willingness to engage 
in his personally articulated valued actions. Héctor 
continued to monitor valued actions taken, missed opportunities, 
mindfulness and obstacles to willingness 
(see Figure 5.1). 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

table 5.1. Choosing a Mindfulness Practice 

Title Focus of attention How it can be helpful Where to find it 

Mindfulness of breath 

Mindfulness of sounds 

3-minute breathing space 

Mindfulness of physical 
sensations 

Mindful progressive 
relaxation 

Mindfulness of emotions 
and physical sensations 

Mindfulness of clouds 
and sky 

Inviting a difficulty in 
and working it through 
the body 

Your personal experience 
with self-compassion/ 
Mindful observation of 
self-critical thoughts 

Breath •• 
Portable MP3 available online 
•• 
Can be centering at www.themindful•• 
Great introduction to the habits of waythroughanxietybook.com; 
the mind (busy, judgmental) Kabat-Zinn (1990); Roemer 
& Orsillo (2009); Orsillo & 
Roemer (2011) 
Sounds •• 
Helps us to notice our tendency to MP3 available online; Segal et 
categorize/judge al. (2002); Roemer & Orsillo 
•• 
Allows us to practice “beginner’s (2009); Orsillo & Roemer 
mind”—seeing things fully as they (2011) 
are, not as we imagine they will be 
Physical sensations •• 
Helps us get centered and present Segal et al. (2002); Roemer 
(including breath), when moving from one activity to & Orsillo (2009); Orsillo & 
thoughts, emotions another Roemer (2011) 
•• 
Useful when we want to “check in” 
with ourselves 
Physical sensations •• 
Good practice for bringing curiosity MP3 available online; Orsillo & 
and compassion to physical Roemer (2011) 
sensations that are typically feared 
and avoided 
•• 
Brings awareness to sensations 
in the body, without judgment or 
avoidance 
Muscle tension/ •• 
Increases awareness of the MP3 available online; Orsillo & 
relaxation sensations of tension and relaxation Roemer (2011) 
•• 
Concrete way to practice “letting 
go” 
•• 
May elicit a relaxed state 
Emotions and/ •• 
Increases awareness of the full MP3 available online; Orsillo & 
or accompanying range of emotions present Roemer (2011) 
physical sensations •• 
Helpful when generally distressed 
or confused 
•• 
Useful for evaluating clear and 
muddy emotions 
Thoughts and •• 
Allows practice of viewing thoughts MP3 available online; Roemer 
feelings, imagery and feelings as transient and & Orsillo (2009); Orsillo & 
separate from self Roemer (2011) 
•• 
Helps with decentering/defusion 
Physical sensations •• 
Helps to cultivate willingness to MP3 available online; Williams 
related to painful experience painful emotions et al. (2007); Roemer & Orsillo 
experience •• 
Useful first step when a client is (2009); Orsillo & Roemer 
struggling against accepting a (2011) 
painful reality 
Self-critical thoughts •• 
Brings awareness to experiences of MP3 available online; Orsillo & 
criticism in the past and the present Roemer (2011) 
•• 
Helps to identify barriers to selfcompassion 
(continued) 


Generalized Anxiety Disorder 

table 5.1. (continued) 

Title Focus of attention How it can be helpful Where to find it 
Mountain meditation Mountain imagery— •• 
Uses the image of a mountain to MP3 available online; Kabattransience 
of events promote the experience of thoughts, Zinn (1995); Roemer & Orsillo 
external to the feelings, and emotions as changing (2009); Orsillo & Roemer 
mountain and impermanent (2011) 
•• 
Particularly helpful for cultivating a 
sense of inner strength or stability, 
even in the face of distress and 
reactivity 

For example, in Session 10, Héctor shared that he 
had missed an opportunity to engage in a valued action. 
Specifically, one of his favorite instructors had offered 
to meet with Héctor to discuss the process of selecting 
rotations, but Héctor had cancelled the appointment. 

tHeraPist: What did you notice about your response 
to his offer? 

Héctor: At first I was excited, but as time went on I 
became more and more anxious. 

tHeraPist: Can you identify the clear emotions that 
arose? 

Héctor: I actually used the Mindfulness of Emotion 
exercise to sort this out a bit. I felt excited about taking 
the next step in my education, happy that my in-

VALUED ACTIVITY LOG 

Please complete this form at the end of each day. 

This week, at the end of each day we would like you to think about an action that you took that was consistent 
with one of your values or an opportunity that you missed to take an action consistent with your value. Briefly 
describe the action and mark T for taken or M for missed. 

On a scale of 0–100 rate how mindful you were during the action or the missed opportunity. 

Note any obstacles that you noticed that stopped you from taking action (or could have). 

There are no right or wrong answers to this assignment—we all choose not to engage in valued actions for a variety 
of reasons. This is just a way for us to start to get a better sense of what may be getting in the way for you so that 
you can make choices as to how you would like to proceed. 

Date Action 
Taken (T) or 
missed (M) 
Mindfulness 
(0–100) Obstacles 

figUre 5.1. Values Monitoring Form. 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

structor singled me out, and nervous about the challenges 
that lie ahead for me in my career. 

tHeraPist: Excellent. Were you also able to observe 
your reaction to your reactions? 

Héctor: Honestly, not until today. I think at the time 
I just got caught up in my reactions rather than observing 
them. But during the mindfulness practice 
today I noticed some of the same old responses I always 
have. I was afraid to feel good about myself, 
and my prospects for the future. I had that same 
sense that worrying about what could go wrong was 
what I needed to do to ensure that I don’t mess up. 
I also became pretty critical and judgmental about 
my anxiety. 

tHeraPist: What do you think you could have done 
differently? 

Héctor: I have become kind of lax when it comes to 
filling out the monitoring forms. But I was thinking 
about what you said last week. I do think that 
the process of physically completing the form in the 
midst of my distress can help me to take a pause . . . 
and remember some of my skills. 

Session 11 brought a more challenging issue into 
therapy. Héctor was extremely distressed over an interaction 
he had with a university security officer. Héctor 
was on his way back home from a long night studying 
when he was approached by a security officer and asked 
to produce his university identification card. Although 
it was close to midnight, Héctor observed at least five 
other students crossing the campus, yet he was the only 
one who was questioned. Héctor was already sensitive 
to the fact that he had been the only person of color in 
the library that night. He was stressed out over exams, 
missing his family and friends, and frankly tired of 
dealing with the subtle and obvious discrimination he 
encountered on a daily basis. Thus, he refused to produce 
his identification card and reported that he “lost” 
it and shouted at the officer. Although the situation was 
eventually sorted out, Héctor was angry, embarrassed 
over his behavior in the situation, and confused. 

Héctor: I am really struggling with this incident. My 
mind is racing, I feel tense all over and I can’t sort 
out what is clear and what is muddy and, more importantly, 
what valued action I could have chosen. 

tHeraPist: It is natural to experience a rush of conflicting 
thoughts and emotions in such a painful en


counter. I am so sorry that, given the racism inherent 
in our society, you are subjected to differential treatment 
because of how you look. This structural problem 
exists outside of you and isn’t your fault. And 
I really understand how the pain and the anger can 
build up when you have to deal with things like this 
all the time. I certainly don’t want to suggest that you 
have to change who you are, when the system needs 
changing. However, I would like us to work with this 
situation to help you find an effective way of dealing 
with this kind of thing because we both know that 
racism isn’t going to go away immediately, and that 
means you have to make choices about how you want 
to respond. If you are willing, let’s spend some time 
with a mindfulness practice to see if that helps us 
gain some clarity. 

Héctor: I don’t feel very open right now, but I do think 
“Inviting a Difficulty In and Working with It through 
the Body” (see Figure 5.2) could be a first step. 

Following the exercise, Héctor appeared more settled, 
although he also had tears in his eyes. 

tHeraPist: What did you notice? 

Héctor: It was pretty easy to locate the tension—it 
was in the pit of my stomach. But I really struggled 
with opening up to it. My first response was “I don’t 
want to let go off the struggle against racism. Why 
should I accept it”? But then I remembered the last 
time we did this exercise. And I reminded myself 
that I only had to be open to the present moment. I 
remembered that acceptance didn’t mean resigning 
myself to a situation. Instead, I focused on accepting 
that the incident had occurred and that I was rigidly 
holding tension in my body. 

tHeraPist: I am really impressed that you were able to 
do that. What happened next? 

Héctor: I continued to breathe into my stomach and I 
worked on letting go of my tension. Once my body 
became more relaxed I turned my attention to my 
thoughts about the incident. 

tHeraPist: And what did you observe? 

Héctor: I had thoughts about racism and how unjust it 
is for people to be treated differently based on their 
appearance. I felt angry, which I think was a clear 
emotion, but then I started to feel ashamed of my 
behavior. 

tHeraPist: Was that reaction clear or muddy? 


Generalized Anxiety Disorder 

Before you begin this exercise, think of a difficulty you’re experiencing right now. It doesn’t have to be a significant 
difficulty, but choose something that you find unpleasant, something that is unresolved. It may be something 
you are worried about, an argument or misunderstanding you’ve had, something you feel angry, resentful, guilty, 
or frustrated about. If nothing is going on right now, think of some time in the recent past when you felt scared, 
worried, frustrated, resentful, angry, or guilty, and use that. 

Noticing the way you are sitting in the chair or on the floor. Noticing where your body is touching the chair or 
floor. Bringing you attention to your breath for a moment. Noticing the in-breath . . . and the out-breath. . . . Now 
gently widening your awareness, take in the body as a whole. Noticing any sensations that arise, breathing with 
your whole body. 

When you are ready, bringing to mind whatever situation has been bringing up difficult emotions for you. 
Bringing your attention to the specific emotions that arise and any reactions you have to those emotions. And as 
you are focusing on this troubling situation and your emotional reaction, allowing yourself to tune in to any physical 
sensations in the body that you notice are arising . . . becoming aware of those physical sensations . . . and then 
deliberately, but gently, directing your focus of attention to the region of the body where the sensations are the 
strongest in the gesture of an embrace, a welcoming . . . noticing that this is how it is right now . . . and breathing 
into that part of the body on the in-breath and breathing out from that region on the out-breath, exploring the 
sensations, watching their intensity shift up and down from one moment to the next. 

Now, seeing if you can bring to this attention an even deeper attitude of compassion and openness to 
whatever sensations, thoughts, or emotions you are experiencing, however unpleasant, by saying to yourself from 
time to time, “It’s OK. Whatever it is, it’s already here. Let me open to it.” 

Staying with the awareness of these internal sensations, breathing with them, accepting them, letting them 
be, and allowing them to be just as they are. Saying to yourself again, if you find it helpful, “It’s here right now. 
Whatever it is, it’s already here. Let me be open to it.” Softening and opening to the sensation you become aware 
of, letting go of any tensing and bracing. If you like, you can also experiment with holding in awareness both the 
sensations of the body and the feeling of the breath moving in and out as you breathe with the sensations moment 
by moment. 

And when you notice that the bodily sensations are no longer pulling your attention to the same degree, simply 
return 100% to the breath and continue with that as the primary object of attention. And then gently bringing your 
awareness to the way you are sitting in the chair, your breath, and, when you are ready, opening your eyes. 

figUre 5.2. Inviting a difficulty in and working with it through the body. From Williams, Teasdale, Segal, and Kabat-
Zinn (2007, pp. 151–152). Copyright 2007 by The Guilford Press. Adapted by permission. 

Héctor: Well, I think a bit of both. I definitely was able 
to bring some compassion to myself. No one wants to 
be treated differently based on his/her appearance. 

tHeraPist: That is great. I know it is not easy for you 
to take a compassionate stance toward your thoughts 
and actions. What do you think was clear about the 
response? 

Héctor: I am ashamed of my behavior. It is inconsistent 
with my values to treat anyone the way I treated 
that officer, even if he/she deserves it. Frankly, I 
don’t care what he thinks of me, but I care what I 
think about myself. 

tHeraPist: It sounds like you said and did some things 

that were inconsistent with your values. I wonder, 
though, if you can bring some compassion to yourself 
for that. Although we intend to behave consistently 
with our values, we all have lapses. This was 
a highly charged situation, and you were vulnerable 
going into it. The important thing is that you are now 
even more aware of your values. Are there any consistent 
actions you can take this week? 

Héctor: This incident made me realize that my values 
have been a bit too off balance lately. I have been paying 
a lot of attention to the schoolwork domain and 
a pretty good amount of attention to the relationship 
domain, but I think I need to take some actions consistent 
with my values regarding self-nourishment 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

and community. At the beginning of the semester I 
grabbed a flyer for the Latino Medical Student Association, 
and I think I am going to contact them to see 
if there are some activities I can get involved with. 

tHeraPist: That sounds great. 

Héctor: I also think I might try and meet with someone 
from campus security. I think I want to apologize 
for my behavior, but I also want to talk to them 
about cultural sensitivity training. And don’t worry, 
I didn’t forget about the arrow thing we talked about 
a few weeks ago. I can only aim the arrow; I can’t 
control where it lands. I know I might not change 
their practices, but these actions are consistent with 
my values. 

Sessions 13–16 

Héctor completed a treatment reflection writing assignment 
that set the stage for the final four sessions of 
therapy. He identified a few specific valued actions that 
he wanted to take before the end of therapy. He also 
recognized that although he was maintaining a pretty 
steady formal mindfulness practice, he had paid less attention 
to informal mindfulness. Héctor also had made 
great gains in increasing his self-compassion, but he 
felt that he needed more practice while he still had the 
support of therapy. 

Thus, Sessions 13–15 continued to follow the structure 
of Sessions 8–11, but with added attention to issues 
of maintenance. The therapist become less and less 
directive throughout this time, allowing Héctor to address 
obstacles and experience success himself. During 
this time, Hector began to date and expand his social 
network, feel more satisfied with his relationships with 
his family members, and find more success and satisfaction 
in his schoolwork. 

During the final session, the therapist predicted that 
there would be times when Héctor would feel overwhelmed 
by emotion, drift away from his mindfulness 
practice, and lose sight of his values, despite all the notable 
gains he reported. She described these “lapses” as 
a natural part of the process of life and helped Héctor to 
make plans for how to cope. Specifically, she suggested 
that he review the handouts in his binder, begin selfmonitoring 
again, increase or reengage in mindfulness 
practice, and consider doing some values writing. The 
therapist and Héctor collaboratively developed a personalized 
list of elements that were particularly helpful 
for him and added that list to his binder. Héctor ex


pressed sadness at saying good-bye to his therapist, and 
also excitement at feeling able to continue his progress 
on his own and use the time allocated to therapy to engage 
in other valued actions moving forward. 

coNclusioN 

Evidence suggests that this ABBT for GAD can target 
symptoms of GAD, comorbid presenting problems, and 
proposed mechanisms that underlie these clinical presentations, 
while helping clients to engage in their lives 
in satisfying ways. This chapter has presented a conceptual 
basis for this treatment, as well as guidelines 
for its flexible application, while remaining responsive 
to the specific context of a given client. More research 
is needed to better understand mechanisms and processes 
of change, as well as how to disseminate this 
treatment in community and primary care settings. 

aCknowledgMents 

We thank the therapists, students, and clients we have worked 
with over the years for all they have taught us, as well as National 
Institutes of Health for funding our work (Grant No. 
MH074589). We also thank Dave Barlow, Tim Brown, Bonnie 
Brown, and the staff at the Center for Anxiety and Related 
Disorders for supporting our research over the past 10 years. 
We dedicate this chapter to Tom Borkovec, whose seminal 
work in the treatment of GAD is the sturdy foundation on 
which our work stands. 

note 

1. Audio recordings of this exercise, as well as other mindfulness 
exercises we use, are available at www.mindfulwaythroughanxietybook.
com. Scripts for many of these 
mindfulness exercises are available in Roemer and Orsillo 
(2009) and Orsillo and Roemer (2011). 
referenCes 

American Psychiatric Association. (1994). Diagnostic and 

statistical manual of mental disorders (4th ed.). Washing


ton, DC: Author. 
American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and 

statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.). Arling


ton, VA: Author. 
Andrews, G., Hobbs, M. J., Borkovec, T. D., Beesdo, K., 

Craske, M. G., Heimberg, R. G., et al. (2010). Generalized 


Generalized Anxiety Disorder 

worry disorder: A review of DSM-IV generalized anxiety 
disorder and options for DSM-V. Depression and Anxiety, 
27(2), 134–147. 

Arch, J. J., Eifert, G. H., Davies, C., Vilardaga, J. C. P., Rose, 

R. D., & Craske, M. G. (2012). Randomized clinical trial 
of cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) versus acceptance 
and commitment therapy (ACT) for mixed anxiety disorders. 
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 
80(5), 750–765. 
Ballenger, J. C., Davidson, J. R. T., Lecrubier, Y., Nutt, D. 
J., Borkovec, T. D., Rickels, K., et al. (2001). Consensus 
statement on generalized anxiety disorder from the international 
consensus group on depression and anxiety. Journal 
of Clinical Psychiatry, 62, 53–58. 

Behar, E., DiMarco, I. D., Hekler, E. B., Mohlman, J., & 
Staples, A. M. (2009). Current theoretical models of generalized 
anxiety disorder (GAD): Conceptual review and 
treatment implications. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 
23(8), 1011–1023. 

Belanger, L., Ladouceur, R., & Morin, C. M. (2005). Generalized 
anxiety disorder and health care use. Canadian 
Family Physician, 51(10), 1362–1363. 

Blevins, D., Roca, J. V., & Spencer, T. (2011). Life guard: 
Evaluation of an ACT-based workshop to facilitate reintegration 
of OIF/OEF veterans. Professional Psychology: 
Research and Practice, 42(1), 32–39. 

Bond, F. W., Hayes, S. C., Baer, R. A., Carpenter, K. M., 
Guenole, N., Orcutt, H. K., et al. (2011). Preliminary 
psychometric properties of the Acceptance and Action 
Questionnaire–II: A revised measure of psychological inflexibility 
and experiential avoidance. Behavior Therapy, 
42, 676–688. 

Borkovec, T. D., Alcaine, O. M., & Behar, E. (2004). Avoidance 
theory of worry and generalized anxiety disorder. 
In R. G. Heimberg, C. L. Turk, & D. S. Mennin (Eds.), 
Generalized anxiety disorder: Advances in research and 
practice. (pp. 77–108). New York: Guilford Press. 

Borkovec, T. D., & Costello, E. (1993). Efficacy of applied 
relaxation and cognitive-behavioral therapy in the treatment 
of generalized anxiety disorder. Journal of Consulting 
and Clinical Psychology, 61(4), 611–619. 

Borkovec, T. D., & Hu, S. (1990). The effect of worry on 
cardiovascular response to phobic imagery. Behaviour Research 
and Therapy, 28(1), 69–73. 

Borkovec, T. D., & Roemer, L. (1995). Perceived functions of 
worry among generalized anxiety disorder subjects: Distraction 
from more emotionally distressing topics? Journal 
of Behavior Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry, 
26(1), 25–30. 

Borkovec, T. D., & Ruscio, A. M. (2001). Psychotherapy for 
generalized anxiety disorder. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 
62, 37–42. 

Borkovec, T. D., & Sharpless, B. (2004). Generalized anxiety 
disorder: Bringing cognitive-behavioral therapy into the 
valued present. In S. C. Hayes, V. M. Follette, & M. M. 

Linehan (Eds.), Mindfulness and acceptance: Expanding 
the cognitive-behavioral tradition (pp. 209–242). New 
York: Guilford Press. 

Brown, L. A., Forman, E. M., Herbert, J. D., Hoffman, K. 
L., Yuen, E. K., & Goetter, E. M. (2011). A randomized 
controlled trial of acceptance-based behavior therapy and 
cognitive therapy for test anxiety: A pilot study. Behavior 
Modification, 35(1), 31–53. 

Bruce, S. E., Machan, J. T., Dyck, I., & Keller, M. B. (2001). 
Infrequency of “pure” GAD: Impact of psychiatric comorbidity 
on clinical course. Depression and Anxiety, 14(4), 
219–225. 

Chodron, P. (2007). Practicing peace in times of war. Boston: 
Shambhala. 

Cisler, J. M., & Koster, E. H. W. (2010). Mechanisms of attentional 
biases towards threat in anxiety disorders: An 
integrative review. Clinical Psychology Review, 30(2), 
203–216. 

Covin, R., Ouimet, A. J., Seeds, P. M., & Dozois, D. J. A. 
(2008). A meta-analysis of CBT for pathological worry 
among clients with GAD. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 
22(1), 108–116. 

Davidson, J. R. T., Bose, A., Korotzer, A., & Zheng, H. 
(2004). Escitalopram in the treatment of generalized anxiety 
disorder: Double-blind, placebo controlled, flexibledose 
study. Depression and Anxiety, 19(4), 234–240. 

Dimidjian, S., & Linehan, M. M. (2009). Mindfulness practice. 
In W. T. O’Donohue & J. E. Fisher (Eds.), General 
principles and empirically supported techniques of cognitive 
behavior therapy (pp. 425–434). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. 

Di Nardo, P. A., Brown, T. A., & Barlow, D. H. (1994). Anxiety 
Disorders Interview Schedule for DSM-IV. Albany, 
NY: Graywind. 

Dugas, M. J., Brillon, P., Savard, P., Turcotte, J., Gaudet, A., 
Ladouceur, R., et al. (2010). A randomized clinical trial 
of cognitive-behavioral therapy and applied relaxation for 
adults with generalized anxiety disorder. Behavior Therapy, 
41(1), 46–58. 

Etkin, A., & Schatzberg, A. F. (2011). Common abnormalities 
and disorder-specific compensation during implicit regulation 
of emotional processing in generalized anxiety and 
major depressive disorders. American Journal of Psychiatry, 
168(9), 968–978. 

Evans, S., Ferrando, S., Findler, M., Stowell, C., Smart, C., & 
Haglin, D. (2008). Mindfulness-based cognitive therapy 
for generalized anxiety disorder. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 
22(4), 716–721. 

Fuchs, C., Lee, J. K., Roemer, L., & Orsillo, S. M. (2013). 
Using mindfulness- and acceptance-based treatments 
with clients from nondominant and/or marginalized backgrounds: 
Clinical considerations, meta-analysis findings, 
and introduction to the special series. Cognitive and Behavioral 
Practice, 20(1), 1–12. 

Fuchs, C., West, L. M., Graham, J. R., Hayes-Skelton, S. A., 
Orsillo, S. M., & Roemer, L. (2012, April). Exploring the 


CLINICAL HANDBOOK OF PSYCHOLOGICAL DISORDERS 

acceptability of mindfulness-based treatment among individuals 
from non-dominant cultural backgrounds. In J. 

R. Graham (Chair), Examining Mindfulness and Anxiety 
across Diverse Methods and Contexts Symposium presented 
at the annual meeting of the Anxiety Disorders Association 
of America, Arlington, VA. 
Gelenberg, A. J., Lydiard, R. B., Rudolph, R. L., Aguiar, L., 
Haskins, J. T., & Salinas, E. (2000). Efficacy of venlafaxine 
extended-release capsules in nondepressed outpatients 
with generalized anxiety disorder: A 6-month randomized 
controlled trial. Journal of the American Medical Association, 
283(23), 3082–3088. 

Gentes, E. L., & Ruscio, A. M. (2011). A meta-analysis of 
the relation of intolerance of uncertainty to symptoms of 
generalized anxiety disorder, major depressive disorder, 
and obsessive–compulsive disorder. Clinical Psychology 
Review, 31(6), 923–933. 

Germer, C. K. (2005). Anxiety disorders: Befriending fear. 
In C. K. Germer, R. D. Siegel, & P. R. Fulton (Eds.), Mindfulness 
and psychotherapy (pp. 152–172). New York: 
Guilford Press. 

Gratz, K. L., & Roemer, L. (2004). Multidimensional assessment 
of emotion regulation and dysregulation: Development, 
factor structure, and initial validation of the 
Difficulties in Emotion Regulation Scale. Journal of Psychopathology 
and Behavioral Assessment, 26(1), 41–54. 

Gross, J. J. (2002). Emotion regulation: Affective, cognitive, 
and social consequences. Psychophysiology, 39(3), 
281–291. 

Gross, J. J., & Levenson, R. W. (1997). Hiding feelings: The 
acute effects of inhibiting negative and positive emotion. 
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 106(1), 95–103. 

Hayes, S. A., Orsillo, S. M., & Roemer, L. (2010). Changes 
in proposed mechanisms of action during an acceptancebased 
behavior therapy for generalized anxiety disorder. 
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 48(3), 238–245. 

Hayes, S. C., Strosahl, K. D., & Wilson, K. G. (2012). Acceptance 
and commitment therapy: The process and practice 
of mindful change (2nd ed.). New York: Guilford Press. 

Hayes, S. C., Wilson, K. G., Gifford, E. V., Follette, V. M., & 
Strosahl, K. (1996). Experiential avoidance and behavioral 
disorders: A functional dimensional approach to diagnosis 
and treatment. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 
64(6), 1152–1168. 

Hayes-Skelton, S. A., Roemer, L., & Orsillo, S. M. (2013). A 
randomized clinical trial comparing an acceptance based 
behavior therapy to applied relaxation for generalized anxiety 
disorder. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 
81(5), 761–773. 

Hays, P. A. (2008). Addressing cultural complexities in practice: 
Assessment, diagnosis, and therapy (2nd ed.). Washington, 
DC: American Psychological Association. 

Heatherington, L., Harrington, N. T., Harrington, J., Neimeyer, 
K. F., Weinberg, S. C., & Friedlander, M. L. (2013). 
Applying group cognitive behavior therapy for anxiety 

disorders in community settings: Retention, outcome, and 
clinical considerations. Manuscript under review. 

Heuzenroeder, L., Donnelly, M., Haby, M. M., Mihalopoulos, 
C., Rossell, R., Carter, R., et al. (2004). Cost-effectiveness 
of psychological and pharmacological interventions for 
generalized anxiety disorder and panic disorder. Australian 
and New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry, 38(8), 
602–612. 

Hidalgo, R. B., Tupler, L. A., & Davidson, J. R. T. (2007). An 
effect-size analysis of pharmacologic treatments for generalized 
anxiety disorder. Journal of Psychopharmacology, 
21(8), 864–872. 

Hoffman, D. L., Dukes, E. M., & Wittchen, H. (2008). Human 
and economic burden of generalized anxiety disorder. Depression 
and Anxiety, 25(1), 72–90. 

Issakidis, C., Sanderson, K., Corry, J., Andrews, G., & Lapsley, 
H. (2004). Modelling the population cost-effectiveness 
of current and evidence-based optimal treatment for anxiety 
disorders. Psychological Medicine, 34(1), 19–35. 

Kabat-Zinn, J. (1990). Full catastrophe living: Using the wisdom 
of your body and mind to face stress, pain, and illness. 
New York: Delta. 

Kabat-Zinn, J. (1995). Wherever you go there you are: Mindfulness 
meditation in everyday life. New York: Hyperion. 

Kabat-Zinn, J. (2003). Mindfulness-based interventions in 
context: Past, present, and future. Clinical Psychology: 
Science and Practice, 10(2), 144–156. 

Katzman, M. A. (2009). Current considerations in the treatment 
of generalized anxiety disorder. CNS Drugs, 23(2), 
103–120. 

Kennedy, B. L., & Schwab, J. J. (1997). Utilization of medical 
specialists by anxiety disorder patients. Psychosomatics, 
38(2), 109–112. 

Kessler, R. C., Berglund, P., Demler, O., Jin, R., Merikangas, 

K. R., & Walters, E. E. (2005). Lifetime prevalence and 
age-of-onset distributions of DSM-IV disorders in the National 
Comorbidity Survey Replication. Archives of General 
Psychiatry, 62(6), 593–602. 
Kocovski, N. L., Fleming, J. E., & Rector, N. A. (2009). 
Mindfulness and acceptance-based group therapy for social 
anxiety disorder: An open trial. Cognitive and Behavioral 
Practice, 16(3), 276–289. 

Ladouceur, R., Gosselin, P., & Dugas, M. J. (2000). Experimental 
manipulation of intolerance of uncertainty: A 
study of a theoretical model of worry. Behaviour Research 
and Therapy, 38(9), 933–941. 

Lee, J. K., Fuchs, C., Roemer, L., & Orsillo, S. M. (2009). 
Cultural considerations in acceptance-based behavior 
therapies. In L. Roemer & S. M. Orsillo (Eds.), Mindfulness- 
and acceptance-based behavioral therapies in practice 
(pp. 215–228). New York: Guilford Press. 

Lee, J. K., Orsillo, S. M., Roemer, L., & Allen, L. B. (2010). 
Distress and avoidance in generalized anxiety disorder: 
Exploring the relationships with intolerance of uncertainty 
and worry. Cognitive Behaviour Therapy, 39(2), 126–136. 


Generalized Anxiety Disorder 

Levitt, J. T., Brown, T. A., Orsillo, S. M., & Barlow, D. H. 
(2004). The effects of acceptance versus suppression of 
emotion on subjective and psychophysiological response 
to carbon dioxide challenge in patients with panic disorder. 
Behavior Therapy, 35(4), 747–766. 

Linehan, M. M. (1993). Cognitive-behavioral treatment 
of borderline personality disorder. New York: Guilford 
Press. 

Logue, M. B., Thomas, A. M., Barbee, J. G., & Hoehn-Saric, 

R. (1993). Generalized anxiety disorder patients seek evaluation 
for cardiological symptoms at the same frequency 
as patients with panic disorder. Journal of Psychiatric Research, 
27(1), 55–59. 
Lovibond, S. H., & Lovibond, P. F. (1995). Manual for the 
Depression Anxiety Stress Scales. Sydney: Psychology 
Foundation of Australia. 

Marten, P. A., Brown, T. A., Barlow, D. H., Borkovec, T. D., 
Shear, M. K., & Lydiard, R. B. (1993). Evaluation of the 
ratings comprising the associated symptom criterion of 
DSM-III-R generalized anxiety disorder. Journal of Nervous 
and Mental Disease, 181(11), 676–682. 

Mennin, D. S., & Fresco, D. M. (2014). Emotion regulation 
therapy. In J. J. Gross (Ed.), Handbook of emotion regulation 
(2nd ed., pp. 469–490). New York: Guilford Press. 

Mennin, D. S., Holaway, R. M., Fresco, D. M., Moore, M. 
T., & Heimberg, R. G. (2007). Delineating components of 
emotion and its dysregulation in anxiety and mood psychopathology. 
Behavior Therapy, 38(3), 284–302. 

Meyer, T. J., Miller, M. L., Metzger, R. L., & Borkovec, T. 

D. (1990). Development and validation of the Penn State 
Worry Questionnaire. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 
28(6), 487–495. 
Michelson, S. E., Lee, J. K., Orsillo, S. M., & Roemer, L. 
(2011). The role of values-consistent behavior in generalized 
anxiety disorder. Depression and Anxiety, 28(5), 
358–366. 

Mussell, M., Kroenke, K., Spitzer, R. L., Williams, J. B. W., 
Herzog, W., & Löwe, B. (2008). Gastrointestinal symptoms 
in primary care: Prevalence and association with depression 
and anxiety. Journal of Psychosomatic Research, 
64(6), 605–612. 

Najmi, S., & Wegner, D. M. (2008). Thought suppression 
and psychopathology. In A. J. Elliot (Ed.), Handbook of 
approach and avoidance motivation (pp. 447–459). New 
York: Psychology Press. 

Neff, K. D. (2003). The development and validation of a 
scale to measure self-compassion. Self and Identity, 2(3), 
223–250. 

Newman, M. G., Castonguay, L. G., Borkovec, T. D., Fisher, 
A. J., Boswell, J. F., Szkodny, L. E., et al. (2011). A 
randomized controlled trial of cognitive-behavioral therapy 
for generalized anxiety disorder with integrated techniques 
from emotion-focused and interpersonal therapies. 
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 79(2), 
171–181. 

Nhat Hanh, T. (1992). Peace is every step: The path of mindfulness 
in everyday life. New York: Bantam Books. 

Olatunji, B. O., & Wolitzky-Taylor, K. B. (2009). Anxiety 
sensitivity and the anxiety disorders: A meta-analytic 
review and synthesis. Psychological Bulletin, 135(6), 
974–999. 

Orsillo, S. M., & Roemer, L. (2011). The mindful way through 
anxiety: Break free from chronic worry and reclaim your 
life. New York: Guilford Press. 

Orsillo, S. M., Roemer, L., & Barlow, D. H. (2003). Integrating 
acceptance and mindfulness into existing cognitivebehavioral 
treatment for GAD: A case study. Cognitive 
and Behavioral Practice, 10(3), 222–230. 

Orsillo, S.M., Roemer, L., & Salters-Pedneault, K. (2008, 
November). Acceptance-based behavioral therapy for 
GAD: Predictors of change. Paper presented at the annual 
meeting of the Association of Behavioral and Cognitive 
Therapies, Orlando, FL. 

Przeworski, A., Newman, M. G., Pincus, A. L., Kasoff, M. 
B., Yamasaki, A. S., Castonguay, L. G., et al. (2011). Interpersonal 
pathoplasticity in individuals with generalized 
anxiety disorder. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 
120(2), 286–298. 

Rickels, K., Zaninelli, R., McCafferty, J., Bellew, K., Iyengar, 
M., & Sheehan, D. (2003). Paroxetine treatment of generalized 
anxiety disorder: A double-blind, placebo-controlled 
study. American Journal of Psychiatry, 160(4), 749–756. 

Revicki, D. A., Travers, K., Wyrwich, K. W., Svedsäter, H., 
Locklear, J., Mattera, M., et al. (2012). Humanistic and 
economic burden of generalized anxiety disorder in North 
America and Europe. Journal of Affective Disorders, 
140(2), 103–112. 

Roemer, L., & Borkovec, T. D. (1994). Effects of suppressing 
thoughts about emotional material. Journal of Abnormal 
Psychology, 103(3), 467–474. 

Roemer, L., Lee, J. K., Salters-Pedneault, K., Erisman, S. 
M., Orsillo, S. M., & Mennin, D. S. (2009). Mindfulness 
and emotion regulation difficulties in generalized anxiety 
disorder: Preliminary evidence for independent and overlapping 
contributions. Behavior Therapy, 40(2), 142–154. 

Roemer, L., Molina, S., & Borkovec, T. D. (1997). An investigation 
of worry content among generally anxious individuals. 
Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 185(5), 
314–319. 

Roemer, L., & Orsillo, S. M. (2007). An open trial of an 
acceptance-based behavior therapy for generalized anxiety 
disorder. Behavior Therapy, 38(1), 72–85. 

Roemer, L., & Orsillo, S. M. (2009). Mindfulness-and 
acceptance-based behavioral therapies in practice. New 
York: Guilford Press. 

Roemer, L., Orsillo, S. M., & Salters-Pedneault, K. (2008). 
Efficacy of an acceptance-based behavior therapy for 
generalized anxiety disorder: Evaluation in a randomized 
controlled trial. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 
76(6), 1083–1089. 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

Romera, I., Fernández-Pérez, S., Montejo, Á. L., Caballero, 
F., Caballero, L., Arbesú, J. Á., et al. (2010). Generalized 
anxiety disorder, with or without co-morbid major depressive 
disorder, in primary care: Prevalence of painful somatic 
symptoms, functioning and health status. Journal of 
Affective Disorders, 127(1–3), 160–168. 

Sauer-Zavala, S., Boswell, J. F., Gallagher, M. W., Bentley, 

K. H., Ametaj, A., & Barlow, D. H. (2012). The role of 
negative affectivity and negative reactivity to emotions in 
predicting outcomes in the unified protocol for the transdiagnostic 
treatment of emotional disorders. Behaviour 
Research and Therapy, 50(9), 551–557. 
Segal, Z. V., Williams, J. M., & Teasdale, J. D. (2002). 
Mindfulness-based cognitive therapy for depression: A 
new approach to preventing relapse. New York: Guilford 
Press. 

Siev, J., & Chambless, D. L. (2007). Specificity of treatment 
effects: Cognitive therapy and relaxation for generalized 
anxiety and panic disorders. Journal of Consulting and 
Clinical Psychology, 75(4), 513–522. 

Sobczak, L. R., & West, L. M. (2013). Clinical considerations 
in using mindfulness- and acceptance-based approaches 
with diverse populations: Addressing challenges in service 
delivery in diverse community settings. Cognitive and Behavioral 
Practice, 20(1), 13–22. 

Sorensen, S. M., Hayes-Skelton, S. A., Roemer, L., & Orsillo, 
S. M. (2012, June). Working alliance across an 
acceptance-based behavior therapy and applied relaxation 
for clients with GAD. Poster presented at the annual 
meeting of the Society for Psychotherapy Research, Virginia 
Beach, VA. 

Stapinski, L. A., Abbott, M. J., & Rapee, R. M. (2010). Fear 
and perceived uncontrollability of emotion: Evaluating the 
unique contribution of emotion appraisal variables to prediction 
of worry and generalised anxiety disorder. Behaviour 
Research and Therapy, 48(11), 1097–1104. 

Stöber, J., & Bittencourt, J. (1998). Weekly assessment of 
worry: An adaptation of the Penn State Worry Questionnaire 
for monitoring changes during treatment. Behaviour 
Research and Therapy, 36(6), 645–656. 

Sue, D. W., & Sue, D. (2012). Counseling the culturally diverse: 
Theory and practice (6th ed.). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. 

Sue, S. (1998). In search of cultural competence in psychotherapy 
and counseling. American Psychologist, 53(4), 
440–448. 

Thayer, J. F., Friedman, B. H., & Borkovec, T. D. (1996). Au


tonomic characteristics of generalized anxiety disorder 
and worry. Biological Psychiatry, 39(4), 255–266. 

Treanor, M., Erisman, S. M., Salters-Pedneault, K., Roemer, 
L., & Orsillo, S. M. (2011). Acceptance-based behavioral 
therapy for GAD: Effects on outcomes from three theoretical 
models. Depression and Anxiety, 28(2), 127–136. 

Wang, P. S., Lane, M., Olfson, M., Pincus, H. A., Wells, K. 
B., & Kessler, R. C. (2005). Twelve-month use of mental 
health services in the united states: Results from the National 
Comorbidity Survey Replication. Archives of General 
Psychiatry, 62(6), 629–640. 

Waters, A. M., & Craske, M. G. (2005). Generalized anxiety 
disorder. In M. M. Antony, D. R. Ledley, & R. G. Heimberg 
(Eds.), Improving outcomes and preventing relapse 
in cognitive-behavorial therapy (pp. 77–127). New York: 
Guilford Press. 

Wells, A. (2005). The metacognitive model of GAD: Assessment 
of meta-worry and relationship with DSM-IV generalized 
anxiety disorder. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 
29(1), 107–121. 

Wells, A., Welford, M., King, P., Papageorgiou, C., Wisely, 
J., & Mendel, E. (2010). A pilot randomized trial of metacognitive 
therapy vs applied relaxation in the treatment of 
adults with generalized anxiety disorder. Behaviour Research 
and Therapy, 48(5), 429–434. 

Whisman, M. A. (2007). Marital distress and DSM-IV psychiatric 
disorders in a population-based national survey. 
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 116(3), 638–643. 

Williams, J. M. G., Teasdale, J. D., Segal, Z. V., & Kabat-
Zinn, J. (2007). The mindful way through depression: 
Freeing yourself from chronic unhappiness. New York: 
Guilford Press. 

Williams, K. E., Chambless, D. L., & Ahrens, A. (1997). 
Are emotions frightening?: An extension of the fear of 
fear construct. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 35(3), 
239–248. 

Wilson, K. G., & Murrell, A. R. (2004). Values work in acceptance 
and commitment therapy: Setting a course for 
behavioral treatment. In S. C. Hayes, V. M. Follette, & M. 

M. Linehan (Eds.), Mindfulness and acceptance: Expanding 
the cognitive-behavioral tradition (pp. 120–151). New 
York: Guilford Press. 
Wilson, K. G., Sandoz, E. K., Kitchens, J., & Roberts, M. 
(2010). The Valued Living Questionnaire: Defining and 
measuring valued action within a behavioral framework. 
Psychological Record, 60(2), 249–272. 


CHaPter 6 

emotional Disorders 

A Unified Transdiagnostic Protocol 

laura a. PayNe 
kristeN k. ellarD 
toDD J. farchioNe 
christoPher P. fairholMe 
DaviD h. Barlow 

in this chapter we describe the most recently developed treatment protocol from the 
Center for Anxiety and related Disorders at Boston University. in this “unified” transdiagnostic 
protocol, therapeutic principles common to psychological treatment of the various 
emotional disorders have been distilled and integrated into a single protocol that is, 
in theory, applicable to the full range of emotional disorders. Unlike protocols for specific 
problems or disorders described in other chapters, this new approach is only beginning to 
benefit from efforts to establish extensive empirical validation. But the components that 
make up this treatment have achieved wide and deep empirical support, and initial outcomes 
of this protocol are promising. What is new about this approach is the systematic 
manner in which the treatment components are applied across disorders, as well as theoretical 
developments leading to reconceptualization of the principal target of treatment 
as a common, higher order temperament undergirding disorders of emotion rather than 
specific DsM‑defining system clusters. The major advantage, of course, in addition to 
greatly simplifying dissemination by eliminating numerous overlapping single‑disorder 
protocols, is that this approach also takes into consideration the extensive comorbidity 
often found among emotional disorders. This approach is illustrated in the treatment of 
“Joseph.”—D. H. B. 

When the first edition of this book was published 
in 1985 it was the dawn of evidence-based psychological 
treatments. Descriptions of only those treatments 
with sufficient empirical support that were broadly applicable 
to large numbers of individuals with various 
forms of psychopathology at that time were included. 
Over succeeding editions of this book some new treatment 
approaches with wide appeal and strong empirical 
support have been added, whereas others have been 

deleted. In addition, the field has matured to the point 
where public health services around the world have 
directed that evidence-based psychological treatments 
become an integral part of health care delivery systems 
due to their effectiveness, efficiency, and durability 
(Clark, 2012; Nathan & Gorman, 2007; Ruzek, Karlin, 
& Zeiss, 2012). It is also a sign of the maturity of a field 
to examine closely the limitations of existing evidence. 
Obviously, a considerable number of patients still do 

237 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

not respond as well as would be desirable to our current 
arsenal of psychological (or drug) treatments, and there 
is plenty of room for improvement. 

Another problem that has become apparent, particularly 
in the context of emotional disorders, is that there 
now exists a plethora of treatment protocols for each of 
the discrete anxiety and mood disorders. Although these 
protocols, by and large, have proven useful and been 
well received, it takes a significant amount of training to 
become sufficiently familiar with the distinct protocols 
to integrate them into clinical practice (Barlow, Bullis, 
Comer, & Ametaj, 2013). Unless these treatments 
become more “user-friendly” as recommended, clinicians 
are less likely to have a sufficient understanding 
of, or access to, these evidence-based treatments for 
the emotional disorders (McHugh & Barlow, 2012). 
In this chapter, we present a unified protocol (UP) for 
the transdiagnostic treatment of emotional disorders. 
“Emotional disorders” in our conception include not 
only the anxiety, depressive, obssessive–compulsive, 
and trauma-related disorders but also other classes of 
disorders in which the experience and regulation of 
emotion plays a prominent role, such as the somatic 
disorders, dissociative disorders, and, to some extent, 
the eating disorders. Borderline personality disorder 
can also be conceptualized as a disorder of extreme 
emotional dysregulation (Sauer-Zavala & Barlow, 2013; 
Neacsiu & Linehan, Chapter 10, this volume) and may 
fit within our UP conceptualization. Our science and 
practice have advanced sufficiently that there are now 
several strong arguments for developing such an approach, 
in addition to the very practical advantage of 
substantially reducing the number of existing protocols. 
We touch on these arguments here before describing the 
treatment components of the UP in some detail, in keeping 
with the long-standing format of this book. 

ratioNale for a uNifieD aPProach 

Perhaps the strongest argument for a unified transdiagnostic 
treatment approach to emotional disorders is an 
emerging body of evidence supporting commonalities 
in the etiology of these disorders that we have summarized 
recently in the form of a new etiological model referred 
to as “triple vulnerability” (Barlow, 1991, 2000, 
2002; Suárez, Bennett, Goldstein, & Barlow, 2009). Of 
course, it is important to note that shared etiological 
pathways or pathophysiological processes are not yet 
firmly established, and that emotional disorders and 

their subtypes may each turn out to be associated with 
unique underlying pathology (reflecting a true categorical 
organization) with identifiable taxa. Yet we believe 
that the evidence on shared pathological processes is 
sufficiently strong at present to justify a transdiagnostic 
treatment approach. 

A second argument focuses on conceptions of the 
major emotional disorders that emphasize their commonalities 
rather than their differences. The “spectrum” 
approach is one manifestation of this conception. 
For example, high rates of comorbidity suggest considerable 
overlap among disorders. The observed effects 
of current psychological treatments on comorbid conditions 
also point to at least a partial nonspecificity 
of treatment response. From a phenomenological perspective, 
emerging research on the latent structure of 
dimensional features of emotional disorders reveals a 
hierarchical structure that can accommodate these disorders. 
The sections to follow briefly review evidence 
relevant to these arguments. 

Etiology 

We have described in some detail an interacting set 
of vulnerabilities or diatheses relevant to the development 
of anxiety, anxiety disorders, and related emotional 
disorders. This “triple vulnerability” theory 
encompasses a generalized biological vulnerability, a 
generalized psychological vulnerability, and a specific 
psychological vulnerability emerging from early learning 
(Barlow, 2000, 2002; Suárez et al., 2009). Much 
of the research on generalized biological and psychological 
vulnerabilities has focused on a temperament 
labeled, variously, “neuroticism,” “negative affect,” 
“behavioral inhibition,” or “trait anxiety.” Although 
the relationships among these closely related traits and 
temperaments have yet to be worked out fully, it seems 
that they substantially overlap and represent a common 
theme associated with a biological vulnerability 
to develop emotional disorders (Barlow, 2000, 2002; 
Campbell-Sills, Liverant, & Brown, 2004; Suárez et 
al., 2009). We have come to refer to this temperament 
by its most traditional label “neuroticism” (Barlow, 
Sauer-Zavala, Carl, Bullis, & Ellard, in press; Eysenck, 
1947). A generalized biological vulnerability involves 
nonspecific genetic contributions to the development 
of neuroticism. Additionally, early life experiences fostering 
a sense that events, particularly negative events, 
are unpredictable or uncontrollable, contribute to a 
generalized psychological vulnerability, or diathesis, 


Emotional Disorders 

to develop neuroticism later on. If a generalized biological 
and a generalized psychological vulnerability 
happen to line up and are potentiated by the influence 
of life stress, the likely result is a development of the 
two closely related clinical syndromes of generalized 
anxiety disorder (GAD) and/or depressive disorders. 
Notice that false alarms (panic attacks) may also occur 
as a function of stressful life events, facilitated by high 
levels of baseline anxiety. But these false alarms seem 
to have a different heritability than anxiety and are not 
necessarily implicated in a clinical disorder. For that 
to occur, an additional layer of a more specific psychological 
vulnerability must be considered. In particular, 
certain learning experiences seem to focus anxiety on 
specific life circumstances, and these circumstances or 
events are associated with a heightened sense of threat 
or danger. For example, specific early learning experiences 
seem to determine whether individuals may view 
somatic sensations, intrusive thoughts, or social evaluation 
as specifically dangerous (Barlow, 2002; Bouton, 
Mineka, & Barlow, 2001); that is, to take one example, 
individuals with social anxiety often have in their background 
admonitions from parents or family always to 
be on their best behavior and to look their best, to avoid 
the dreaded consequence of being negatively evaluated 
or “disapproved of” by others. It is this specific psychological 
vulnerability that, when coordinated with the 
generalized biological and psychological vulnerabilities 
mentioned earlier, seems to contribute to the development 
of discrete anxiety disorders such as social 
anxiety disorder, panic disorder, and specific phobias. 
This model is also applicable to obsessive–compulsive 
and trauma and stressor-related disorders. For instance, 
in obsessive–compulsive disorder (OCD), individuals 
often report learning from authority figures that having 
a thought is as bad as engaging in the action (i.e., 
having the thought about shaking a newborn infant to 
quiet it is as bad as actually shaking the infant). Existing 
evidence for this “triple vulnerability” model has 
been reviewed in detail elsewhere (Bouton et al., 2001; 
Chorpita & Barlow, 1998; Suárez et al., 2009) and is 
consistent with the overriding importance of common 
factors in the genesis and presentation of emotional disorders. 


Latent Structure of the Emotional Disorders 

Whereas the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of 
Mental Disorders, fourth and fifth editions (DSM-
IV-TR and DSM-5; American Psychiatric Associa


tion, 2000, 2013) highlight a “splitting approach” to 
nosology, in an attempt to achieve high rates of diagnostic 
reliability, this achievement may have come at 
the expense of diagnostic validity; that is, the current 
system may be highlighting categories that are minor 
variations of more fundamental underlying syndromes. 
Quantitative approaches using latent variable methodology 
are now capable of examining the full range of 
anxiety and mood disorders, and their interrelationships, 
without the constraints of existing (possibly) artificial 
categories (Brown, Chorpita, & Barlow, 1998; 
Chorpita, Albano, & Barlow, 1998; Clark, 2005; Clark 
& Watson, 1991; Watson, 2005). We have been studying 
this question for a number of years. For example, 
Brown and colleagues (1998), using a sample of 350 
patients with DSM-IV anxiety and mood disorders, 
confirmed a hierarchical structure to the emotional disorders. 
In this structure, trait negative affect and trait 
positive affect were identified as crucial higher-order 
factors to the DSM-IV disorder factors, with significant 
paths from negative affect to each of the five DSM-IV 
disorder factors (GAD, social phobia, panic disorder, 
OCD, and major depression). Interestingly, low positive 
affect emerged with significant paths to major depression 
and social phobia only. In this model, autonomic 
arousal represents the phenomenon of panic, and this 
arousal emerges as a lower-order factor with significant 
paths from panic disorder and GAD (where the relationship 
was negative). 

A separate study followed 606 patients with DSM-
IV anxiety and mood disorders over the course of 2 
years found further support for this hierarchical model 
(Brown, 2007). Replicating earlier cross-sectional findings, 
the two higher-order temperament dimensions of 
neuroticism/behavioral inhibition/negative affectivity 
and behavioral activation/positive affectivity accounted 
for virtually all of the covariance among DSM-IV 
disorder constructs (GAD, social phobia, and major 
depression). Furthermore, the rate of change in neuroticism/
behavioral inhibition over the study period accounted 
for virtually all of the covariance among the 
rate of change in DSM-IV disorder constructs. Findings 
such as these suggest that commonalities among 
emotional disorders outweigh the differences. We have 
concluded from this research that DSM-IV emotional 
disorder categories are best considered as useful concepts 
or constructs that emerge as “blips” on a general 
background of neuroticism/behavioral inhibition but 
may not be the best way to organize nosology (Brown 
& Barlow, 2009). 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

Overlap among Disorders 

At the diagnostic level, the overlap among the emotional 
disorders is most evident in the high rates of current 
and lifetime comorbidity (e.g., Brown, Campbell, 
Lehman, Grisham, & Mancill, 2001; Kessler et al., 
1996; Roy-Byrne, Craske, & Stein, 2006; Tsao, Mystkowski, 
Zucker, & Craske, 2002, 2005). Results from 
Brown, Campbell, and colleagues (2001) indicate that 
55% of patients with a principal anxiety disorder had 
at least one additional anxiety or depressive disorder 
at the time of assessment. But if one examines for the 
presence of a disorder over the lifetime of the patient, 
whether it is present or not at the time of interview, this 
rate increases to 76%. To take one example, 60% of 324 
patients diagnosed with panic disorder with or without 
agoraphobia (PD/A) were determined to meet criteria 
for either an additional anxiety or mood disorder, or 
both. Specifically 47% presented with an additional 
anxiety disorder and 33% with an additional mood 
disorder. When lifetime diagnoses are considered, the 
percentages rise to 77% experiencing any anxiety or 
mood disorder, breaking down to 56% for any anxiety 
disorder and 60% for any mood disorder. If posttraumatic 
stress disorder (PTSD) or GAD were the principal 
(most severe) diagnoses, comorbidity rates were 
highest. Merikangas, Zhang, and Aveneoli (2003) followed 
almost 500 individuals for 15 years and found 
that relatively few people suffer from anxiety or depression 
alone. When a single disorder did occur at one 
point in time, the additional mood state would almost 
certainly emerge later. 

Several possible explanations for these high rates of 
comorbidity have been reviewed extensively elsewhere 
(Brown & Barlow, 2002). Among these are relatively 
trivial issues with overlapping definitional criteria; artifactual 
reasons, such as differential base rates of occurrence 
in our setting; and the possibility that disorders 
are sequentially related, and that the features of 
one disorder act as risk factors for another disorder. 
For example, depression seems to follow PDA, and 
PDA seems to follow PTSD. But the more intriguing 
explanation, for our purposes, first offered by individuals 
such as Gavin Andrews and Peter Tyrer (Andrews, 
1990, 1996; Tyrer, 1989; Tyrer et al., 1998), is that this 
pattern of comorbidity argues for the existence of what 
has been called a “general neurotic syndrome.” Andrews 
and Tyrer have suggested that the difference in 
the expression of emotional disorder symptoms (individual 
variation in the prominence of social anxiety, 

panic attacks, anhedonia, etc.) is simply a trivial variation 
in the manifestation of a broader syndrome. This, 
in turn, is consistent with “triple vulnerability” models 
mentioned earlier, that anxiety (and mood) disorders 
emerge from shared psychosocial and biological/genetic 
diatheses. If this is the case, then a unified treatment 
protocol cutting across current diagnostic categories 
to address core features of the anxiety and mood 
disorders could be a more parsimonious, and, perhaps, 
powerful option. 

We have reviewed the genetic and neurobiological 
evidence on the commonalities among anxiety 
and depressive states in some detail elsewhere (Barlow, 
2002, Chaps. 3, 6, 7, & 8; Bouton, 2005; Brown, 
2007; Suárez et al., 2009). For example, most work on 
genetic contributions to anxiety and depression supports 
the early dictum of Ken Kendler (1996; Kendler 
et al., 1995), “same genes different environment” 
(Hettema, Neale, & Kendler, 2001; Rutter, Moffit, & 
Caspi, 2006). Consistent with a theory of an underlying 
genetic vulnerability, genetic variations have been 
linked to both trait anxiety and negative emotionality 
(or neuroticism) (Montag, Fiebach, Kirsch, & Reuter, 
2011; Stein, Campbell-Sills, & Gelernter, 2009), and 
have been found to influence the later development of 
psychopathology following life stressors (Caspi et al., 
2003). Recently, a growing body of literature in genetics 
has observed links between genetic polymorphisms 
and both the function and structure of neural pathways 
implicated in emotional processing, suggesting an association 
between a genetic predisposition, inefficient or 
maladaptive emotion processing, and the development 
of emotion disorders. For example, genetic variations 
have been associated with hyperactivation in neural 
structures implicated in emotion generation (Drabant 
et al., 2012; Lonsdorf et al., 2011; Munafò, Brown, & 
Hariri, 2008), reduced gray matter volume in limbic 
regions, and reduced functional connectivity between 
emotion-generating regions and structures implicated 
in their inhibitory control (Pezawas et al., 2005). 

Increased perceptions of emotions as uncontrollable 
and intolerable, increased avoidant processing, 
and increased attempts at emotional control have also 
been demonstrated across disorders (Campbell-Sills, 
Barlow, Brown, & Hofmann, 2006a, 2006b; Weinberg 
& Hajcak, 2010; Weiser, Pauli, Weyers, Alpers, 
& Mühlberger, 2009). Intolerance of uncertainty and 
distress has been demonstrated across a full range of 
disorders, including depression, GAD, social anxiety, 
and OCD (Boelen, Vrinssen, & van Tulder, 2010; Bo



Emotional Disorders 

swell, Thompson-Holland, Farchione, & Barlow, 2013; 
Lee, Orsillo, Roemer, & Allen, 2010). In addition, a 
growing number of studies have shown that individuals 
with anxiety and mood disorders tend to use maladaptive 
emotion regulation strategies, including attempts to 
avoid or dampen the intensity of uncomfortable emotions, 
that ultimately backfire and contribute to the 
maintenance of their symptoms (e.g., Campbell-Sills et 
al., 2006a, 2006b; Liverant, Brown, Barlow, & Roemer, 
2008; Mennin, Heimberg, Turk, & Fresco, 2005; Tull 
& Roemer, 2007). Taken together, the evidence from 
genetics, neuroscience, behavioral studies, and psychopathology 
research suggests that a common, overlapping 
feature across disorders is the propensity toward 
increased emotional reactivity and inefficient or deficient 
regulatory control that is coupled with a heightened 
tendency to view these experiences as aversive 
and is manifest in attempts to alter, avoid, or control 
emotional responding. 

In summary, the existing literature supports several 
arguments for stepping back from individual DSM diagnostic 
categories and associated disorder-specific 
psychological protocols, and considering a more unified 
transdiagnostic approach based on new findings on 
the nature of psychopathology and from the emerging 
field of emotion science. In addition, current evidencebased 
cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) protocols for 
emotional disorders have much in common and reduce 
to three broad principles of change: altering emotionbased 
misappraisals of salient events; preventing avoidance 
of negative, emotionally charged internal or external 
triggers, as well as modifying emotion-driven 
behaviors (EDBs) and facilitating extinction of fear; 
and reducing anxiety and distress over the experience 
of intense emotion. A full explanation of this protocol 
and a description of its application with a patient follows. 


treatMeNt variaBles 

Setting 

All assessments and treatments of patients are conducted 
in the Center for Anxiety and Related Disorders 
(CARD) at Boston University. Our clinic receives over 
500 new admissions per year, with many patients being 
offered treatment after their initial intake assessments. 
CARD, in addition to housing staff psychologists and 
a psychiatrist, is also a training center for doctoral 

students and psychiatric residents. At any given time, 
numerous National Institutes of Health (NIH)–funded 
treatment and research studies are ongoing at the Center. 
Regarding diagnostic breakdown of treatmentseeking 
patients, the most common diagnosis assigned 
is GAD, followed by social phobia, PD/A, specific 
phobia, OCD, and PTSD, but the full range of “neurotic 
spectrum” disorders are assessed and treated. A 
small percentage of patients are assigned “coprincipal 
diagnoses,” which refers to cases in which two separate 
diagnoses are judged to be of equal severity. 

Prior to the intake evaluation, each patient is mailed 
a packet of questionnaires to complete and bring to the 
assessment, which are scored and interpreted subsequent 
to the interview. The majority of the intake appointment 
comprises administration of the Anxiety 
Disorders Interview Schedule (for DSM-5 [ADIS-5; 
Brown, Di Nardo, & Barlow, 2014] or for DSM-IV 
[ADIS-IV; Di Nardo, Brown, & Barlow, 1994]). Following 
completion of the entire assessment process, 
consensus diagnoses are determined during a weekly 
staff meeting, after which the patient is provided diagnostic 
feedback and treatment recommendations. 
Based on the information from the interview, the patient 
may be offered one of several treatment options at 
the Center, or a referral in the community. 

Format 

Treatment with the UP is typically conducted in an 
individual format, although it has been successfully 
conducted in a group format with patients with mixed 
principal emotional disorder diagnoses. The treatment 
described in this chapter reflects the individual treatment 
protocol, which allows for greater attention to the 
description and application of treatment components 
during each session. However, when administered in a 
group setting, patients are easily able to see the commonalities 
among their diverse presenting complaints, 
and this understanding often creates a strong bond 
among group members. Therefore, it may be useful to 
adapt the protocol for group treatment as we have done 
at CARD. 

Therapist Variables 

The UP has been administered by therapists with varying 
degrees of clinical experience and expertise with 
the protocol. To our knowledge, both junior therapists 
(even therapists who have never had experience with 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

cognitive-behavioral treatments) and senior therapists 
(i.e., therapists with at least 4 or more years of treatment 
experience) have been able to adapt to the UP 
without significant difficulty. Certainly, a background 
in cognitive-behavioral techniques may be helpful 
when utilizing the protocol (e.g., facilitating cognitive 
reappraisal, and designing and conducting exposures). 
Evidence suggests some benefit to therapist experience, 
at least when treating PDA with a highly structured 
CBT protocol (Huppert et al., 2001). 

The UP is an emotion-focused treatment approach; 
that is, the focus of every exercise is on eliciting and 
changing responses to a variety of emotions and emotional 
cues. Perhaps one of the most challenging aspects 
for the therapist is to be able to create and utilize 
emotion-provoking exposures effectively, which begin 
early in treatment and continue throughout its course. 
Most importantly, the therapist must have a sense of 
when a patient is avoiding the process of experiencing, 
expressing, or accepting emotions, and this is often signaled 
by very subtle behavioral cues, such as avoiding 
eye contact, changing the topic of discussion, arriving 
late for a session, and not completing (or “overdoing”) 
homework assignments. Each of these behaviors represents 
attempts to control uncomfortable emotions 
through either direct avoidance or overcontrol. It is essential 
that the therapist be able to recognize and address 
such behaviors when they occur, thereby allowing 
the opportunity for an effective emotion exposure and 
discussion of avoidance to facilitate emotional processing. 


A second challenge for the therapist is to be able to 
tolerate and experience the expression of emotion by 
the patient. It is common for less experienced therapists 
to quickly “rationalize away” the patient’s emotional 
reactions; however, this only feeds into the cycle of 
emotions and avoidance. At every step, the therapist 
should encourage the expression and acceptance of 
emotion, while guiding the patient in how to “examine” 
it, without letting the emotion “take over.” In such 
cases, modeling from a senior therapist and/or extensive 
supervision may be helpful instruction for less experienced 
therapists in how to allow their patients to be 
“emotional.” 

Client Variables 

As previously mentioned, the rate of comorbidity 
among patients with a principal anxiety or mood disorder 
is approximately 55% (Brown, Campbell, et al., 

2001), depending on the principal diagnosis. In most 
CBT protocols, comorbid diagnoses are never a focus 
of treatment, although successful treatment of a principal 
anxiety disorder often results in decreases in comorbidity 
(e.g., Allen et al., 2010; Brown, Antony, & 
Barlow, 1995). One advantage of a unified treatment 
approach is that symptoms related to comorbid diagnoses 
can be discussed in treatment sessions and may 
even be the focus of an emotion exposure. For example, 
a patient with GAD who experiences chronic worry 
about daily matters may also feel anxious in social situations. 
Therefore, that patient’s in-session emotion exposure 
might comprise a conversation with a stranger 
or giving a speech to a small group of people. Contrary 
to traditional protocols, it is the experience of any emotion 
that is the target of treatment, which may be particularly 
beneficial for patients with significant comorbidity 
or for those who would like to address multiple 
concerns during the course of treatment. 

Concurrent Drug Treatment 

Many patients who present for treatment are also taking 
some form of psychoactive medication. At CARD, 
patients are required to have stabilized on the dosage 
of medication prior to the intake interview, so that 
the therapist has a clear picture of actual symptoms 
(as opposed to symptoms that may be caused by the 
initial addition or removal of a medication). Whereas 
concurrent use of medications such as tricyclic antidepressants 
and selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors 
(SSRIs) does not appear to have a negative impact on 
treatment outcome initially, once the medications are 
removed, evidence suggests that patients who received 
medication alone or CBT in addition to medication are 
more likely to relapse (e.g., Barlow, Gorman, Shear, & 
Woods, 2000; Heimberg et al., 1998; Liebowitz et al., 
1999). The exact mechanisms underlying the return 
of symptoms are unclear, although some authors have 
suggested that patients may attribute the success of the 
treatment to the use of medication and, once it is withdrawn, 
no longer believe they have the ability to manage 
their symptoms. However, in a recent investigation 
using data from a multisite comparative study for the 
treatment of panic disorder, results indicated that patients 
who received CBT plus pill placebo were equally 
likely to believe they had received medication as patients 
who had actually received the medication (Raffa 
et al., 2008). Yet those in the CBT plus placebo condition 
were less likely to relapse compared to those who 


Emotional Disorders 

had received either CBT plus medication or medication 
alone. Therefore, it appears unlikely that the higher relapse 
rates in the medication conditions were due solely 
to this “attribution hypothesis.” One other hypothesis 
to explain greater relapse in patients receiving psychopharmacological 
treatment is that the medication 
provides an unintended “protective” effect against increased 
physiological arousal and anxiety. However, 
eliciting anxiety and panic is a core component of CBT 
protocols, so patients taking medication (1) may have 
experienced greater physical sensations when the medication 
was removed and/or (2) were never able fully to 
confront the physiological arousal and panic during the 
course of treatment. However, these hypotheses have 
yet to be fully investigated. 

One additional consideration is the use of benzodiazepines 
on a p.r.n., or “as needed,” basis during the 
course of treatment. Following conceptions outlined in 
the UP, any strategy used to reduce the intensity of emotions 
in the moment is considered an emotional avoidance 
strategy, and ultimately contributes to increasing 
levels of anxiety and emotional reactivity. Therefore, 
the use of benzodiazepines (or other fast-acting medications) 
is discouraged, particularly if the medications 
are carried with the person as a “safety signal.” 

assessMeNt 

Case Study 

Joseph is a 25-year-old, single man who, at the time 
of intake, worked as a freelance music teacher and an 
independent musician, occasionally performing his 
music at small local venues. Joseph came to our Center 
seeking help for long-standing, debilitating emotional 
issues that were standing in the way of his ability to 
attain personal and professional goals. Joseph reported 
a long history of struggles with anxiety and depression 
that were exacerbated and compounded by issues with 
his physical health. 

During his intake interview, Joseph reported significant 
and oftentimes paralyzing social anxiety, describing 
significant fear of being evaluated negatively, 
and of others seeing him as a burden or “in the way.” 
This fear had caused him to avoid important social engagements 
throughout his life, such as birthday parties 
or other special occasions, and he often turned down 
invitations for casual gatherings at bars or at friends’ 
homes. He found himself becoming increasingly iso


lated because of this, and felt that some of his friends 
were “giving up” on him. In addition, his fears of being 
burdensome to others prevented him from asserting 
himself, which would often cause significant interference. 
For example, Joseph reported that he wanted to 
find a job as a music teacher for elementary schoolchildren, 
but asking others to provide information that was 
necessary for the completion of job applications, which 
was nearly impossible for him, would cause Joseph 
to miss deadlines or promising opportunities. Joseph 
noted that he has experienced social anxiety his whole 
life, but that it became more intense for him following 
a diagnosis of diabetes when he was 9 years old. He 
described always feeling like a burden on others since 
that time, and feeling like he was always “in the way.” 
Notably, these feelings extend even to walking down 
a public sidewalk—one of his most feared situations 
is inadvertently bumping into someone walking in the 
other direction, for fear that he has inconvenienced or 
caused that person to judge him negatively. Joseph reported 
that his social anxiety currently is more interfering 
than ever, as it is preventing him from finding work, 
and his social life is now “nonexistent.” 

In addition, Joseph described significant embarrassment 
related to symptoms of irritable bowel syndrome 
(IBS), which had begun 5 years previously. Specifically, 
Joseph noted that he avoids any situation from which 
he cannot leave if he begins to experience stomach 
problems. He avoids eating all fruits or any type of food 
that might trigger bloating or loose bowels and reports 
that he wakes up 3 hours before he needs to leave for 
work in order to use the bathroom several times before 
leaving the house, in an attempt to avoid having any unexpected 
bowel movements while in public situations. 
He estimated using the bathroom up to five times each 
morning before leaving for work. In addition, Joseph 
reported that his fear of having an unexpected bowel 
movement has prevented him from traveling long distances 
in cars, attending movies or sporting events, or 
engaging in any activity where quick access to a restroom 
is not possible. He reported that his greatest fear 
related to these symptoms was that he would embarrass 
himself in front of others, either by becoming flatulent 
or losing control of his bowels altogether. 

Joseph also described significant anxiety and worry 
about a number of different areas in his life. He worries 
about making small mistakes in his work, such 
as grammatical errors. He worries about his potential 
performance at work should he secure a teaching position, 
fearing that he would ultimately get fired from his 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

job for some mistake he might make. Joseph worries 
about his finances and being able to support himself, as 
well as about the health of his parents and their wellbeing. 
He also reported worrying about community and 
world affairs but noted that he controls these worries by 
“avoiding the news at all costs.” Joseph reports that his 
worries are difficult to control, and they interfere with 
his ability to concentrate. He feels restless, tense, irritable, 
and often has trouble sleeping when he worries. 
He noted that he spends about 90% of the average day 
worrying about something, and that these worries have 
interfered with his social life, his overall well-being, 
and his ability to find a job. 

Joseph also described significant anxiety related 
to intrusive doubting thoughts, and thoughts that he 
might cause accidental harm to others. He described 
difficulty leaving his house in the morning for fear that 
he might inadvertently leave the stove on or the house 
unlocked, leaving his roommates vulnerable to fire or 
burglary. These thoughts drive him to check repeatedly 
to see that he has locked doors, extinguished candles, 
or turned off the oven and stove sufficiently, which can 
take up to an hour. Joseph also notably never received 
his driver’s license for fear that he might accidently run 
someone over or cause an accident while driving. He 
reported that his doubting thoughts and thoughts of accidentally 
causing others harm are extremely distressing 
to him and make him feel like he is an awful person 
who cannot be trusted. 

Finally, Joseph reported feelings of depression and 
lack of interest in activities for the past year, since graduating 
from college. He often has difficulty sleeping at 
night and reports sleeping too much during the day. He 
experiences a feeling of “heaviness” and lack of energy, 
has difficulty concentrating on things. He experiences 
constant feelings of guilt and worthlessness, and has 
periodic thoughts of suicide, although he reported no 
plan or intent. Joseph reported that every few weeks 
he cuts himself on his legs and chest using a singleedged 
razor, in order to relieve tension and calm himself 
down. Joseph stated that although his feelings of 
depression are “bothersome,” he is also “used to them” 
because they have been present much of his life. 

Objective assessment of Joseph’s emotional state via 
self-report questionnaires resulted in a score of 51 on 
the Social Interaction Anxiety Scale (SIAS; Mattick & 
Clarke, 1998), reflecting severe social anxiety; a score 
of 49 on the Beck Depression Inventory–II (BDI-II; 
Beck, Steer, & Brown, 1996), reflecting severe depression; 
and a score of 80 on the Penn State Worry Ques


tionnaire (PSWQ; Meyer, Miller, Metzger, & Borkovec, 
1990), reflecting moderate to severe levels of worry. 
His score on the Work and Social Adjustment Scale 
(WSAS; a modification of a scale introduced by Hafner 
& Marks, 1976) suggested that Joseph was experiencing 
severe interference in his life from these emotional 
symptoms. A diagnostic interview using the ADIS-IV 
revealed a principal diagnosis of social anxiety disorder 
at a clinical severity rating (CSR; described below) 
of 7, and additional diagnoses of GAD (CSR = 6), OCD 
(CSR = 5), and major depressive disorder (MDD; CSR 
= 5). 

Interviews 

A number of structured and semistructured clinical 
interviews may be appropriate for diagnosing Axis I 
disorders. The Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-
IV (SCID; First, Spitzer, Gibbon, & Williams, 1996) is 
widely used and assesses diagnoses. Because this interview 
is highly structured and focuses only on current 
symptom count, it achieves a high degree of interrater 
reliability for many diagnoses. However, this interview 
does not include dimensional ratings of frequency and 
severity of symptoms, so it may be less useful for more 
detailed profiling of emotional disorders. 

The Anxiety Disorders Interview Schedules for DSM 
(ADIS-5; Brown, Di Nardo, & Barlow, 2014), a semistructured, 
diagnostic clinical interview, focuses on 
DSM diagnoses of anxiety, OCD and related disorders, 
and trauma- and stressor-related disorders and their accompanying 
mood states, as well as somatic symptoms 
and dissociative disorders, and substance and addictive 
disorders. The information derived from the interview 
using the ADIS allows clinicians to determine differential 
diagnoses and gain a clear understanding of the 
level and severity of each diagnosis. We refer to the updated 
DSM-5 version from this point forward. Principal 
and additional diagnoses are assigned a CSR on a scale 
from 0 (No symptoms) to 8 (Extremely severe symptoms), 
with a rating of 4 or above (Definitely disturbing/
disabling) passing the clinical threshold for DSM 
diagnostic criteria. Inquiries about suicidal ideation are 
part of this interview. The ADIS-IV has demonstrated 
excellent to acceptable interrater reliability for the anxiety 
and mood disorders (Brown, Di Nardo, Lehman, & 
Campbell, 2001). 

Two additional clinician-rated measures that provide 
a wider range of scores are the (1) Structured Interview 
Guide for the Hamilton Anxiety Rating Scale (SIGH



Emotional Disorders 

A; Shear, Vander Bilt, & Rucci, 2001) and the (2) Structured 
Interview Guide for the Hamilton Depression 
Rating Scale (SIGH-D; Williams, 1988). The SIGH-A 
was developed to create a structured format for administering 
the Hamilton Anxiety Rating Scale (HARS; 
Hamilton, 1959). Respondents are asked to indicate the 
presence and severity of a number of symptoms that 
may have been present over the past week, including 
anxious mood, tension, sleep problems, irritability, and 
so forth. The rater is also asked to rate the interview 
behavior of the patient. The SIGH-A includes specific 
instructions on administration and anchor points for 
assigning severity ratings. This measure demonstrated 
good interrater and test–retest reliability (Shear et al., 
2001). In addition, scores are similar to (although consistently 
higher than) the HARS. 

Similar to the SIGH-A, the SIGH-D was developed 
to provide more specific instructions for administration 
and scoring of the Hamilton Depression Rating 
Scale (HDRS; Hamilton, 1960). Again, patients are 
questioned about the presence and severity of a range 
of depressive symptoms over the past week, including 
depressed mood, suicidal ideation, fatigue, feelings of 
hopelessness, weight loss, and so forth. The SIGH-D 
also demonstrated good interrater and test–retest reliability, 
and produces scores similar to the HDRS (Williams, 
1988). 

Medical Evaluations 

Medical evaluations are generally recommended prior 
to assignment of diagnoses and initiation of treatment 
to rule out organic causes for symptoms of emotional 
disorders. Some conditions, such as hypothyroidism, 
hyperthyroidism, hypoglycemia, mitral valve prolapse, 
or alcohol or substance withdrawal, may elicit symptoms 
similar to those associated with GAD or PDA. Although 
the diagnosis of such medical conditions does 
not preclude the need for a psychological treatment, it 
is generally recommended that such conditions be examined 
by a physician because an alternative treatment 
may be clinically indicated. 

Self‑Monitoring 

Self-monitoring forms are an important part of the 
treatment protocol for several reasons. First, the therapist 
is able to discuss specific situations or events that 
occurred over the past week and may have contributed 
to emotional reactions. Such records can facilitate dis


cussions of concepts presented during the treatment 
sessions and help the therapist integrate the general 
treatment components into the patient’s specific symptoms. 
Second, some evidence suggests that patients’ 
retrospective recall of past episodes of anxiety may 
be inflated, particularly when recalling panic attacks 
(Margraf, Taylor, Ehlers, Roth, & Agras, 1987; Rapee, 
Craske, & Barlow, 1990). Self-monitoring forms allow 
for a prospective, and possibly more accurate, account 
of anxiety episodes and may therefore be more useful 
therapeutically. In addition, consistent with the themes 
outlined in the UP, practicing awareness of emotions in 
the present moment is believed to be an important component 
of changing maladaptive patterns of emotional 
responding. The very nature of self-monitoring requires 
patients to disengage, even briefly, from the habitual 
anxious process to write down concrete thoughts, feelings, 
and behaviors, helping them to begin to adopt a 
more objective stance toward their own emotional experiences. 
Developing this habit will ultimately aid patients 
in beginning to change emotional reactions and 
resulting behaviors. 

Treatment forms used in the UP include selfmonitoring 
forms for emotional awareness, automatic 
appraisals, emotion avoidance, as well as forms tracking 
interoceptive and situational exposure. Figure 6.1 
illustrates the Monitoring Emotions and EDBs in Context 
(MEEC) form used in the UP. This form is given 
for several weeks at the beginning of treatment to begin 
to orient patients to tracking their own emotional responses. 
As new skills are introduced (i.e., cognitive 
reappraisal, changing EDBs), new self-monitoring 
forms typically replace the MEEC. For instance, once 
the skill of altering action tendencies associated with 
emotions is introduced, patients are asked to monitor 
situations, EDBs, and identify a new response incompatible 
with the original EDB on the Changing EDBs 
monitoring form (see Figure 6.2). 

Several problems may arise with the introduction 
and completion of self-monitoring forms. First, some 
patients may not be compliant with completion of monitoring 
forms and homework assignments, which is an 
important issue to be addressed in the therapy session. 
Adopting a motivation enhancement approach, eliciting 
reasons underlying the patient’s ambivalence regarding 
completing the homework or monitoring can 
be a valuable technique (i.e., eliciting reasons why the 
patient might not wish to complete the homework and 
perceived benefits to not completing it). This process is 
crucial as it allows the therapist to identify maladaptive 


A’sAntecedents 
R’sResponses 
C’sConsequences 
Date/Time Situation/Trigger Thoughts Feelings Behaviors What happened next? 

figUre 6.1. Monitoring Emotions and EDBs in Context (MEEC) form. 

246 


Situation/Trigger Emotion EDB New (incompatible) response Consequence 

figUre 6.2. Changing EDBs monitoring form. 

247 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

cognitive appraisals and emotional reasons contributing 
to the lack of completion of monitoring forms. Once 
such reasons are identified, therapeutic strategies such 
as cognitive reappraisal may also be used to increase 
patients’ willingness to complete homework forms 
by addressing some of the reasons for noncompliance 
raised by the patient. Furthermore, selectively reflecting 
the benefits of completing the homework and the 
costs associated with noncompliance can help to build 
motivation to complete homework forms. In some 
cases, especially when patient self-efficacy for completion 
is low, completion of homework forms themselves 
may become an emotion exposure, and progress toward 
this goal should be reinforced accordingly. 

Another common problem with the completion of 
self-monitoring may be the tendency for some patients 
(particularly those with more obsessive or “perfectionistic” 
features, commonly seen in GAD and OCD) to 
“overdo” the homework forms; that is, the patient may 
write an extremely long and involved description of a 
situation and his/her reactions to it. This is common 
with patients who feel a need to “unload” every piece 
of information about the event. Although the patient 
is doing the homework, his/her overengagement may 
also be facilitating the anxious/worry process. If this 
becomes evident, the therapist may want to discuss the 
tendency to overengage in the homework as an emotional 
avoidance strategy (or as an EDB) and encourage 
patients to try to monitor situations and events 
using one- or two-word descriptions, or even implement 
a time limit to help ensure that patients do not 
spend lengthy periods of time generating their descriptions. 


Questionnaires 

In our research we employ a number of self-report 
questionnaires over the course of treatment. We describe 
most of them here, realizing that for purely clinical 
purposes only a subset would be needed. Two general 
(diagnosis nonspecific) questionnaires designed to 
measure symptoms and impairment associated with 
those symptoms are administered weekly prior to session 
to track symptoms and impairment across the 
course of treatment. A larger questionnaire battery is 
administered pre-, mid-, and posttreatment, and every 
four sessions during treatment, in order to gain a more 
comprehensive picture of patients’ presenting concern, 
as well as their overall functioning and quality 
of life. This battery comprises general questionnaires 

(measures designed to assess a range of symptoms associated 
with anxiety and mood disorders, as well as 
disorder-specific measures designed to track symptoms 
associated with specific disorders). 

Weekly General Measures 

The Overall Anxiety Severity and Impairment Scale 
(OASIS; Norman, Cissell, Means-Christensen, & Stein, 
2006), a brief, five-item questionnaire developed as a 
continuous measure of anxiety-related symptom severity 
and impairment, can be used across anxiety disorders, 
with multiple anxiety disorders, and with subthreshold 
anxiety symptoms. This measure has good 
internal consistency, excellent test–retest reliability, 
and convergent and divergent validity (Campbell-Sills 
et al., 2009; Norman et al., 2006). The Overall Depression 
Severity and Impairment Scale (ODSIS; Bentley, 
Gallagher, Carl, Farchione, & Barlow, 2013), a direct 
adaptation of the OASIS, is modified to be applicable 
for depression. It is a brief, five-item questionnaire that 
assesses dimensional depression-related symptom severity 
and impairment that can be used across depressive 
disorders, with varied comorbid presentations, and 
with subthreshold depressive symptoms. Both measures 
focus on severity of and impairment associated 
with particular symptoms over the past week, offering 
a general, diagnosis nonspecific measure designed to 
track changes as they occur over the course of treatment. 


Additional General Measures 

In the Positive and Negative Affect Schedule—Trait 
version (PANAS; Watson, Clark, & Tellegen, 1988), a 
brief, reliable, and valid measure of positive and negative 
affect, individuals rate how frequently they experience 
20 feeling or emotion words in general. The 
PANAS assesses core negative affect and deficits in 
positive affect in those disorders with this characteristic 
(i.e., agoraphobia, social anxiety disorder, depression) 
and is useful in determining changes in positive 
and negative affect over the course of treatment. In an 
effort to establish degree of interference from symptoms 
in various domains of living, the WSAS (Hafner 
& Marks, 1976) includes five items that ask participants 
to rate the degree of interference caused by their 
symptoms in work, home management, private leisure, 
social leisure, and family relationships. The WSAS, a 
descriptive measure of subjective interference in vari



Emotional Disorders 

ous domains of living, has been successfully used in 
previous studies (e.g., Brown & Barlow, 1995). 

Quality of Life and Well-Being Measures 

The Quality of Life and Enjoyment Satisfaction Questionnaire 
(QLESQ; Endicott, Nee, Harrison, & Blumenthal, 
1993), a 14-item measure that assesses enjoyment 
and satisfaction across different life areas in the 
past week, is widely used and has been validated for 
use in clinical populations and shown to be sensitive 
to change (Endicott et al., 1993). The Mental Health 
Continuum—Short Form (MHC-SF; Keyes, 2005, 
2006; Keyes et al., 2008; Lamers, Westerhof, Bohlmeijer, 
ten Klooster, & Keyes, 2011; Westerhof & Keyes, 
2009) is a 14-item measure designed to assess social, 
emotional, and psychological well-being. The measure 
has shown excellent internal consistency and discriminant 
validity in both adolescents and adults in the United 
States, the Netherlands, and South Africa (Keyes, 
2005, 2006; Keyes et al., 2008; Lamers et al., 2011; 
Westerhof & Keyes, 2009). 

Diagnosis-Specific Measures 

In addition to the general (diagnosis nonspecific) measures, 
it is important to assess symptoms specific to the 
individual’s specific diagnostic presenting concerns. 
We use the following measures that assess symptom 
severity over the past week and can be administered 
both as self-report and clinician-rated measures, increasing 
their clinical utility. The Yale–Brown Obsessive–
Compulsive Scale–II (Y-BOCS-II; Storch, Larson, 
Price, Rasmussen, Murphy, & Goodman, 2010) 
is a revised version of the Y-BOCS (Goodman et al., 
1989), designed to assess the presence and severity of 
OCD symptoms. 

The Panic Disorder Severity Scale (PDSS; Shear et 
al., 1997), a seven-item scale, provides ratings of the 
core features of panic disorder (panic frequency, distress 
during panic, anticipatory anxiety, panic-related 
avoidance of situations and sensations) and the degree 
of work and social impairment/interference due to 
PD/A (Shear et al., 1997). 

The Liebowitz Social Anxiety Scale (LSAS; Liebowitz, 
1987) is a widely used 24-item scale designed 
to assess the range of social interaction and performance 
situations that patients with social anxiety may 
fear and/or avoid (Heimberg et al., 1999; Safren et al., 
1999). 

The Generalized Anxiety Disorder Severity Scale 
(GADSS; Shear, Belnap, Mazumdar, Houck, & Rollman, 
2006) is a six-item assessment that evaluates the 
core features of GAD. 

The PTSD Symptom Scale (PSS; Foa, Riggs, Dancu, 
& Rothbaum, 1993) is a 17-item measure designed to 
assess DSM-IV symptoms of PTSD. Each item, corresponding 
to the symptoms of PTSD, comprises one 
brief question that is rated from 0 (Not at all) to 3 (5 or 
more times per week/Very much). This measure yields 
a total PTSD severity score, as well as Reexperiencing, 
Avoidance, and Arousal subscores (Foa & Tolin, 
2000). 

Functional Analysis 

Regardless of the diagnosis, a clear functional analysis 
of the patient’s behavior is essential prior to beginning 
treatment. Several components are important to consider 
when diagnosing a patient based on a functional 
analysis. These include a close examination of symptom 
topography (including duration of illness, physical 
sensations, level of distress and interference from 
symptoms), triggers (situations, physical symptoms, 
places, thoughts, etc.), cognitions (beliefs about symptoms 
and misappraisals), behavioral responses to emotions 
(including avoidance of situations, places, people, 
or triggers, as well as escape behaviors), and the consequences 
of behavioral reactions (limiting quality of 
life, reduced “comfort zone,” etc.). 

Joseph, at the diagnostic level, met criteria for several 
distinct anxiety and mood disorders. His primary 
concern involved anxiety and avoidance of social situations 
due to fears of being judged or disliked by others. 
These fears had been present since Joseph was a 
young child and clearly fit with a diagnosis of social 
phobia. However, Joseph also experienced anxiety related 
to intrusive thoughts about causing potential harm 
to others. His intrusive doubting thoughts and thoughts 
of accidental harm to others, coupled with a number 
of compulsive checking behaviors, which took up at 
least an hour per day, were consistent with a diagnosis 
of OCD. Joseph also presented with significant anxiety 
and uncontrollable worry about his ability to perform 
well at work, his finances, and the health of his family, 
along with several associated physical symptoms. 
These worries, although involving social situations to 
some degree, also included more diffuse worries related 
to potential future negative outcomes. These worries 
were present even outside the context of a depressive 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

episode. Thus, an additional diagnosis of GAD was 
also assigned. Finally, Joseph’s reported symptoms of 
depression in the past year, along with accompanying 
lack of interest in activities, sleep difficulties, lack of 
energy, and poor concentration, resulted in a diagnosis 
of MDD. 

Whereas Joseph’s symptoms merited the assignment 
of multiple co-occurring disorders, it is important 
to note that at the phenomenological level, these 
diagnosis-specific symptoms tended to interact and exacerbate 
one another, such that each disorder-specific 
cluster of symptoms was not necessarily occurring in 
isolation. This was an important consideration for treatment, 
and it provided a strong argument for a unified, 
transdiagnostic approach. For example, Joseph’s low 
self-esteem, driven by his depressogenic ruminations, 
fueled his sense of being “less than” and increased the 
perceived potential to be evaluated negatively by others. 
This anxiety focused on negative evaluation in turn 
increased Joseph’s more general anxiety and fueled his 
EDBs, for example, checking, which was often set in 
motion as a way to control a feared potential outcome 
of doing something wrong (checking locks to prevent 
loss of property), causing real harm to others (prevent 
fire by checking stoves, candles, etc.), or embarrassing 
himself in public (using the bathroom several times 
before work to prevent a flare-up of IBS symptoms). 
These anxieties were in turn congruent with his beliefs 
about himself as being “in the way” and a “bad person.” 
Joseph’s vigilance relative to his IBS symptoms was 
also fueled by anxiety related to negative evaluation, 
and an increased focus on his physical symptoms was 
usually coupled with increased levels of anticipatory 
anxiety. Joseph’s worries about potential future failures 
at work, his finances, and his family’s health were also 
congruent with a general belief that he would inevitably 
do something wrong and cause the “bottom to fall 
out,” or that some negative, unexpected outcome was 
always on the horizon. Joseph linked this sense of unpredictability 
and uncontrollability to his childhood diagnosis 
of diabetes, which also was his earliest memory 
of being “in the way.” He recalled several childhood 
incidents in which the adults in his life appeared “put 
out” by having to monitor his eating and insulin levels; 
he recalled developing a sense that he was a burden 
on others, although he recalled his sense of being “less 
than” developing much earlier on. Thus, all of these 
beliefs, behaviors, and physiological responses were interacting 
in Joseph’s emotional experiences, regardless 
of their specific diagnostic classification, and affecting 

his ability to function in an adaptive way. Treatment 
of Joseph’s symptoms with the UP, which focuses on 
how the interactions of thoughts, feelings and behaviors 
at any given moment influence overall emotional experiences 
and subsequent actions, allowed us to target 
Joseph’s phenomenological patterns of dysfunction directly 
rather than focus on one diagnosis-specific cluster 
of symptoms at a time. 

coMPoNeNts of treatMeNt 

The structure of the UP outlines five core treatment 
modules and three additional modules, designed to be 
delivered in 12–18, 50- to 60-minute individual treatment 
sessions, held on a weekly basis. Final sessions 
may be held every other week to allow patients to consolidate 
gains and to provide somewhat of a “taper” off 
the weekly therapy. This format for the final sessions 
is not a requirement, though, and it may be more beneficial 
for the patient to continue to have weekly sessions 
if he/she might potentially have trouble using the 
treatment concepts consistently without the weekly reinforcement 
of sessions. Therefore, spacing of the final 
sessions is determined by the therapist, who takes into 
consideration the patient’s progress and any anticipated 
difficulties after treatment. 

The five core treatment modules designed to target 
aspects of emotion processing and regulation are as follows: 
(1) increasing present-focused emotion awareness 
(Module 3); (2) increasing cognitive flexibility (Module 
4); (3) identifying and preventing patterns of emotion 
avoidance and maladaptive EDBs (Module 5); (4) 
increasing awareness and tolerance of emotion-related 
physical sensations (Module 6); and (5) interoceptive 
and situation-based emotion-focused exposure (Module 
7). Preceding these core components is a module 
focused on enhancing motivation and readiness for 
change and treatment engagement (Module 1), as well 
as an introductory module providing psychoeducation 
about the nature of emotions and a framework for understanding 
emotional experiences (Module 2). A final 
module reviews progress over treatment and develops 
relapse prevention strategies (Module 8). This treatment, 
which takes place in the context of provoking 
emotional expression (emotion exposure) through situational, 
internal, and somatic (interoceptive) cues, as 
well as through standard mood induction exercises, differs 
from patient to patient only in the situational cues 
and exercises utilized. In addition, “exposure” is not 


Emotional Disorders 

conceptualized as a mechanism of action. Rather, successfully 
provoking emotions creates a setting condition 
to implement the essential treatment components. 
Emotion exposures begin with general stimuli (e.g., 
mood induction and interoceptive provocation) and are 
later tailored to address each patient’s particular concerns 
and symptoms. Although each session addresses 
a specific component of the protocol, the expectation 
is that patients then “carry through” to future sessions 
the strategies they learn (e.g., patients learn cognitive 
reappraisal strategies in Module 4 but are expected to 
continue to use cognitive reappraisal throughout the remainder 
of treatment). 

Module 1: Motivation Enhancement 
for Treatment Engagement 

In this initial treatment module, which is grounded 
in the principles and therapeutic techniques utilized 
in motivational interviewing (MI; Miller & Rollnick, 
2013), therapists work to increase the patient’s readiness 
and motivation for behavior change, and to foster 
a sense of self-efficacy, or the patient’s belief in his/ 
her ability to change. This module was included in the 
protocol in reaction to recent research by Westra and 
colleagues (Westra, Arkowitz, & Dozois, 2009; Westra 
& Dozois, 2006) suggesting that MI may enhance the 
efficacy of CBT for anxiety disorders. This module utilizes 
two specific motivational exercises: (1) a decisional 
balance exercise, in which the therapist works with 
the patient to identify and weigh the pros and cons of 
changing versus staying the same; and (2) a treatment 
goal-setting exercise that helps patients more clearly 
articulate achievable and concrete goals for treatment. 
This module, and the principles and techniques contained 
therein, are primarily used to help “set the stage” 
for subsequent learning that takes in the core modules. 
However, the principles can also be applied throughout 
the course of treatment to enhance treatment engagement 
and maintain patient motivation for behavior 
change. 

Module 2: Psychoeducation and Tracking 
of Emotional Experiences 

Following the initial motivation enhancement session, 
patients are provided with psychoeducation about the 
nature and function of emotions. This component is 
common to most CBT protocols, although the focus 
is expanded to include the function of many different 

emotions (anger, sadness, etc.), in addition to the function 
of anxiety. In this module (which typically occurs 
over the course of one to two sessions), patients are 
provided information about the cognitive, physiological, 
and behavioral sequelae of emotional reactions and 
how these three components interact. It is important 
that the patient begin to consider that his/her reactions 
are functional and serve the purpose of providing information 
about the environment, in addition to protection 
from harm. This three-component model is then 
applied to a recent situation or event that the patient 
experienced, so that he/she may better understand the 
aspects of each component and how they interact. Patients 
also learn how to monitor and track more carefully 
their emotional responses and, as a result, are 
expected to develop greater awareness of their own 
patterns of emotional responding, including potential 
maintaining factors (e.g., common triggers and/or environmental 
contingencies). 

Another important aspect of psychoeducation is the 
concept of negative reinforcement. Specifically, this is 
a detailed discussion of how the patient’s behavioral response 
to an emotional episode (usually escape or some 
form of emotional avoidance) is problematic because it 
reduces the emotion in the short term (i.e., by removing 
the person from the emotional stimulus) but reinforces 
the cycle of emotions in the long term (i.e., by teaching 
the person that escape/avoidance is the only way 
to manage these feelings in the future). It is extremely 
important that the patient understand the connection 
between behavioral responses and reinforcement of 
emotion, so that he/she is better able to appreciate the 
purpose and function of emotion exposures introduced 
in future sessions. 

Module 3: Emotion Awareness Training 

The first core module (which typically occurs over the 
course of one to two treatment sessions) is designed 
to help patients further identify how they are reacting 
and responding to their emotions by promoting a 
more nonjudgmental, present-focused approach to the 
experience of emotions. Often, patients report feeling 
that their emotions are confusing, or that they seem to 
just happen “automatically,” and/ or in such way that 
they are outside of the patient’s immediate awareness 
(i.e., “unconsciously”). Through this module, patients 
learn to become more aware of the interaction among 
thoughts, feelings, and behaviors and to view their emotions 
in a more objective and present-focused manner. 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

This occurs within the specific context of the situation 
in which the emotional experience is unfolding. The 
focus on present-moment experiences is important and 
is believed to put the patient in a better position to more 
clearly identify patterns of emotional responding and/ 
or the emotion regulation strategies being employed in 
the particular situation. In turn, this renders the patient 
better able to modify the emotional response adaptively 
to make it more consistent or compatible with ongoing 
situational or motivational demands. Furthermore, secondary 
reactions to the patient’s emotional experiences 
are also explored, and the therapist introduces the idea 
that it is not the emotions per se that are problematic, 
but rather how the patient reacts to the emotion. As 
these reactions tend to be judgment-laden (e.g., seeing 
anxiety as a sign of one’s inability to cope an indication 
of weakness, or a sign of failure) and are often not 
based on information from the present-moment context, 
they can prevent the processing of potentially corrective 
information that would allow for a change in the 
emotional response. It is expected that as patients develop 
a more nonjudgmental stance toward their emotions, 
they will be better able to identify the specific 
thoughts, physical sensations, and behaviors that may 
be contributing to their distress, and thus be in a better 
position to implement strategies for adaptively altering 
their emotional response. These skills are developed 
through the practice of brief mindfulness and emotion 
induction exercises. 

Module 4: Cognitive 
Appraisal and Reappraisal 
(Increasing Cognitive Flexibility) 

Cognitive therapy, initially developed by Aaron T. Beck 
to treat depression (Beck, 1967; Beck, Rush, Shaw, & 
Emery, 1979; also discussed in-depth in Young, Rygh, 
Weinberger, & Beck, Chapter 7, this volume), has become 
a fundamental part of psychological treatments. 
Individuals with emotional disorders are likely to have 
appraisals and interpretations of external events that are 
characterized by cognitive biases, such as the tendency 
to overestimate the likelihood of the occurrence of 
negative events and to underestimate the ability to cope 
with these events. Thus, the aim of cognitive therapy is 
to evaluate objectively the likelihood of these negative 
appraisals and to incorporate more realistic, evidencebased 
appraisals of the outcome of a situation. On the 
surface, this technique may appear to be a way to suppress 
or control negative thoughts by “rationalizing” 

them, and occasionally, this is how cognitive therapy 
is incorrectly used, as noted by Hayes, Strosahl, and 
Wilson (1999). However, this strategy can also be conceptualized 
from an emotion regulation perspective, 
especially if reappraisals are considered one of many 
possible interpretations of a situation. 

The primary aim of this module is to foster greater 
flexibility in thinking (this module is typically administered 
in one or two sessions). This is accomplished 
first by helping patients develop an understanding of 
how they interpret or appraise situations, and how their 
appraisals influence patterns of emotional responding, 
then by teaching them to generate numerous alternative 
attributions and appraisals when experiencing strong 
emotional experiences. As their initial interpretations 
are typically more negative or anxious, patients are 
encouraged to be more flexible in their thinking (i.e., 
to generate alternative appraisals) and are taught reappraisal 
strategies. 

As adapted in our usage, the UP focuses on correcting 
two fundamental misappraisals often found in individuals 
with emotional disorders: the probability of a 
negative event happening (probability overestimation) 
and the consequences if the negative event does happen 
(catastrophizing) (Barlow & Craske, 2007; Craske 
& Barlow, 2006). Although a number of other misappraisals 
are noted in other, traditional CBT protocols, 
most misappraisals can be condensed into one of the 
two appraisals listed here. 

Module 5: Prevention of Emotion Avoidance 
and Modifying EDBs 

Module 5 generally comprises one to two sessions. The 
concept of emotion avoidance is likely to be particularly 
important for patients who do not physically avoid 
or escape situations but still experience high levels of 
anxiety without much relief. The therapist should convey 
that even if the person stays physically in the situation, 
he/she is likely to engage in a number of other 
subtle behaviors to prevent full emotional arousal. In 
the UP, emotional avoidance strategies are behaviors 
that prevent the full experience of emotion in a situation, 
as opposed to EDBs, which are behavioral consequences 
of the experience of emotion (described later 
in the chapter). Any technique or strategy the patient 
uses to reduce or to down-regulate emotions may be 
conceptualized as an emotional avoidance strategy, and 
it is essential that emotional avoidance be identified and 
eliminated prior to engagement in emotion exposures, 


Emotional Disorders 

to allow for full emotional processing. Therefore, a very 
detailed description of individual emotional avoidance 
strategies must be obtained for each patient. 

We have identified three general categories of emotion 
avoidance strategies: (1) subtle behavioral avoidance, 
(2) cognitive avoidance, and (3) safety signals (see 
Table 6.1 for examples). Subtle behavioral avoidance 
strategies may include a number of different behaviors, 
with certain behaviors occurring more frequently with 
particular disorders. For example, the avoidance of caffeine 
in panic disorder or social phobia (prior to a social 
engagement) is an attempt to keep physiological symptoms 
from becoming strong in anxiety-provoking situations. 
Patients with social phobia may also avoid eye 
contact or wear sunglasses when interacting in social 
settings. Individuals with GAD may excessively plan, 
prepare, or write “to do” lists in an attempt to control 

potentially negative outcomes. At the same time, procrastination 
is also a form of subtle behavioral avoidance, 
if a particular task or project seems too emotionally 
arousing for the patient. It is very important to 
conduct a functional analysis of the subtle behaviors to 
determine which ones are avoidance strategies, that is, 
behaviors that serve to reduce or avoid emotional experience 
and are functional responses to situations. And, 
notably, what may be an avoidance strategy for one person 
may be a functional response for another. Cognitive 
avoidance strategies are typically more difficult to identify 
because they tend to occur outside of the patient’s 
awareness. Some of these strategies include distraction, 
“tuning out,” and mentally checking lists or reviewing 
past conversations. However, data also suggest 
that worry and rumination actually function as a way 
to down-regulate and avoid emotions (e.g., Borkovec, 

table 6.1. examples of emotional avoidance strategies 

Emotional avoidance strategy Disorder most usually associated 

1. Subtle behavioral avoidance 
•• 
Avoid eye contact Social phobia 
•• 
Avoid drinking caffeine PDA 
•• 
Attempt to control breathing PDA 
•• 
Avoid exercise/physiological arousal (interoceptive avoidance) PDA/depression 
•• 
Avoid touching sink/toilet OCD 
•• 
Procrastination (avoiding emotionally salient tasks) GAD 
2. Cognitive avoidance 
•• 
Distraction (reading a book, watching television) Depression/PDA 
•• 
“Tune out” during a conversation Social phobia 
•• 
Reassure self that everything is OK GAD 
•• 
Try to prevent thoughts from coming into mind OCD 
•• 
Distraction from reminders of trauma PTSD 
•• 
Force self to “think positive” Depression 
•• 
Worry GAD 
•• 
Rumination Depression 
•• 
Thought suppression All disorders 
3. Safety signals 
•• 
Carry cell phone PDA/GAD 
•• 
Carry empty medication bottles PDA 
•• 
Hold onto “good luck” charms OCD 
•• 
Carry items that are associated with positive experiences GAD/depression 
(e.g., teddy bears, pictures) 
•• 
Have mace at all times PTSD 
•• 
Carry water bottle PDA 
•• 
Have reading material/prayer books on hand GAD 
•• 
Carry sunglasses or item to hide face/eyes Social phobia 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

1994). The function of worry is to enable the person 
to prepare for a possible threat. However, when someone 
experiences chronic worry and associated anxiety, 
his/her attention is focused on the future as opposed 
to the present moment. Research has shown that when 
confronted with an emotionally arousing event, chronic 
worriers do not experience the full emotional impact of 
that event because (1) they have been “bracing” themselves 
for something bad to happen, and (2) their focus 
has already shifted to other, future negative outcomes 
(Borkovec, Hazlett-Stevens, & Diaz, 1999). Therefore, 
the worry functions as a cognitive avoidance strategy 
and only serves as a maladaptive attempt to gain control 
over seemingly uncontrollable future events. Obsessions, 
common to individuals with OCD, may also 
function in a similar manner. 

Safety signals are most common to patients with 
PDA, although may also be present in individuals with 
GAD, OCD, or other emotional disorders. Safety signals 
include any object that the patient carries to feel 
more safe or “comfortable,” particularly if he/she is 
entering an emotionally arousing situation. Safety signals 
can range from actual medication (e.g., benzodiazepines 
for reducing physiological arousal or medications 
for gastrointestinal distress) to empty medication 
bottles, to “lucky” objects (a talisman, teddy bear, 
“lucky” pen, etc.). Regardless of the object itself, if its 
function is to help the patient reduce emotional arousal 
in the moment, then it also is problematic because it 
feeds into the cycle of negative reinforcement. 

In addition to changing patterns of emotion avoidance, 
this module also focuses on helping patients identify 
and subsequently change EDBs. Data and hypotheses 
from emotion science suggest that the most efficient 
and effective way to change emotions is by changing 
responses to them (Barlow, 1988; Izard, 1971); thus, it 
is conceivable that the mechanism of change during an 
exposure is to prevent the action tendency associated 
with a particular emotional experience. Over the past 
several decades, research has focused on these action 
tendencies, and changing action tendencies has become 
an important treatment component for anxiety, as well 
as other emotional disorders (Barlow, 1988; Linehan, 
1993). For example, Beck and colleagues (1979) based 
a large part of their treatment for depression on changing 
the action tendencies of their patients to behave in 
a “passive, retarded, and apathetic manner” (p. 312). 
More recently, behavioral activation strategies have 
become a central feature of newer treatments for de


pression (Dimidjian et al., 2006; Jacobson, Martell, & 
Dimidjian, 2001); for a more in-depth discussion, see 
Dimidjian, Martell, Herman-Dunn, and Hubley (Chapter 
9, this volume). 

To distinguish action tendencies from avoidance 
strategies (described earlier), the UP has termed these 
behavioral responses to emotions as “emotion-driven 
behaviors” (EDBs). Whereas the function of emotional 
avoidance strategies is to down-regulate or suppress 
emotions, EDBs include a specific set of “reactive” 
behaviors associated with each emotion. For example, 
the EDB for a panic attack is escape (fight or flight), 
whereas that for anxiety is hypervigilance. Similarly, 
the emotion of anger elicits an EDB of attacking– 
defending, and the EDB for sadness is cognitive, emotional, 
and physical slowing and withdrawal (see Table 

6.2 for examples of EDBs associated with different 
emotional disorders). It is important to note, however, 
that the therapist must focus on changing EDBs, in addition 
to preventing emotional avoidance. For example, 
a patient with social phobia may be able to maintain eye 
contact and fully engage in social situations but escape 
the situation when his anxiety rises to the level of panic. 
On the contrary, this same patient may be able to stay in 
the situation as long as needed, but he may be distracting 
himself the whole time or avoiding conversations 
with people. Clearly, both scenarios are problematic 
because the patient is preventing himself from learning 
that he can experience emotions at their fullest without 
leaving the situation. It should also be noted that, in 
practice, avoidance and EDBs may be difficult to distinguish, 
and this distinction can be downplayed with a 
given patient, if necessary or clinically relevant. 
After the concept of EDBs is introduced, patients 
begin to track EDBs on the self-monitoring forms and 
eventually focus on changing EDBs. This can be a very 
concrete exercise for the patient because he/she is instructed 
to “do something different than he/she would 
typically do.” The Changing EDBs monitoring form is 
illustrated in Figure 6.2. 

Module 6: Awareness and Tolerance 
of Physical Sensations 

This module (typically one session) was designed to 
increase patients’ awareness of the role of physical sensations 
as a core component of emotional experiences 
and to promote increased tolerance of these sensations. 
In this module, patients are asked to engage in a series 


Emotional Disorders 

table 6.2. examples of emotion-driven behaviors and incompatible behaviors 

Disorder 
most usually 
EDBs associated Incompatible behaviors 
Calling relatives to check on safety GAD Restricting contact/calling relatives 
Perfectionistic behavior at work or home GAD Leaving things untidy or unfinished 
Checking locks, stove, or other appliances OCD Repeatedly locking–unlocking and turning on–off until memory 
is unclear 
Leaving (escaping from) a theater, PDA Move to the center of the crowd. Smile or produce nonfearful 
religious service, or other crowded area facial expressions 
Social withdrawal Depression Behavioral activation 
Leaving (escaping) a social situation Social phobia Staying in situation and approaching people 
Verbally/physically attacking someone PTSD Remove self from situation and/or practice relaxation techniques 
when in an argument 
Hypervigilance All disorders Focus attention on specific task at hand; meditation; relaxation 

of interoceptive exposure (IE) exercises designed to induce 
physical sensations analogous to those typically 
associated with naturally occurring feelings of anxiety 
and emotional distress (e.g., shortness of breath, 
heart palpitations, dizziness), which themselves often 
become cues for anxiety through interoceptive conditioning 
(Barlow, 2002). Examples of IE exercises include 
hyperventilation, spinning (while standing and/ 
or in a chair), running in place, and breathing through 
a thin straw. The use of IE has largely been confined to 
the treatment of PDA, and has been shown to be effective 
in reducing panic attack frequency and the fear of 
physical sensations that occurs as a primary feature of 
the disorder (e.g., Barlow et al., 2000; Craske, Rowe, 
Lewin, & Noriega-Dimitri, 1997). However, given the 
fact that heightened physiological arousal, and sensitivity 
to physical sensations, is observed in other emotional 
disorders, IEs are applied across diagnoses, regardless 
of whether the physical sensations represent a 
specific focus of the patient’s anxiety. 

Module 7: Interoceptive 
and Situational Exposures 

In this final core module, treatment concepts are practiced 
and extended during in-session emotion expo


sures created by the therapist and individually tailored 
to the patient’s presenting symptoms (this module is the 
longest; typically lasting four to six sessions). Through 
exposure to both internal and external cues, patients 
ultimately increase their tolerance of intense and uncomfortable 
emotional experiences. In-session exposures 
can range from an imaginal exposure to a past 
emotional event (for PTSD or GAD), a conversation 
with a stranger (for social phobia), going into a dirty 
bathroom (for OCD), or watching a sad movie or movie 
clip (for MDD or dysthymia). Furthermore, for some 
patients, continued engagement in IEs may be indicated 
to promote greater tolerance of uncomfortable physical 
sensations. The goal of the exposures is gradually 
to introduce situations and experiences that serve as 
external triggers for emotional experiences. By eliciting 
the emotions that patients have been avoiding, they 
have the opportunity to practice the techniques taught 
in treatment (present-focused awareness, cognitive reappraisal, 
modifying EDBs, and prevention of emotion 
avoidance). In this sense, exposure to the emotion itself 
is the necessary mechanism of action for change. Thus, 
the actual situational context of the exposure becomes 
less important. Therapists must be creative in the design 
of the exposure to maximize the emotion provocation 
for the patient. 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

Module 8: Relapse Prevention 

Treatment concludes with a general review of treatment 
principles and a discussion of the patient’s progress 
(usually one session). In this module, therapist and 
patient identify specific strategies for maintaining and 
extending treatment gains and for responding to future 
difficulties that may arise. For instance, it is emphasized 
that a return of anxiety and/or mood difficulties 
does not reflect relapse and, instead, may be a more 
natural fluctuation of emotions that can be addressed 
using the skills developed in treatment. 

DetaileD DescriPtioN of Protocol 

The following session descriptions and accompanying 
transcripts are from the case of “Joseph,” described 
earlier, treated by one of the authors (K. K. E). 

Introduction: Overview of General Treatment 
Format and Procedures 

During the introductory session, the goals of the treatment 
program are identified and reviewed. The UP 
aims to help clients become aware of and better understand 
emotional experiences and reactions, and 
to counter maladaptive responses to uncomfortable 
emotions. Modifying maladaptive responses can help 
reduce the intensity and frequency of uncomfortable 
emotions, while still allowing clients to experience 
them in an adaptive way. It is also important to emphasize 
that modifying these responses can be challenging, 
and that change often does not occur in a linear fashion. 

Prior to the first treatment module, the therapist also 
provides a general introduction to treatment logistics, 
including general session length and structure, the role 
of therapist and client, and the importance of prioritizing 
treatment and completing out-of-session practice. 
The collaborative nature of treatment is emphasized, 
including the importance of feedback from the patient. 
Although the UP is ideally delivered in 12–18 sessions 
of 50–60 minutes each because the UP is based in a 
modular format, a flexible number of sessions can be 
used in each module, which may vary the total number 
of sessions across clients. 

Following this introduction to treatment is a detailed 
review of the presenting complaint. In this review, the 
therapist focuses on the emotions that result in the most 
distress and/or interference in the patient’s life, the 

situations and contexts in which those emotions occur, 
and how the patient has attempted to manage these 
emotions. Below, Joseph describes anxiety related to a 
new job opportunity: 

tHeraPist: You mentioned you recently were offered 
an opportunity to teach over the summer. Can you 
tell me more about that? 

JosePH: Well, I know I should be excited about it. 
It’s something I really want to do, teaching urban 
schoolkids music, but it’s stressing me out because I 
know I’m going to screw it up. 

tHeraPist: How so? 

JosePH: Well, in order to teach the class I need to 
schedule the classrooms and get supplies, but I don’t 
know who I’m supposed to talk to in order to arrange 
that, and I’m afraid if I send the person who hired me 
an e-mail, she is going to think I am stupid or incompetent, 
or that she made a mistake hiring me because 
I don’t know what I’m doing. 

tHeraPist: And how are you coping with the anxiety 
now? 

JosePH: Well, not very well, I think. I just feel like hiding, 
like this whole thing was a big mistake. I’m sort 
of hoping it will just work out somehow, but I don’t 
know how. I’ve been avoiding e-mailing her, but I 
haven’t talked to anyone else about it either. I keep 
waking up at night thinking about it, and it feels just 
like a pit in my stomach. 

tHeraPist: So it sounds like it is also affecting your 
sleep? 

JosePH: Yes. 

tHeraPist: Have you come up with any solutions to 
your problem yet? 
JosePH: No, I just feel like a deer in the headlights right 
now, like I’m frozen, stuck. 
tHeraPist: Have you thought about asking someone 
else at the school for advice? 
JosePH: No way, I could never do that! 

Note that in this early exchange, the therapist has 
already obtained important information about the patient’s 
emotional experiences and the ways in which he 
copes with uncomfortable emotions. In this case, Joseph 
is experiencing a great deal of anxiety related to a 
new job opportunity. The therapist is already gathering 
information about some of Joseph’s negative automatic 


Emotional Disorders 

appraisals (e.g., Joseph’s assumption that by asking for 
information or help, others will see him as incompetent), 
anxiety-related physical sensations (e.g., a “pit” in 
his stomach), and maladaptive behaviors (e.g., worry, 
rumination, avoidance, procrastination). The therapist 
is also able to elicit information about how helpful the 
patient’s current ways of responding to uncomfortable 
emotions are to him. In this case, Joseph is experiencing 
a great deal of anxiety but has been unable to come 
up with any solution to his problem, and is “frozen, 
stuck.” 

Although the therapist will spend a significant portion 
of the session reviewing Joseph’s presenting complaints 
and gathering additional information about his 
responses to emotions, this process will continue across 
the first several treatment sessions. As the therapist obtains 
additional information about strategies (adaptive 
or maladaptive) for managing emotions, emotional or 
situational avoidance, and engagement in EDBs, this 
is then integrated into the patient’s functional analysis 
and the treatment plan may be adjusted accordingly. 

Module 1: Motivation Enhancement 
for Treatment Engagement 

This module focuses on achieving the goals of preparing 
and developing each patient’s willingness to make 
identified behavioral changes, based on the MI principals 
and techniques developed by Miller and Rollnick 
(2013). Specifically, the principles of (1) expressing 
empathy, (2) developing discrepancy, (3) rolling with 
resistance, and (4) supporting self-efficacy are used in 
this module and throughout the course of treatment to 
support behavior change. In this module, the therapist 
explores motivational issues with the patient, through 
exercises designed to build motivation (through the 
Decisional Balance Worksheet) and to enhance selfefficacy 
(using the Treatment Goal-Setting Worksheet). 
The aim of these exercises is to highlight potential obstacles 
to change, as well as to identify specific, concrete 
goals, respectively. 

tHeraPist: Let’s take a look at your Decisional Balance 
Worksheet. You noted some pros for change, 
including being more social and working at a job you 
enjoy. What about some cons for change? 

JosePH: Well, sometimes it’s easier just to avoid dealing 
with these situations altogether. 

tHeraPist: Right, and it is important to note and be 

honest with yourself about this because there is part 
of you here that wants to change, and another part 
that has learned that, at least in the short-term, it’s 
easier to just stay the same. What about cons for 
staying the same? 

JosePH: Well, if I don’t ever face my anxiety, I might 
not ever get to have a social life, or the job I want. 

tHeraPist: So, on the one hand, you want to change 
how you deal with your anxiety so that you can have 
the life you want, and at the same time, this change 
is harder than just avoiding? 

JosePH: Yes, that’s right. 

tHeraPist: Acknowledging both of these parts of 
yourself is important because it is actually quite normal 
to have some apprehension or ambiguity about 
change. By being open with yourself about this, you 
are in a much better position to weigh out your decision 
whether or not to engage in treatment because 
it will be about weighing out a choice rather than 
judging yourself for success or failure. If you find 
yourself wavering during treatment, you will be able 
to recognize that this may be related to your feelings 
of apprehension or ambiguity about change, which 
is quite normal, and not because you are necessarily 
failing in some way. 

Module 2 

Understanding Emotions 

The therapist begins this module by providing psychoeducation 
about the nature of emotions and how they 
become disordered. It is important to highlight the 
functional, adaptive nature of emotions at the onset of 
this discussion for two reasons: (1) so the patient can 
understand why he/she would not simply want to eliminate 
emotions and (2) to explore the potentially important 
information provided by adaptive emotions. This 
second point is illustrated by the introduction of EDBs 
(behaviors that occur in response to emotions), so that 
the patient can see how emotion motivates specific responses 
to internal or external events or situations. 

Next, the three-component model of emotional experiences 
is described as a framework for examining 
emotions by dividing them into components (cognitions, 
behaviors, and physiological sensations), thereby 
making them more manageable. The therapist uses an 
example relevant to the patient’s experience to demonstrate 
the contribution of each component to his/ 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

her emotional experience. The therapist guides the 
patient in identifying each component in this example 
and presents the model as the structural basis for treatment. 
Each component is addressed separately over 
the course of treatment as contributing to the overall 
emotion and interacting with the other components. 
For homework in this section of the module, the patient 
is asked to complete a three-component model 
example in which he/she is asked to break down an 
emotion from the week into the three-component 
model presented in session, by recording the thoughts, 
behaviors, and physiological sensations specific to that 
example. 

tHeraPist: As we talked about, emotions at their core, 
even ones like anxiety, fear, anger, or sadness, are 
actually good things because they help us to function, 
and help us to navigate the world around us. 
The thing is, though, we also have reactions to our 
emotions. An emotion can trigger all sorts of associated 
thoughts, memories, physical sensations, and 
behaviors, oftentimes learned over a lifetime. The 
problem is, when we experience all of that at once, 
it can feel overwhelming, and we can get caught up 
in our emotional responses, and all of sudden these 
emotions feel like something we can’t cope with, that 
we have to get away from. Suddenly, the anxiety you 
feel about your new job isn’t functioning as a helpful 
way to motivate you to prepare for the future, 
which is, at its core, the adaptive function of anxiety. 
Instead, the anxiety is something paralyzing, something 
that is waking you in the night and making you 
feel “frozen.” 

JosePH: Right, and I just want it to go away. 

tHeraPist: Right. Instead of feeling helpful and useful, 
the emotion feels intolerable. So what we need 
to do is break down these emotional experiences 
into their component parts to help make them less 
overwhelming, and to help us identify how an emotion 
like anxiety goes from something adaptive and 
useful to something feared and avoided. As I mentioned, 
emotional experiences are made up of three 
main parts: thoughts, feelings, and behaviors. What 
we need to do is get you better at recognizing each 
of these parts, to make you a better observer of your 
emotional experiences. Then, throughout treatment, 
we’ll take a closer look at each of these components 
individually, to see how specific thoughts, feelings 

or physical sensations, and behaviors might be influencing 
your overall experience and causing the 
experience to go from something helpful and useful 
to something uncomfortable and unwanted. 

Recognizing and Tracking Emotional Responses 

An important step to gaining greater understanding of 
emotional experiences involves more closely monitoring 
when, where, and why the emotions are occurring. 
This is done through illustration of the ARC of emotions. 
In this illustration, it is critical that the therapist 
clearly work through an example with the patient, focusing 
on several important points. First, emotions are 
always triggered by some event or situation (internal or 
external), even though it may be difficult to identify that 
trigger initially. However, with repeated practice and 
awareness, it can get easier to identify specific triggers, 
and those are known as antecedents (“A” in ARC of 
emotions). Antecedents can occur immediately before 
the emotion is experienced (e.g., going into an elevator 
triggers a panic attack), or they may have occurred days 
or even longer before the emotion is experienced (e.g., 
an argument with a friend earlier in the week triggering 
an outburst at a loved one later on). Often, there are 
multiple antecedents, and may be both immediate and 
distal. The “R” of ARC of emotions is all responses to 
emotional experiences, including the thoughts, physiological 
sensations, and behaviors noted in the threecomponent 
model. Finally the consequences, or “C” of 
ARC of emotions, signify the short-term and/or longterm 
results of emotional responding. Consequences 
are often negative, but it is important that the therapist 
point out potential positive consequences of emotional 
responding (e.g., reduction in anxiety after escaping 
a difficult situation), as this process of negative reinforcement 
is usually maintaining the cycle of emotions. 

Expanding on this discussion, the therapist now introduces 
the concept of learned behaviors, essentially 
focusing on how the patient has learned responses to 
emotions that are usually an attempt to manage or control 
the emotions, but often end up leading the patient 
to feeling worse. Habitually responding to emotions 
prevents any new learning from taking place (i.e., that 
a situation is not as dangerous as it appears during the 
experience of a panic attack) and disables the patient 
from developing a way of coping. This process is what 
makes adaptive emotions and emotional responses maladaptive. 



Emotional Disorders 

Module 3: Emotion Awareness Training— 
Learning to Observe Experiences 

The goal of this module is to introduce the patient to the 
concept of emotion awareness and begin developing a 
regular practice of this skill. The therapist must convey 
that the emotion awareness skill is different than 
the patient’s current sense of his/her emotions. This 
skill allows the patient to see emotions from an objective 
and nonjudgmental perspective in order to better 
identify and alter maladaptive thoughts and behaviors. 
During this introduction, the therapist reviews the 
difference between primary emotions, which are the 
“first” emotional responses to a situation and memory 
(usually directly related to the situation or memory itself) 
and secondary reactions, which are reactions to 
primary emotions that tend to be judgment-laden and 
not based on the present-moment context. Secondary 
reactions are problematic because they can prevent receipt 
of corrective information about the current situation. 
Additionally, secondary reactions are typically 
evaluative and critical in nature, which further distances 
the patient from the potentially helpful or corrective 
information provided by the current situation or 
primary emotions, and tend to intensify or prolong the 
emotional experience. Using personal examples from 
the patient’s own experience to describe both primary 
emotions and secondary reactions can be very helpful 
in this discussion. 

When reviewing present-focused awareness, it is important 
that the therapist remind the patient of several 
important points. First, this type of practice may feel 
awkward or uncomfortable at first. The goal is not to 
be “perfect” at the exercise; rather, the patient should 
focus on becoming an objective observer of emotional 
experience, and start developing the ability to pay attention 
mindfully and in the moment. Second, informal, 
present-focused awareness practice is also important. 
The therapist can help the patient find a “cue” 
(e.g., the breath) to shift focus to the present moment, 
particularly in times of distress. The goal of this more 
informal practice is repeatedly to pair the patient’s chosen 
cue with a shift in attention and awareness to the 
present moment, by focusing on a sight, sound, or other 
sensation, so that engaging this cue will eventually be 
automatically paired with present-moment awareness. 
It is important that the therapist note that the breath (or 
other cue) should not be used as distraction—it should 
only be used as a cue to remind the patient to be mind


ful of the present moment. Eventually, once the patient 
has successfully conditioned this cue to help refocus on 
the present moment, the patient can learn to follow this 
with a brief “three-point check” of thoughts, physical 
sensations, and behaviors. By observing what is occurring 
in the moment within these three domains, the 
patient can begin to identify how responses in any of 
these domains may be affecting the overall emotional 
experience, to compare what is happening in these domains 
with information from the current context, and 
ultimately to identify and alter any maladaptive patterns 
of responding. 

These concepts are illustrated in session with the use 
of a specific nonjudgmental emotion awareness practice 
during formal mindfulness or awareness exercise. 
This may be a guided meditation or some other practice 
that allows the patient to focus on the present moment, 
while he/she notices and practices letting go of 
judgments and evaluation. After the patient has had a 
chance to practice this skill, the next practice involves 
using the skill to notice slightly stronger emotional experiences. 
It is often helpful to have the patient identify 
a salient piece of music to listen to in session; otherwise, 
the therapist can select a piece of music. At the 
conclusion of the music, the therapist helps the patient 
elicit thoughts, feelings, or other reactions and practice 
discussing this experience in an objective and nonjudgmental 
way. The following excerpt describes Joseph’s 
reaction to listening to a piece of music: 

tHeraPist: What did you notice when you were listening 
to the music? 

JosePH: I noticed my mind was sort of jumping from 

place to place. That was hard—observing my 

thoughts. 

tHeraPist: Although, it sounds like you were able to 
notice that your thoughts were jumping around a bit 
and hard to pin down. Since the goal of this exercise 
is to practice observing, even just noticing your 
thoughts have taken you somewhere else, even after 
it has already happened, counts. What about physical 
sensations—did you notice any of those? 

JosePH: I noticed when one of the instruments came in, 
I sort of felt it in my gut. 

tHeraPist: So just hearing that new sound brought 
about a physical sensation? 

JosePH: Yes. 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

tHeraPist: And what about behaviors, did you notice 
any behaviors, or any urges to do something? 
JosePH: Well, I noticed a couple of times just feeling 
uncomfortable and sort of wanting to move around. 

tHeraPist: And what about the music itself, were you 
able to listen to the music itself? 
JosePH: I think I was more sort of lost in my head. 

tHeraPist: This is what our emotions can do. An emotion 
can trigger all sorts of associated thoughts, feelings, 
and behaviors that have very little to do with 
what is happening “in the room,” yet the initially 
triggered emotion itself is connected to something 
occurring in the present moment, just like the music 
you were listening to, which was really just sounds 
happening in the present moment. Getting better at 
observing our reactions to the trigger (in this case, 
the music), can help us to see how many of our associated 
thoughts, feelings, and behaviors actually 
“fit” with the current context, and how many of them 
are just associations, which may or may not fit the 
current context at all. 

Module 4: Cognitive Appraisal 
and Reappraisal 

Cognitive appraisal first involves discussing the concept 
that interpretations depend, in large part, on which 
of the numerous aspects (or stimuli) a person chooses to 
focus on in any given situation. Focusing only on limited 
or specific aspects of a situation is critical for our 
survival. We would be overwhelmed by information if 
we focused on all stimuli everywhere we went. This 
process helps us quickly evaluate situations for risk and 
danger, and allows us to estimate what might happen 
in the future. This process usually happens outside of 
awareness. Importantly, the information we focus on 
and what we perceive as risky or dangerous tends to 
be the result of learned associations between specific 
information or stimuli and the affective or threat value 
of those stimuli. For example, if negative evaluation by 
others has been associated with threat in the past, an 
increase in vigilance for negative evaluation may result. 
Importantly, appraisals can have a powerful impact on 
our feelings or mood states, and vice versa. The therapist 
can illustrate this concept by inquiring how appraisals 
might vary depending on whether the patient 
was feeling joyful, sad, or angry. 

An in-session exercise is used to demonstrate the 
many possible different appraisals that can be gener


ated from a situation. The therapist shows the patient 
an “ambiguous” picture to which many cognitive appraisals 
can be assigned, instructs the patient to look at 
the picture for approximately 30 seconds, then elicits 
both the patient’s initial appraisal and at least two or 
three alternative appraisals. Additionally, the patient is 
asked what specifically may have contributed to the automatic 
appraisal (e.g., memories of similar situations, 
specific details in the picture). This exercise is used to 
demonstrate the way that situations can be interpreted 
in many ways, if all available information is considered. 


Automatic appraisals, interpretations of situations 
that happen very quickly, are often negative or pessimistic 
in nature. Core automatic appraisals (e.g., “I 
am a failure”) are appraisals that may be driving many 
emotional responses. It is helpful if the therapist can 
identify one or more core automatic appraisals by using 
the downward arrow technique instead of focusing only 
on surface-level appraisals related to a specific situation. 


Automatic appraisals can lead to a habitual and powerful 
heuristic that begins to exclude other, possibly 
more appropriate or realistic appraisals of a situation or 
event. These automatic appraisals are called “thinking 
traps,” because, over time, a patient may get “stuck” in 
this way of thinking. As described earlier, two common 
thinking traps, “probability overestimation” (jumping 
to conclusions), or the tendency to assume a high likelihood 
of the occurrence of a negative event, and “catastrophizing” 
(thinking the worst), or assuming that the 
consequences of an event will be beyond the individual’s 
ability to cope, are presented as two cognitive biases 
common to all emotional disorders. The therapist 
guides the patient in beginning to identify these biases 
in the context of his experience. Below, the therapist 
discusses both of these cognitive biases based on a recent 
situation in which Joseph was nearly hit by a car 
while crossing the street. 

tHeraPist: Tell me what happened when you were 
nearly hit by the car. 

JosePH: Well, I was crossing the street, and a car made 
an illegal right turn and nearly ran me over. My 
hands hit the hood of her car, and I could see the 
driver’s face yelling at me. 

tHeraPist: And what happened next? 

JosePH: Well, I noticed people on the sidewalk were all 
looking at me like I was a complete idiot, and I was 


Emotional Disorders 

so embarrassed I just ran home. I didn’t go out for the 
rest of the day, I just couldn’t face anyone. 

tHeraPist: Can you remember any of your thoughts 
at the time? 

JosePH: I just remember feeling like an idiot, like everyone 
was just staring at me and thinking what a 
jerk I am. 

tHeraPist: You mentioned you were crossing at a 
crosswalk—was the walk sign on to cross? 

JosePH: Yes. 

tHeraPist: And the driver, you mentioned the driver 
was taking an illegal turn? 

JosePH: Yes, there was a “No turn on red” sign. 

tHeraPist: So you had the right of way? 

JosePH: I guess so. 

tHeraPist: Let’s go back to the reaction of the people 
on the sidewalk—you said they were staring at you, 
thinking you were an idiot? 

JosePH: It seemed like it. 

tHeraPist: What evidence did you have to suggest the 
pedestrians thought you were an idiot? 

JosePH: I don’t know, they were just looking at me and 
pointing and frowning. 

tHeraPist: Do you know for certain that was what 

they were thinking? 

JosePH: Well, not for certain. 

tHeraPist: Exactly, because we actually don’t know 
what they were thinking. So one possibility is they 
thought you were an idiot, but can you think of any 
other possible thoughts that might have been going 
through their minds? If you were standing on the 
sidewalk and saw someone almost get run over in 
a crosswalk, what might some of your thoughts be? 

JosePH: Well, I guess I might be sort of alarmed, or 
hoping the person was OK. 

tHeraPist: If you saw someone crossing the street and 
they had the right of way and were nearly hit by a 
car making an illegal turn, how likely do you think 
it would be that you would be thinking that person 
is an idiot? 

JosePH: Not very likely, I would probably be more concerned. 


tHeraPist: But for you, at that moment, how much did 
it feel like that’s what the pedestrians were thinking 

about you, that you were an idiot, on a scale of 0% or 
not at all to 100% certain. 

JosePH: At that moment? Probably 80–90%. 

tHeraPist: And sitting here now, how likely do you 
think it is that the pedestrians were thinking you 
were an idiot, using the same percentage scale? 

JosePH: I don’t know, maybe 20%? 

tHeraPist: And at the time, what emotions were you 
experiencing? 

JosePH: Well, when she almost hit me, I think I felt 
fear. 

tHeraPist: Can you remember any physical sensations? 


JosePH: I think my heart was racing, and I remember 
feeling hot and shaky. 

tHeraPist: So when you were experiencing fear, and 
all of the associated physical sensations, the thoughts 
that came with that was that others perceived you as 
an idiot, in the wrong. And at the time, these thoughts 
felt like they were true. Now, sitting here, without the 
experience of fear or the associated physical symptoms, 
how likely do those thoughts feel? 

JosePH: Well, sitting here now, it doesn’t seem very 
likely they would be thinking I was an idiot if I almost 
got run over. It seems sort of extreme. 

The therapist discusses the importance of monitoring 
and recording automatic appraisals, in order to increase 
the patient’s awareness that these automatic appraisals 
are occurring, and reminds the patient that using the 
present-focused awareness skills learned in the previous 
module can help aid in this process—by anchoring 
in the present moment using the patient’s chosen cue 
(i.e., taking a deep breath and focusing attention on a 
sound or sensation occurring in the present moment), 
the patient can use the “three-point check” to observe 
what thoughts are occurring at that moment. The goal 
is to notice what automatic thoughts are occurring, 
then, using information from the current situation, consider 
other possible interpretations of what is occurring 
within the current context. In this way, the patient can 
more flexibly apply information from learned associations 
(i.e., memory) and information from the current 
context toward more adaptive appraisals. 

As the patient begins to record automatic appraisals, 
the therapist can help him/her begin to identify patterns 
in the automatic thoughts. The therapist provides guid



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

ance on identifying thinking traps and tries to focus the 
patient’s attention on the “core” appraisal through the 
use of “downward arrow” Socratic questioning. The 
excerpt below is from a discussion of Joseph’s fears of 
having a flare-up of his IBS symptoms and needing to 
use the bathroom in the middle of a party. 

tHeraPist: You’ve talked about how your IBS symptoms 
have kept you from going to parties. What specifically 
concerns you about your IBS symptoms and 
parties? 

JosePH: Well, that I’ll be there at a party and all of a 
sudden I’ll have to run to the bathroom. 

tHeraPist: And what concerns you about that? 

JosePH: Well, people will notice me rushing to the 
bathroom. 

tHeraPist: And what? 

JosePH: And they’ll know I’m in there using the bathroom. 


tHeraPist: And what concerns you about that? 

JosePH: They’ll think I’m disgusting. 

tHeraPist: And what does that mean to you? 

JosePH: That I’m gross and worthless. No one will 
want anything to do with me. 

tHeraPist: Now that is what we want, the real core of 
it, what is driving this interpretation. A lot of these 
anxious thoughts you’ve recorded often do come 
down to feeling worthless. So you think, “If I can’t 
control my bowels, I am going to have to use the 
bathroom, and if I have to use the bathroom people 
are going to reject me as disgusting and worthless.” 
Of course, anyone would be anxious about going to a 
party with that type of appraisal. 

As demonstrated earlier, the therapist then engages 
the patient in a more detailed discussion of this core 
cognitive reappraisal, focusing on flexible thinking. 
Countering probability overestimation and decatastrophizing 
strategies are presented as a way to generate 
alternative appraisals and to place less focus on the 
automatic appraisal. Countering probability estimation 
involves drawing on past evidence to examine how 
realistic the patient’s estimation is when experiencing 
an emotion. The therapist guides the patient in making 
concrete estimations and comparing the original 
estimation to a more realistic one. Decatastrophizing 
involves helping the patient to identify his/her ability 

to cope with the feared situation using past evidence 
and specific examples (e.g., similar experiences in the 
past). It is important to communicate that these strategies 
do not eliminate negative appraisals, but they 
provide greater flexibility and allow the patient to gain 
perspective on the feared situations, using more accurate 
information as a guide rather than being caught up 
in overlearned automatic appraisals. 

Module 5 
###CUT###
Emotion Avoidance 

The therapist now introduces the concept of emotional 
avoidance, describing how avoidance is harmful 
in the long term, despite potentially providing some 
short-term relief. As noted earlier, types of avoidance, 
including subtle behavioral (e.g., procrastination), cognitive 
(e.g., distraction) and safety signals (e.g., carrying 
a medication bottle), are introduced. It is important 
that the patient understand why and how avoidance is 
problematic. The therapist explains that avoidance (1) 
prevents habituation to a feared stimulus, so that fear 
levels are maintained at a high or constant level while 
in contact with the stimulus; (2) interferes with the process 
of extinction, so that the conditioned association 
between the cue and fearful response is maintained instead 
of weakened; and (3) prevents the patient from 
developing a sense of control or self-efficacy in managing 
the fear because positive outcomes are attributed to 
the avoidance strategy. The therapist asks the patient 
to generate personally relevant examples of avoidance 
and discusses how those strategies have maintained the 
cycle of emotions. 

tHeraPist: We’re going to shift our focus now and 
look at how behaviors contribute to your emotional 
experiences. First, let’s talk about avoidance. Sometimes 
you might do things to avoid having to feel an 
uncomfortable emotion to begin with. For example, 
you mentioned that having to reach out to your coworkers 
at the school to get information about something 
you don’t know is very anxiety provoking for 
you, and brings about appraisals like they will think 
you are incompetent or stupid, correct? 

JosePH: Yes, like the supplies I need for my class. I 
need more music books for the kids but I don’t know 
if I’m supposed to go get them myself, or if I’m supposed 
to order them through the school, or how I’m 
supposed to pay for them. I know I should just e-mail 


Emotional Disorders 

[his supervisor], but since she never mentioned anything 
about ordering supplies I’m afraid she’s going 
to think I’m stupid or asking too much, that I should 
be taking care of it myself instead of asking her. 

tHeraPist: So you avoid asking her, in order to avoid 
having to feel anxious or “stupid.” This is a good example 
of one of the ways we can actively do things to 
avoid uncomfortable emotions. There are also some 
behaviors that can be more subtle, things we aren’t 
even aware we are doing as an avoidance strategy. 
For example, someone who has panic attacks might 
avoid caffeine so they don’t have to feel the physical 
sensations of increased arousal. Can you think of 
any examples of more subtle ways you may be avoiding 
uncomfortable emotions? 

JosePH: Well, when you said that, I immediately 
thought of fruit. I haven’t eaten fruit in 2 years because 
I’m afraid it will make my IBS symptoms flare 
up. 

tHeraPist: So you’re trying to avoid bloating and 
cramping? 

JosePH: Well that, and probably more important, I’m 
trying to avoid embarrassing myself in public! 

tHeraPist: So you can see, we have subtle and more 
overt ways of avoiding uncomfortable emotions, 
but the question is, does it make the problem go 
away? 

JosePH: Well no, I still don’t know what I’m going to do 
about ordering books, and I guess I’m still worried 
about my IBS even without eating fruit. 

tHeraPist: So you can see, avoidance might make the 
problem go away in the short term, but in the long 
term this strategy is not particularly helpful and may 
even make the situation worse. In fact, these avoidance 
behaviors can strengthen the association of fear 
and anxiety with these situations—the more you 
avoid e-mailing your supervisor, the more anxiety 
provoking the thought of contacting her gets. 

JosePH: True, now it’s just looming out there and feels 
even worse. 

Next, in-session exercises to demonstrate the effects 
of emotional avoidance are conducted. The first exercise 
involves asking the patient directly to suppress a 
thought, such as asking the patient to think of anything 
at all for the next 30 seconds, but not to allow him/ 
herself to think about a white bear (Wegner, Schneider, 

Carter, & White, 1987). In this classic example, patients 
report great difficulty not thinking about a white 
bear and continually experience recurrent images or 
thoughts about a white bear throughout the experiment. 
The effectiveness of suppression strategies is then discussed. 
Second, the same exercise is conducted but the 
patient is asked to suppress a personally relevant and 
distressing memory or thought. Joseph, for example, 
had been actively trying not to think about an e-mail he 
had sent to his supervisor, asking for information about 
how to order supplies for his students. He was worried 
that he might have come across as incompetent, and 
that she would respond negatively to his e-mail. The 
same “white bear” experiment was conducted with this 
thought: Joseph was asked to think about anything he 
wanted to for 30 seconds, but not to think about this email. 
Predictably, Joseph found it extremely difficult to 
prevent ruminations about his supervisor’s potential reactions 
from coming into his mind. Thus, this exercise 
presents a poignant and personally relevant demonstration 
of the futility of active attempts to avoid distressing 
topics or situations. 

Emotion-Driven Behaviors 

The concept of EDBs was introduced earlier in treatment 
(Module 2), and the goal of this module is to 
focus on EDBs in greater detail and learn to identify 
and counter maladaptive EDBs. The therapist begins 
with a review of adaptive and nonadaptive EDBs. 
Again, an EDB to escape a situation when experiencing 
panic may be adaptive if a person is encountering a 
direct threat to his/her safety; however, an EDB to escape 
when panicking is maladaptive if there is no clear 
threat present. In the latter example, the panic and resulting 
EDB is an example of a “false alarm.” The therapist 
can then explain how EDBs are established and 
maintained through the concept of negative reinforcement. 
Similar to emotional avoidance, habitual reliance 
on EDBs does provide some relief in the short term, 
and can therefore become a powerful learned response 
that maintains the cycle of emotions. At this point, the 
patient is asked to generate examples of EDBs from 
his/her experience and discuss how negative reinforcement 
may be contributing to emotional distress. In the 
transcript below, Joseph describes personal examples 
of EDBs, including repeatedly using the bathroom in 
an attempt to control his IBS, and engaging in checking 
behaviors in response to doubting thoughts and fears of 
disappointing or causing harm to others. 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

tHeraPist: You mentioned you are getting up several 
hours before you need to leave for work. Can you tell 
me what you are doing during that time? 

JosePH: Well, like I said, once I go to work it is hard 
for me to use the bathroom, so I want to make sure 
I have used the bathroom before I leave the house. 

tHeraPist: And how many times are you using the 
bathroom before you leave? 

JosePH: About five or six times. 

tHeraPist: And what caused you to start going five or 
six times, instead of just the once? 

JosePH: Well, in the beginning, I’d go once, but then 
I would start worrying about if I need to go again, 
so then I’d go again. Then I go back and forth for a 
while, worrying about if I’ve gone enough, then go 
again, then worry .. . 

tHeraPist: And how do you know you’ve gone enough 
times? 

JosePH: I never really know for sure, but at some point 
I just have to leave the house or I’ll be late for work. 
That’s why I started getting up earlier, to make sure 
I have enough time to use the bathroom. 

tHeraPist: And what would happen if you went only 
once? 

JosePH: That would make me very anxious, I couldn’t 
do that. 

tHeraPist: And in that moment when you are experiencing 
uncertainty about whether or not you have 
gone enough times, what emotions come with that? 

JosePH: I start feeling anxious. 

tHeraPist: And what do you do when you start to feel 
anxious? 

JosePH: I go again. 

tHeraPist: And does that make you feel less anxious, 
at least in the short term? 

JosePH: Yes, it makes me feel like I have some control 
over it. 

tHeraPist: This is what we refer to as an EDB. What 
happens is, when you allow yourself to use the bathroom 
again in response to the worry about not having 
gone enough, it helps you to feel better temporarily, 
and that strengthens that relationship—worry, 
anxiety, use the bathroom again. It’s a very powerful 
concept. So what will you do next time this uncertainty 
comes along? Something that you know will 
make you feel better. You have learned that the anxi


ety you experience resulting from being uncertain 
as to whether you have dealt with the situation sufficiently 
to leave the house can be alleviated by just 
going again, which sets in motion a sort of loop. Can 
you think of other examples of this kind of relationship, 
between feeling anxious or uncertain and doing 
some sort of action? 

JosePH: Well, I guess it’s sort of the same thing when I 
start worrying about forgetting to turn the stove off 
or if I’ve somehow left a candle burning from the 
night before, and I have to go back and check. 

tHeraPist: And can you describe what happens right 
before you go back and check? 

JosePH: I start to feel fear. I get an image in my head of 
the apartment on fire and my roommates still asleep, 
then I start worrying about it, and thinking what if I 
left for work and forgot to turn off the stove and the 
kitchen catches on fire and I end up burning down 
the apartment, and even worse with my roommates 
still in the apartment? 

tHeraPist: Which is a pretty anxiety-provoking 
thought. What do you feel physically in that moment? 


JosePH: I’m not sure, but probably pretty tense and nervous. 


tHeraPist: And what do you do? 

JosePH: I go back and check everything again. 

tHeraPist: Once? Or more than once? 

JosePH: I’ll check, then I’ll start doubting again, then 
I’ll check again. 

tHeraPist: And when you first check, how do you 
feel? 

JosePH: At first I feel better. 

tHeraPist: So, just like the other example, this EDB 
of checking gets reinforced each time you do it because 
it makes you feel better, at least temporarily. 
When you feel that anxiety, you feel driven to perform 
the checking as a way of relieving or acting 
on the anxiety. But these EDBs don’t seem to work 
because the doubting thoughts return, and you end 
up late for work, or you have to lose out on sleep 
in order to make time for these behaviors. And just 
like we talked about with the avoidance behaviors, 
it seems to make it worse—the doubt and anxiety 
you feel is so strong that it feels like you couldn’t 
tolerate it if you didn’t do these behaviors. What we 
need to do, just like we did with your thoughts, is 


Emotional Disorders 

start breaking down these associations so you can 
learn new things about the doubt and anxiety driving 
these behaviors, like maybe you can tolerate these 
emotions more than you think, even without engaging 
in the EDB. 

This module concludes with an introduction to countering 
patterns of avoidance and EDBs through targeting 
and modifying specific behaviors. The two primary 
therapeutic strategies are (1) beginning to engage in 
activities to evoke emotions that are currently being 
avoided and (2) counteracting maladaptive EDBs by 
developing and engaging in behaviors that are different, 
or thatcounteract, these responses. 

Module 6: Awareness and Tolerance 
of Physical Sensations 

Module 6 introduces the first opportunity to engage in 
an exposure that focuses on eliciting physical sensations 
that often trigger strong emotional reactions, and 
to begin to build the patient’s awareness of the contribution 
of physical sensations to emotional experiences. 
Following an introduction to the rationale for provoking 
physical sensations, therapist and patient work 
through a list of exercises designed to elicit emotion 
through physical activation, known as “symptom induction 
exercises.” Some examples include hyperventilating, 
spinning, and running in place. In addition, any 
exercises that may be particularly relevant to the patient 
may be added. Prior to each exercise, the therapist 
demonstrates the exercise, and following the patient’s 
completion of the exercise asks the patient to rate the 
intensity, distress, and similarity to physical sensations 
typically experiences during an emotion, each on a 
scale of 0 (Not at all) to 8 (Very much). 

tHeraPist: So today we’ll do a number of exercises 
to induce some of these physical sensations that are 
often present when you experience anxiety, and look 
at the intensity, distress, and how close the sensations 
come to your experiences during uncomfortable 
emotions. The first one I’m going to ask you to 
do is the hyperventilation exercise. (following the 
exercise) What sensations do you notice? 

JosePH: I didn’t like that at all. 

tHeraPist: So you are having thoughts and judgments 
about the sensations, that you don’t like them. What 
about the actual physical sensations themselves— 
can you describe them? 

JosePH: Dizzy, lightheaded, sort of unreal, like I’m disconnected. 
tHeraPist: Great. So thinking about those sensations, 
how would you rate the intensity of those sensations? 
JosePH: Probably a 7. 
tHeraPist: And how about the distress? 
JosePH: Also a 7. 
tHeraPist: And similarity? 

JosePH: Well, I don’t usually get dizzy when I’m anxious, 
but I guess feeling lightheaded and surreal is 
closer, so maybe like a 5? 

The therapist repeats the exposure two more times, 
and the last time asks the patient to pay particular attention 
to any thoughts he is having about the sensations, 
particularly any negative appraisals, and how these 
thoughts interact with and either lessen or intensify the 
physical sensations. 

tHeraPist: How would you rate the intensity this 
time? 
JosePH: Probably a 5. 
tHeraPist: And the distress? 
JosePH: It was much better that time, probably only a 4. 
tHeraPist: What did you notice was different that 
time? 

JosePH: Well, I guess I knew what to expect, and I 
wasn’t having the same thoughts as the first time. 
The first time I kept thinking, “I don’t like this,” and 
wondering when it was going to end. This time I just 
sort of went with it. 

tHeraPist: Interesting. So when you just focused on 
the sensations themselves, without judgment or negative 
thoughts about them, the intensity was less? 

JosePH: Yes, definitely. 

Following the completion of all the chosen exercises, 
therapist and patient choose the most relevant exercises 
to engage in regularly over the next week. The patient 
is asked to complete one exercise several times a day, 
until the associated distress decreases. This repeated 
exposure helps facilitate learning of new information 
about the dangerousness (or lack thereof) of physical 
sensations and may help diminish future distress when 
physical symptoms do occur. See Figure 6.3 for an example 
of a Symptom Induction Test Form. 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

Please complete each of the exercises (as described) below. Be sure to engage in each exercise fully, and try to produce 
at least moderate symptom intensity. After the exercise, please note: 

1. the physical symptoms you experienced 
2. the intensity of the symptoms (0- to 8-point scale; 0 = No intensity, 8 = Extreme intensity) 
3. the level of distress you experienced during the task (0- to 8-point scale; 0 = No distress, 8 = Extreme distress) 
4. the degree of similarity to your naturally occurring symptoms (0- to 8-point scale; 0 = Not at all similar, 8 = 
Extremely similar) 
Wait until the symptoms have mostly subsided before attempting the next exercise. Use the other spaces provided to be 
creative and come up with additional exercises that are specific to you. When you are done, pick three of the exercises 
that produced the most anxiety for you. Put a star next to those exercises. 

Procedure Symptoms experienced Intensity Distress Similarity 
Hyperventilation 
(60 seconds) 
Breathing through a thin straw 
(2 minutes) 
Spinning while standing 
(60 seconds) 
Running in place 
(60 seconds) 
Other: 
( seconds) 
Other: 
( seconds) 
Other: 
( seconds) 
Other: 
( seconds) 
Other: 
( seconds) 
Other: 
( seconds) 

figUre 6.3. Symptom Induction Test Form. 


Emotional Disorders 

Module 7: Interoceptive and Situational 
Emotion Exposures 

This treatment module allows application of all the 
skills learned thus far to actual situations, events, or activities 
that trigger strong levels of emotions that the patient 
has previously avoided. The therapist begins with 
a discussion about the rationale for emotion exposures. 
Although this module in the treatment program is often 
the most challenging, it is the best opportunity to make 
lasting behavioral and emotional changes. Emotion exposures 
serve three critical goals: (1) Interpretations 
and appraisals about the dangerousness of situations 
(internal or external) are modified and replaced with 
newer, more adaptive interpretations and appraisals; 
and (2) avoidance and related impairment is reversed, 
EDBs are recognized and modified, and the primary 
goal of extinguishing anxious and distressing reactions 
to the experience of intense emotions can proceed. 

In addition to engaging in emotion exposures for 
homework, an important part of this module is practicing 
emotion exposures in session. This is critical because 
the therapist can often challenge the patient to engage 
in more difficult exposures in session and will be 
able to note any use of avoidance strategies or engagement 
in EDBs that may be outside the patient’s awareness. 
The particular in-session exposure tasks vary 
from patient to patient, and it is important that the therapist 
be able to generate a number of different possible 
tasks in which to engage. Once the task has been identified, 
the therapist can discuss any anxious or negative 
automatic appraisals occurring and help the patient 
consider other possibilities. The therapist should also 
remind the patient to use the skills of present-focused 
awareness and try to prevent any avoidance strategies 
that would interfere with the exposure. At the end of 
each session, the therapist helps the patient choose several 
emotion exposures to engage in outside of session 
for homework. 

For Joseph, several different exposures were designed 
that targeted a variety of anxiety-provoking 
situations. Examples included walking straight ahead 
on a crowded sidewalk, forcing oncoming pedestrians 
to move aside rather than moving aside himself; 
engaging in a mock debate with a stranger and sticking 
to his opinion; eating a piece of fruit and riding 
on public transportation, and focusing his attention on 
what is going on around him rather than on any subsequent 
physical reactions to the fruit (e.g., gas, bloating); 
going to a party and excusing himself to the restroom, 

in order to test some of his anticipatory automatic appraisals 
about what others will think of him; reducing 
the number of times he uses the bathroom in the morning 
from five to one; and similarly reducing the number 
of times he checks stoves, candles, and so forth, before 
leaving the house. 

An exposure near the top of Joseph’s hierarchy was 
to go on a long car trip with some friends and acquaintances 
to see a concert in a nearby city. This would 
require him to face several of his fears at once. First, 
he would have to assert himself and ask his friends if 
he could come along in the car. Second, he would be 
traveling with a small group of people, including a few 
people he does not know well, and might be required 
to carry on casual conversation. Third, he would be 
locked in a small, confined space with no easy escape 
route should his IBS symptoms flare up. 

tHeraPist: This was a big exposure assignment for 
you. Let’s start from the beginning, when you had to 
ask your friend if you could come along on the trip. 
Do you remember what you were experiencing just 
before you made that call? 

JosePH: I noticed I felt shaky. I felt butterflies in my 
stomach, my face was hot, and my heart was beating 
fast. 

tHeraPist: So, a lot of physical sensations associated 
with anxiety. What about thoughts? 

JosePH: I was worried that my friend would be annoyed, 
like I am putting him out, or that he would 
be mad I waited so long to ask him. I also noticed I 
kept procrastinating, looking things up on the Internet, 
going to the corner store to buy a soda, things 
like that. 

tHeraPist: Good! So you noticed some behaviors, too. 
And what happened when you called him? Did your 
anticipatory appraisals come true? 

JosePH: Not at all, he was actually pretty happy I asked. 
He said he was hoping I was coming along, sort of 
like he was expecting it and was happy about it. 

tHeraPist: What about the trip itself, how did that go? 

JosePH: Well, about 10 minutes into it I started to feel 
some cramping in my stomach and thought, “Oh 
boy, here we go.” Then I remembered the exposure 
we did with the fruit and decided to try focusing on 
the music on the stereo, the view out the window, 
and the conversations that were happening in the car, 
rather than focusing on my stomach. 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

tHeraPist: Did that help? 

JosePH: Well, the cramping was still there, but it wasn’t 
bothering me as much because I wasn’t just focusing 
on that. 

tHeraPist: Did you have any urges to use the bathroom? 


JosePH: I did at one point, and I decided to try what we 
talked about, and see if I could wait it out and see if 
it passed, and it did! At one point, though, I did need 
to use the bathroom. 

tHeraPist: What happened then? 

JosePH: I asked my friend if he could stop at the next 
rest stop. 

tHeraPist: And what was his reaction, or the reaction 
of the other passengers? 

JosePH: It was no big deal at all! No one seemed to 
care, and in fact I think they also wanted to stop, 
so it was no big deal! I also noticed something else. 
On the car ride back, I didn’t really think about it 
at all, and my gut started rumbling but I just didn’t 
worry about it and kept focusing on what was going 
on around me. It wasn’t even an issue at all on the 
way back. 

For Joseph, great progress was made through exposures 
relating to his symptoms of anxiety and management 
of his IBS symptoms. However, Joseph continued 
to hold on to a core belief that he was “unworthy” and 
“unlikable.” Additional exposures were designed to target 
this belief directly. 

tHeraPist: You seem to have made some great progress 
over the last few weeks, would you agree? 

JosePH: Yes, I definitely feel like I can cope with my 
anxiety better, and things seem to be going really 
well at work right now, which helps. The other teachers 
have even started inviting me out for drinks after 
work, and I’ve gone a few times and actually had a 
lot of fun. 

tHeraPist: That’s great news. One thing that is 
interesting—despite these changes, on your weekly 
questionnaires I notice you are still marking a few 
items like “I dislike myself” or “I feel utterly worthless.” 


JosePH: Yeah, I still don’t think I’m a great person, and 
I still worry I’m just fooling people, or they are going 
to find out the “true” me and run the other way. 

tHeraPist: I wonder if we can do some exposure work 
around those? 

Using similar techniques learned in Module 4, the 
therapist helps Joseph generate evidence for and against 
the statements that he dislikes himself and that he is 
worthless. He is able to generate some evidence against 
this belief, for example, the large turnout of friends and 
supporters at a recent concert he put on. Using this and 
other evidence, the therapist helps Joseph generate a list 
of positive self-statements. 

tHeraPist: So, what might you say about your recent 
experiences putting on the concert? 
JosePH: I don’t know, “I am a good musician?” 

tHeraPist: That’s one, but maybe something even 
more objective and believable to you, like you work 
hard on your music? 

JosePH: That’s true. And when I play, people seem to 
like it. 
tHeraPist: So you work hard at your music, and you 
entertain people with it? 
JosePH: Yes, that’s true. I also am a good listener. 
tHeraPist: Tell me more about that. 

JosePH: Well, I have a friend who is going through a 
hard time right now, and sometimes he calls me just 
to talk about it. I usually am pretty good at letting 
him talk it through. 

tHeraPist: So can we add “I am there for people and 
listen to them” to the list? Maybe even “I am a good 
friend?” 

Once the therapist and Joseph generated a list of 
statements that are evidence against the core belief 
of being worthless and disliking himself, Joseph was 
asked to read these statements aloud and to notice his 
reactions to them. 

tHeraPist: How was that reading those statements? 
JosePH: Awkward. I felt really uncomfortable. It makes 

me feel anxious. 
tHeraPist: Can you describe that for me? 
JosePH: Well, I get this weird sort of “zap” of fear and 

this feeling in the pit of my stomach, and I notice I 
get these kind of sarcastic thoughts like “That’s not 
true” or “Sure you are.” 


Emotional Disorders 

tHeraPist: So saying nice things about yourself brings 
on a feeling of fear, and some negative thoughts 
about yourself? 

JosePH: Yes. I guess I feel kind of vulnerable, too, like 
my guard is down. 

tHeraPist: That’s a very interesting observation. So 
saying something positive about yourself leaves you 
feeling a bit vulnerable, exposed maybe? Is it maybe 
a less familiar feeling to you than the self-criticism? 

JosePH: Definitely. So is the fear like entering a foreign 
territory, like I don’t know what might jump out at 
me? 

tHeraPist: Maybe something like that! Whereas the 
negative thoughts are perhaps more familiar and less 
fearful in a way. What if we made the statements a 
little less new and unfamiliar by repeating them a 
few times? (After Joseph rereads the statements two 
more times.) How was it this time? 

JosePH: Well, a little easier, not quite as foreign, I 
guess, but still a little strange. 

tHeraPist: Good. So exposing yourself to these statements 
repeatedly seems to have a similar effect as 
some of the other exposure exercises we’ve done? A 
little easier and less foreign each time? 

JosePH: Yeah, I guess it gets a little easier each time. 

tHeraPist: How about continuing with this exposure 
this week, generating a few more statements, and 
reading them out loud to yourself each day? 

JosePH: I could try that. 

In future sessions, the therapist revisits the patient’s 
continuing need for emotional exposures. If he/she determines 
that the patient would benefit from additional 
emotion exposures, they can be continued both in session 
and for homework at this time. Additionally, the 
therapist can focus on any events or emotional reactions 
over the past week that can be processed in session. Obstacles 
to exposure completion and reactions to exposures 
are discussed in session. 

Module 8: Accomplishments, Maintenance, 
and Relapse Prevention 

In the final treatment session, the therapist reviews 
both the major concepts presented in treatment and 
the patient’s progress. The therapist reviews the threecomponent 
model of emotions, focusing on cognitive 

reappraisal, preventing emotional avoidance, and modifying 
EDBs. The patient is asked for his/her impression 
of progress made over the course of treatment, 
and the therapist can highlight areas of improvement 
and areas in need of continued practice. Reasons for 
lack of improvement (e.g., initial error in diagnosis, 
lack of understanding treatment principles, unrealistic 
goals, and lack of motivation) should also be reviewed. 
The therapist then discusses the inevitability of future 
stressors and potential reoccurrence of symptoms. The 
continuation of informal emotion exposures and use of 
skills learned are encouraged. The therapist may further 
assist the patient in staying committed to treatment 
by establishing long-term goals for the patient. 

outcoMe aND coNclusioN 

Joseph’s symptoms were assessed at pre- and posttreatment 
using a battery of self-report questionnaires, as 
described earlier. During treatment, Joseph’s SIAS 
score decreased from 51 at pretreatment to 26 at posttreatment. 
His BDI-II score decreased from 49 at pretreatment 
to 11 at post-treatment. His PSWQ score decreased 
from 80 to 35. Functionally, Joseph was able 
to meet many of his treatment goals over the course 
of treatment. For example, he was able to find a job 
he thoroughly enjoyed that matched his career goals. 
He significantly increased his social interactions and 
began engaging in activities, such as playing more local 
concerts, all of which significantly increased his selfconfidence 
and sense of self-worth. He gained control 
of his IBS symptoms and no longer engaged in avoidance 
behaviors related to his symptoms. At the time of 
termination, Joseph noted that he felt “like a completely 
different person” and was noticeably more positive and 
confident in his demeanor and presentation. Although 
Joseph was not part of the research program and, 
therefore, did not participate in an independent posttreatment 
clinical interview, his clinician (K. K. E.) 
estimated that his CSRs for both the social phobia and 
GAD diagnoses had dropped to a 3 (subclinical), the 
diagnosis of MDD was in partial remission with a CSR 
of 2, and although he improved in many of his OCDrelated 
symptoms, the diagnosis of OCD warranted a 
CSR rating of 4 (just above clinical severity). 

Joseph returned to our Center for a follow-up assessment 
8 months posttreatment that comprised of 
readministration of the ADIS and self-report questionnaires. 
At follow-up, Joseph’s self-reported symptom 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

ratings increased slightly from posttreatment. He endorsed 
somewhat higher scores on the SIAS, particularly 
on items related to greeting strangers or encountering 
strangers on the street, with a total follow-up 
score of 37. His scores on the PSWQ increased slightly, 
from 35 to 40. Notably, Joseph’s BDI score increased 
from 11 at posttreatment to 35 at follow-up, suggesting 
a relapse of depressive symptoms. In particular, Joseph 
indicated increases in pessimistic feelings about the future, 
guilty feelings, fatigue, and sleep disruption. At 
the time of his follow-up interview, Joseph reported 
that he had recently gone through a breakup with his 
girlfriend at the start of the holiday season, and he attributed 
his low mood to this breakup and the winter 
weather. Without further follow-up data, however, it is 
unclear the degree to which the increase in depressive 
symptoms is attributable to these situational variables 
or represents a relapse of his depression. Despite these 
increases at follow-up, Joseph did show a decrease in 
WSAS scores from pretreatment to follow-up (from 
34, Severe interference, to 21, Moderate interference), 
which may reflect that even though his symptoms had 
returned to some degree, he was able to manage interference 
from the symptoms much better. However, Joseph 
did not complete the WSAS at posttreatment, so it 
is not clear exactly what the trajectory of change is on 
this measure. 

Clinician ratings using the ADIS seemed largely to 
coincide with Joseph’s self-report. He experienced a 
slight worsening of his GAD and MDD symptoms from 
posttreatment to follow-up, receiving CSR ratings of 4 
and 5, respectively. He was able to maintain his treatment 
gains for his OCD symptoms, which were again 
given a CSR of 4. Notably, Joseph’s social phobia was 
given a CSR rating of 2, suggesting that he was able 
to maintain and possibly even improve on gains made 
in treatment; whereas he still endorsed some fear and 
anxiety related to social situations, the interference and 
distress related to these fears was no longer endorsed at 
a clinical level. 

referenCes 

Allen, L. B., White, K. S., Barlow, D. H., Shear, M. K., Gorman, 
J. M., & Woods, S. W. (2010). Cognitive-behavior 
therapy (CBT) for panic disorder: Relationship of anxiety 
and depression comorbidity with treatment outcome. 

Journal of Psychopathology and Behavioral Assessment, 

32(2), 185–192. 
American Psychiatric Association. (2000). Diagnostic and 

statistical manual of mental disorders (4th ed., text rev.). 
Washington, DC: Author. 

American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and 
statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.). Arlington, 
VA: Author. 

Andrews, G. (1990). Classification of neurotic disorders. 
Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine, 83(10), 606– 
607. 

Andrews, G. (1996). Current controversies in the anxiety 
disorders. In R. M. Rapee (Ed.), Comorbidity in neurotic 
disorders: The similarities are more important than the 
difference (pp. 3–20). New York: Guilford Press. 

Barlow, D. H. (1988). Anxiety and its disorders: The nature 
and treatment of anxiety and panic. New York: Guilford 
Press. 

Barlow, D. H. (1991). Disorders of emotion. Psychological 
Inquiry, 2, 58–71. 

Barlow, D. H. (2000). Unraveling the mysteries of anxiety 
and its disorders from the perspective of emotion theory. 
American Psychologist, 55(11), 1247–1263. 

Barlow, D. H. (2002). Anxiety and its disorders: The nature 
and treatment of anxiety and panic (2nd ed.). New York: 
Guilford Press. 

Barlow, D. H., Bullis, J. R., Comer, J. S., & Ametaj, A. A. 
(2013). Evidence-based psychological treatments: An update 
and the way forward. Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 
9, 1–27. 

Barlow, D. H., & Craske, M. G. (2007). Mastery of your anxiety 
and panic: Client workbook for anxiety and panic (4th 
ed.). New York: Oxford University Press. 

Barlow, D. H., Gorman, J. M., Shear, M. K., & Woods, S. 

W. (2000). Cognitive-behavioral therapy, imipramine, or 
their combination for panic disorder: A randomized controlled 
trial. Journal of the American Medical Association, 
283, 2529–2536. 
Barlow, D. H., Sauer-Zavala, S. E., Carl, J. R., Bullis, J. R., & 
Ellard, K. K. (in press). The nature, diagnosis, and treatment 
of neuroticism: Back to the future. Clinical Psychological 
Science. 

Beck, A. T. (1967). The diagnosis and management of depression. 
Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press. 

Beck, A. T., Rush, A. J., Shaw, B. F., & Emery, G. (1979). 
Cognitive therapy of depression. New York: Guilford 
Press. 

Beck, A. T., Steer, R. A., & Brown, G. K. (1996). Beck Depression 
Inventory manual (2nd ed.). San Antonio, TX: 
Psychological Corporation. 

Bentley, K. H., Gallagher, M. W., Carl, J. R., Farchione, T. 
J., & Barlow, D. H. (2013). Development and validation 
of an Overall Depression Severity and Impairment Scale. 
Manuscript submitted for publication. 

Boelen, P. A., Vrinssen, I., & van Tulder, F. (2010). Intolerance 
of uncertainty in adolescents: Correlations with 
worry, social anxiety, and depression. Journal of Nervous 
and Mental Disease, 198, 194–200. 


Emotional Disorders 

Borkovec, T. D. (1994). The nature, functions, and origins 
of worry. In G. C. L. Davey & F. Tallis (Eds.), Worrying: 
Perspectives on theory, assessment, and treatment 
(pp. 5–34). New York: Wiley. 

Borkovec, T. D., Hazlett-Stevens, H., & Diaz, M. L. (1999). 
The role of positive beliefs about worry in generalized 
anxiety disorder and its treatment. Clinical Psychology 
and Psychotherapy, 6, 126–138. 

Boswell, J. F., Thompson-Holland, J., Farchione, T. J., & 
Barlow, D. H. (2013). The intolerance of uncertainty: A 
common factor in the treatment of emotional disorders. 
Journal of Clinical Psychology, 69, 630–645. 

Bouton, M. E. (2005). Behavior systems and the contextual 
control of anxiety, fear, and panic. In L. Feldman Barrett, 

P. M. Niedenthal, & P. Winkielman (Eds.), Emotion and 
consciousness (pp. 205–227). New York: Guilford Press. 
Bouton, M. E., Mineka, S., & Barlow, D. H. (2001). A modern 
learning theory perspective on the etiology of panic disorder. 
Psychological Review, 108, 4–32. 

Brown, T. A. (2007). Temporal course and structural relationships 
among dimensions of temperament and DSM-IV 
anxiety and mood disorder constructs. Journal of Abnormal 
Psychology, 116, 313–328. 

Brown, T. A., Antony, M. M., & Barlow, D. H. (1995). Diagnostic 
comorbidity in panic disorder: Effect on treatment 
outcome and course of comorbid diagnoses following 
treatment. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 
63, 408–418. 

Brown, T. A., & Barlow, D. H. (1995). Long-term outcome in 
cognitive-behavioral treatment of panic disorder: Clinical 
predictors and alternative strategies for assessment. Journal 
of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 63, 754–765. 

Brown, T. A., & Barlow, D. H. (2002). Classification of anxiety 
and mood disorders. In D. H. Barlow (Ed.), Anxiety 
and its disorders: The nature and treatment of anxiety and 
panic (2nd ed., pp. 292–327). New York: Guilford Press. 

Brown, T. A., & Barlow, D. H. (2009). A proposal for a dimensional 
classification system based on the shared features 
of the DSM-IV anxiety and mood disorders: Implications 
for assessment and treatment. Psychological 
Assessment, 21, 256–271. 

Brown, T. A., Campbell, L. A., Lehman, C. L., Grisham, J. 
R., & Mancill, R. B. (2001). Current and lifetime comorbidity 
of the DSM-IV anxiety and mood disorders in a 
large clinical sample. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 
110, 49–58. 

Brown, T. A., Chorpita, B. F., & Barlow, D. H. (1998). Structural 
relationships among dimensions of the DSM-IV 
anxiety and mood disorders and dimensions of negative 
affect, positive affect, and autonomic arousal. Journal of 
Abnormal Psychology, 107, 179–192. 

Brown, T. A., Di Nardo, P. A., & Barlow, D. H. (2014). Anxiety 
Disorders Interview Schedule for DSM-5. New York: 
Oxford University Press. 

Brown, T. A., Di Nardo, P. A., Lehman, C. L., & Campbell, 

L. A. (2001). Reliability of DSM-IV anxiety and mood 
disorders: Implications for the classification of emotional 
disorders. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 110, 49–58. 
Campbell-Sills, L., Barlow, D. H., Brown, T. A., & Hofmann, 

S. G. (2006a). Acceptability and suppression of negative 
emotion in anxiety and mood disorders. Emotion, 6, 
587–595. 
Campbell-Sills, L., Barlow, D. H., Brown, T. A., & Hofmann, 

S. G. (2006b). Effects of suppression and acceptance on 
emotional responses in individuals with anxiety and mood 
disorders. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 44, 1251– 
1263. 
Campbell-Sills, L., Liverant, G. I., & Brown, T. A. (2004). 
Psychometric evaluation of the behavioral inhibition/behavioral 
activation scales in a large sample of outpatients 
with anxiety and mood disorders. Psychological Assessment, 
16(3), 244–254. 

Campbell-Sills, L., Norman, S. B., Craske, M. G., Sullivan, 
G., Lang, A. J., Chavira, D. A. (2009). Validation of a brief 
measure of anxiety-related severity and impairment: the 
Overall Anxiety Severity and Impairment Scale (OASIS). 
Journal of Affective Disorders, 112(1-3), 92–101. 

Caspi, A., Sugden, K., Moffitt, T. E., Taylor, A., Craig, I. W., 
& Harrington, H. (2003). Influence of life stress on depression: 
Moderation by a polymorphism in the 5-HTT 
gene. Science, 301, 386–389. 

Chorpita, B. F., Albano, A. M., & Barlow, D. H. (1998). The 
structure of negative emotions in a clinical sample of children 
and adolescents. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 
107, 74–85. 

Chorpita, B. F., & Barlow, D. H. (1998). The development 
of anxiety: The role of control in the early environment. 
Psychological Bulletin, 124, 3–21. 

Clark, D. A. (2012). The English Improving Access to Psychological 
Therapies (IAPT) program: History and progress. 
In R. K. McHugh & D. H. Barlow (Eds.), Dissemination 
and implementation of evidence-based psychological 
interventions (pp. 61–77). New York: Oxford University 
Press. 

Clark, L. A. (2005). Temperament as a unifying basis for personality 
and psychopathology. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 
114, 505–521. 

Clark, L. A., & Watson, D. (1991). Tripartite model of anxiety 
and depression: Psychometric evidence and taxonomic 
implications. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 103, 103– 
116. 

Craske, M. G., & Barlow, D. H. (2006). Mastery of your anxiety 
and worry (2nd ed.). New York: Oxford University 
Press. 

Craske, M. G., Rowe, M., Lewin, M., & Noriega-Dimitri, R. 
(1997). Interoceptive exposure versus breathing retraining 
within cognitive-behavioural therapy for panic disorder 
with agoraphobia. British Journal of Clinical Psychology, 
36, 85–99. 

Dimidjian, S., Hollon, S. D., Dobson, K. S., Schmaling, K. 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

B., Kohlenberg, R. J., & Addis, M. E. (2006). Randomized 
trial of behavioral activation, cognitive therapy, and 
antidepressant medication in the acute treatment of adults 
with major depression. Journal of Consulting and Clinical 
Psychology, 74(4), 658–670. 

Di Nardo, P. A., Brown, T. A., & Barlow, D. H. (1994). Anxiety 
Disorders Interview Schedule for DSM-IV. Albany, 
NY: Graywind. 

Drabant, E. M., Ramel, W., Edge, M. D., Hyde, L. W., Kuo, 

J. R., Goldin, P. R. (2012). Neural mechanisms underlying 
5-HTTLPR-related sensitivity to acute stress. American 
Journal of Psychiatry, 169, 397–405. 
Endicott, J., Nee, J., Harrison, W., & Blumenthal, R. (1993). 
Quality of Life Enjoyment and Satisfaction Questionnaire: 
A new measure. Psychopharmacology Bulletin, 29(2), 
321–326. 

Eysenck, H. J. (1947). Dimension of personality. London: 
Routledge & Kegan Paul. 

First, M. B., Spitzer, R. L., Gibbon, M., & Williams, J. B. W. 
(1996). Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV Axis I 
Disorders—Patient Edition (SCID-I/P, Version 2.0). New 
York: Biometrics Research Department, New York State 
Psychiatric Institute. 

Foa, E. B., Riggs, D. S., Dancu, C. V., & Rothbaum, B. O. 
(1993). Reliability and validity of a brief instrument for assessment 
post-traumatic stress disorder. Journal of Traumatic 
Stress, 6(4), 459–473. 

Foa, E. B., & Tolin, D. F. (2000). Comparison of the PTSD 
Symptom Scale—Interview Version and the Clinician-
Administered PTSD scale. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 
13(2), 181–191. 

Goodman, W. K., Price, L. H., Rasmussen, S. A., Mazure, 
C., Fleischmann, R. L., & Hill, C. L. (1989). The Yale– 
Brown Obsessive Compulsive Scale: I. Development, use, 
and reliability. Archives of General Psychiatry, 46(11), 
1006–1011. 

Hafner, J., & Marks, I. M. (1976). Exposure in vivo of agoraphobics: 
Contributions of diazepam, group exposure, and 
anxiety evocation. Psychological Medicine, 6, 71–88. 

Hamilton, M. (1959). The assessment of anxiety states by 
rating. British Journal of Medical Psychology, 32, 50–55. 

Hamilton, M. (1960). A rating scale for depression. Journal 
of Neurology, Neurosurgery, and Psychiatry, 23, 56–62. 

Hayes, S. C., Strosahl, K. D., & Wilson, K. G. (1999). Acceptance 
and commitment therapy: An experiential approach 
to behavior change. New York: Guilford Press. 

Heimberg, R. G., Horner, K. J., Juster, H. R., Safren, S. A., 
Brown, E. J., & Schneier, F. R. (1999). Psychometric properties 
of the Liebowitz Social Anxiety Scale. Psychological 
Medicine, 29(1), 199–212. 

Heimberg, R. G., Liebowitz, M. R., Hope, D. A., Schneier, 

F. R., Holt, C. S., & Welkowitz, L. A. (1998). Cognitive 
behavioral group therapy vs phenelzine therapy for social 
phobia: 12-week outcome. Archives of General Psychiatry, 
55(12), 1133–1141. 
Hettema, J. M., Neale, M. C., & Kendler, K. S. (2001). A 
review and meta-analysis of the genetic epidemiology of 
anxiety disorders. American Journal of Psychiatry, 158, 
1568–1578. 

Huppert, J. D., Bufka, L. F., Barlow, D. H., Gorman, J. M., 
Shear, M. K., & Woods, S. W. (2001). Therapists, therapist 
variables and cognitive-behavioral therapy outcome in a 
multicenter trial for panic disorder. Journal of Consulting 
and Clinical Psychology, 69, 747–755. 

Izard, C. E. (1971). The face of emotion. New York: AppletonCentury-
Crofts. 

Jacobson, N. S., Martell, C. R., & Dimidjian, S. (2001). Behavioral 
activation treatment for depression: Returning to 
contextual roots. Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 
8, 255–270. 

Kendler, K. S. (1996). Major depression and generalized 
anxiety disorder: Same genes, (partly) different 
environments—revisited. British Journal of Psychiatry, 
30(Suppl.), 68–75. 

Kendler, K. S., Walters, E. E., Neale, M. C., Kessler, R. C., 
Heath, A. C., & Eaves, L. J. (1995). The structure of genetic 
and environmental risk factors for six major psychiatric 
disorders in women: Phobia, generalized anxiety disorder, 
panic disorder, bulimia, major depression, and alcoholism. 
Archives of General Psychiatry, 52, 374–382. 

Kessler, R. C., Nelson, C. B., McGonagle, K. A., Lui, J., 
Swartz, M., & Blazer, D. G. (1996). Comorbidity of DSM-
III-R major depressive disorder in the general population: 
Results from the National Comorbidity Survey. British 
Journal of Psychiatry, 168, 17–30. 

Keyes, C. L., Wissing, M., Potgieter, J. P., Temane, M., Kruger, 
A., & van Rooy, S. (2008). Evaluation of the Mental 
Health Continuum—Short Form (MHC-SF) in Setswanaspeaking 
South Africans. Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy, 
15(3), 181–192. 

Keyes, C. L. M. (2005). Mental illness and/or mental health?: 
Investigating axioms of the complete state model of health. 
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 73, 539– 
548. 

Keyes, C. L. M. (2006). Mental health in adolescence: Is 
America’s youth flourishing? American Journal of Orthopsychiatry, 
76, 395–402. 

Lamers, S. M., Westerhof, G. J., Bohlmeijer, E. T., ten 
Klooster, P. M., & Keyes, C. L. (2011). Evaluating the 
psychometric properties of the Mental Health Continuum-
Short Form (MHC-SF). Journal of Clinical Psychology, 
67(1), 99–110. 

Lee, J. K., Orsillo, S. M., Roemer, L., & Allen, L. B. (2010). 
Distress and avoidance in generalized anxiety disorder: 
Exploring the relationships with intolerance of uncertainty 
and worry. Behaviour Therapy, 39, 126–136. 

Liebowitz, M. R. (1987). Social phobia. Modern Problems in 
Pharmacopsychiatry, 22, 141–173. 

Liebowitz, M. R., Heimberg, R. G., Schneier, F. R., Hope, D. 
A., Davies, S., & Holt, C. S. (1999). Cognitive-behavioral 


Emotional Disorders 

group therapy versus phenelzine in social phobia: Longterm 
outcome. Depression and Anxiety, 10(3), 89–98. 

Linehan, M. M. (1993). Cognitive behavioral treatment of 
borderline personality disorder. New York: Guilford 
Press. 

Liverant, G. I., Brown, T. A., Barlow, D. H., & Roemer, L. 
(2008). Emotion regulation in unipolar depression: The 
effects of acceptance and suppression of subjective emotional 
experience on the intensity and duration of sadness 
and negative affect. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 46, 
1201–1209. 

Lonsdorf, T. B., Golkar, A., Lindstöm, K. M., Fransson, 
P., Schalling, M., & Ohman, A. (2011). 5-HTTLPR and 
COMTval158met genotype gate amygdala reactivity and 
habituation. Biological Psychology, 87, 106–112. 

Margraf, J., Taylor, C. B., Ehlers, A., Roth, W. T., & Agras, 

W. S. (1987). Panic attacks in the natural environment. 
Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 175, 558–565. 
Mattick, R. P., & Clarke, J. C. (1998). Development and validation 
of measures of social phobia scrutiny fear and social 
interaction anxiety. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 
36, 455–470. 

McHugh, R. K., & Barlow, D. H. (Eds.). (2012). Dissemination 
and implementation of evidence-baed psychological 
interventions. New York: Oxford University Press. 

Mennin, D. S., Heimberg, R. G., Turk, C. L., & Fresco, D. 

M. (2005). Preliminary evidence for an emotion dysregulation 
model of generalized anxiety disorder. Behaviour 
Research and Therapy, 43, 1281–1310. 
Merikangas, K. R., Zhang, H., & Aveneoli, S. (2003). Longitudinal 
trajectories of depression and anxiety in a prospective 
community study. Archives of General Psychiatry, 60, 
993–1000. 

Meyer, T. J., Miller, M. L., Metzger, R. L., & Borkovec, T. 

D. (1990). Development and validation of the Penn State 
Worry Questionnaire. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 
28, 487–495. 
Miller, W. R., & Rollnick, S. (2013). Motivational interviewing: 
Preparing people for change (3rd ed.). New York: 
Guilford Press. 

Montag, C., Fiebach, C. J., Kirsch, P., & Reuter, M. (2011). 
Interation of 5-HTTLPR and a variation on the oxytocin 
recepter gene influences negative emotionality. Biological 
Psychiatry, 69, 601–603. 

Munafò, M. R., Brown, S. M., & Hariri, A. R. (2008). Seratonin 
transporter (5-HTTLPR) genotype and amygdala 
activation: A meta-analysis. Biological Psychiatry, 63, 
852–857. 

Nathan, P. E., & Gorman, J. M. (Eds.). (2007). A guide to 
treatments that work (3rd ed.). New York: Oxford University 
Press. 

Norman, S. B., Cissell, S. H., Means-Christensen, A. J., & 
Stein, M. B. (2006). Development and validation of an 
Overall Anxiety Severity and Impairment Scale (OASIS). 
Depression and Anxiety, 23(4), 245–249. 

Pezawas, L., Meyer-Lindenberg, A., Drabant, E. M., Verchinski, 
B. A., Munoz, K. E., & Kolachana, B. S. (2005). 5-HT-
TLPR polymorphism impacts human cingulate-amygdala 
interactions: A genetic susceptibility mechanism for depression. 
Nature Neuroscience, 8(6), 828–834. 

Raffa, S. D., Stoddard, J. A., White, K. S., Barlow, D. H., 
Gorman, J. M., & Shear, M. K. (2008). Relapse following 
combined-treatment discontinuation in a placebocontrolled 
trial for panic disorder. Journal of Nervous and 
Mental Disease, 196(7), 548–555. 

Rapee, R. M., Craske, M. G., & Barlow, D. H. (1990). Subject 
described features of panic attacks using a new selfmonitoring 
form. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 4, 171– 
181. 

Roy-Byrne, P. P., Craske, M. G., & Stein, M. B. (2006). Panic 
disorder. Lancet, 368, 1023–1032. 

Rutter, M., Moffit, T. E., & Caspi, A. (2006). Gene– 
environment interplay and psychopathology: Multiple varieties 
but real effects. Journal of Child Psychology and 
Psychiatry, 47, 226–261. 

Ruzek, J. I., Karlin, B. E., & Zeiss, A. (2012). Implementation 
of evidence-based psychological treatments in the 
Veterans Health Administration. In R. K. McHugh & D. 

H. Barlow (Eds.), Dissemination and implementation of 
evidence-based psychological interventions (pp. 78–96). 
New York: Oxford University Press. 
Safren, S. A., Heimberg, R. G., Horner, K. J., Juster, H. R., 
Schneier, F. R., & Liebowitz, M. R. (1999). Factor structure 
of social fears: The Liebowitz Social Anxiety Scale. 
Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 13(3), 253–270. 

Sauer-Zavala, S. E., & Barlow, D. H. (2013). The case for 
borderline personality disorder as an emotional disorder: 
Implications for treatment. Manuscript submitted for publication. 


Shear, K., Belnap, B. H., Mazumdar, S., Houck, P., & Rollman, 
B. L. (2006). Generalized anxiety disorder severity 
scale (GADSS): A preliminary validation study. Depression 
and Anxiety, 23(2), 77–82. 

Shear, M. K., Brown, T. A., Barlow, D. H., Money, R., Sholomskas, 
D. E., & Woods, S. W. (1997). Multicenter collaborative 
Panic Disorder Severity Scale. American Journal 
of Psychiatry, 154, 1571–1575. 

Shear, M. K., Vander Bilt, J., & Rucci, P. (2001). Reliability 
and validity of a Structured Interview Guide for the Hamilton 
Anxiety Rating Scale (SIGH-A). Depression and 
Anxiety, 13, 166–178. 

Stein, M. B., Campbell-Sills, L., & Gelernter, J. (2009). Genetic 
variation in 5HTTLPR is associated with emotional 
resilience. Neuropsychiatric Genetics, 150B, 900–906. 

Storch, E. A., Larson, M. J., Price, L. H., Rasmussen, S. A., 
Murphy, T. K., & Goodman, W. K. (2010). Psychometric 
analysis of the Yale–Brown Obsessive–Compulsive Scale 
Second Edition Symptom Checklist. Journal of Anxiety 
Disorders, 24, 650–656. 

Suárez, L., Bennett, S. M., Goldstein, C., & Barlow, D. H. 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

(2009). Understanding anxiety disorders from a “triple 
vulnerability” framework. In M. M. Antony & M. B. Stein 
(Eds.), Handbook of anxiety and the anxiety disorders 
(pp. 153–172). New York: Oxford University Press. 

Tsao, J. C. I., Mystkowski, J. L., Zucker, B. G., & Craske, M. 

G. (2002). Effects of cognitive-behavior therapy for panic 
disorder on comorbid conditions: Replication and extension. 
Behavior Therapy, 33, 493–509. 
Tsao, J. C. I., Mystkowski, J. L., Zucker, B. G., & Craske, 

M. G. (2005). Impact of cognitive-behavioral therapy for 
panic disorder on comorbidity: A controlled investigation. 
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 43, 959–970. 
Tull, M. T., & Roemer, L. (2007). Emotion regulation difficulties 
associated with the experience of uncued panic 
attacks: Evidence of experiential avoidance, emotional 
nonacceptance, and decreased emotional clarity. Behaviour 
Research and Therapy, 38, 378–391. 

Tyrer, P. J. (1989). Classification of neurosis. Chichester, UK: 
Wiley. 

Tyrer, P. J., Seivewright, N., Murphys, S., Ferguson, B., Kingdon, 
D., & Barczak, B. (1998). The Nottingham study of 
neurotic disorder: Comparison of drug and psychological 
treatments. Lancet, 2, 235–240. 

Watson, D. (2005). Rethinking the mood and anxiety disorders: 
A quantitative hierarchical model for DSM-V. Journal 
of Abnormal Psychology, 114, 522–536. 

Watson, D., Clark, L. A., & Tellegen, A. (1988). Development 
and validation of brief measures of positive and negative 

affect: The PANAS scales. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 54, 1063–1070. 

Wegner, D. M., Schneider, D. J., Carter, S. R., III, & White, 

T. L. (1987). Paradoxical effects of thought suppression. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 53(1), 
5–13. 
Weinberg, A., & Hajcak, G. (2010). Electrocortical evidence 
for vigilance–avoidance in generalized anxiety disorder. 
Psychophysiology, 48(6), 1–10. 

Weiser, M., Pauli, P., Weyers, P., Alpers, G., & Mühlberger, 
A. (2009). Fear of negative evaluation and the 
hypervigilance–avoidance hypothesis: An eye-tracking 
study. Journal of Neural Transmission, 116, 717–723. 

Westerhof, G. J., & Keyes, C. L. (2009). Mental illness and 
mental health: The two continua model across the lifespan. 
Journal of Adult Development, 17(2), 110–119. 

Westra, H. A., Arkowitz, H., & Dozois, D. J. A. (2009). Adding 
a motivational interviewing pretreatment to cognitive 
behavioral therapy for generalized anxiety disorder: A 
preliminary randomized controlled trial. Journal of Anxiety 
Disorders, 23, 1106–1117. 

Westra, H. A., & Dozois, D. J. A. (2006). Preparing clients 
for cognitive behavioural therapy: A randomized pilot 
study of motivational interviewing for anxiety. Cognitive 
Therapy and Research, 30, 481–498. 

Williams, J. B. (1988). A structured interview guide for the 
Hamilton Depression Rating Scale. Archives of General 
Psychiatry, 45, 742–747. 


CHaPter 7 

Cognitive Therapy for Depression 

Jeffrey e. youNG 
JayNe l. ryGh 
arthur D. weiNBerGer 
aaroN t. Beck 

one of the most important developments in psychological approaches to emotional problems 
has been the success of cognitive therapy for depression. evidence for the powerful 
efficacy of this approach has increased steadily over the years, particularly in regard to 
successful long‑term outcome. employing a variety of well‑specified cognitive and behavioral 
techniques, cognitive therapy is also distinguished by the detailed structure of 
each session with its specific agendas, and by the very deliberate and obviously effective 
therapeutic style of interacting with the patient through a series of questions (socratic 
style). Moreover, the authors underscore very clearly the importance of a collaborative 
relationship between therapist and patient, and outline specific techniques to achieve 
this collaborative state, so that patient and therapist become an investigative team. in 
this chapter, the authors cover not only traditional cognitive therapy but also an expansion 
of cognitive therapy called “schema‑focused” therapy. This approach concentrates 
on identifying and modifying early maladaptive or “core” schemas thought to develop 
during childhood in more severely depressed and treatment‑resistant patients, often with 
comorbid personality disorders that may make them vulnerable to relapse. Detailed explication 
of this expanded treatment will be invaluable to experienced cognitive therapists, 
as well as to those becoming acquainted with cognitive therapy for depression for 
the first time. Two compelling cases, Denise, treated with traditional cognitive therapy, 
and Barbara, treated with schema‑focused therapy, illustrate each approach.—D. H. B. 

overview aND research 

Depression and the Emergence 
of Cognitive Therapy 

Depression is one of the most common disorders encountered 
by mental health professionals. Research 
from the U.S. National Comorbidity Survey Replication 
(NCS-R; 2005) studies, the Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention (CDC; 2010), and the World 
Health Organization (WHO; 2008), and data provided 

by the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH; 
2006) indicate the following: 

•• 
The lifetime prevalence estimate for major depressive 
disorder in the United States is 29.9% (Kessler, 
Petukhova, Sampson, Zaslavsky, & Wittchen, 
2012). 

•• 
The 12-month prevalence estimate for major depressive 
disorder in the United States is 8.6% 
(Kessler et al., 2012). 

275 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

•• 
Across countries and cultures, the lifetime prevalence 
estimates for major depressive disorder are 
14.6% in high- and 11.1% in low- to middle-income 
countries; the 12-month prevalence estimates are 
5.5% in high- and 5.6% low- to middle-income 
countries (Bromet et al., 2011). 

•• 
Major depressive episodes in the United States 
are associated with higher rates of substance dependence 
or abuse among adults ages 18 or older 
(21.5%) and among youth ages 12–17 (18.9%) than 
among those without such episodes (8.2% and 
6.7%, respectively) (Substance Abuse and Mental 
Health Services Administration [SAMHSA], 
2008). 

•• 
Depression increases the risk of heart attacks and 
is more common in those with chronic conditions 
such as obesity, diabetes, cardiovascular disease, 
cancer, asthma, and arthritis (NIMH, 2006; Strine 
et al., 2008; Chapman, Perry, & Strine, 2005). 

•• 
Major depressive disorder in the United States is 
associated with 27.2 lost workdays and bipolar disorder 
(I or II) with 65.5 lost workdays for each ill 
worker per year (Kessler et al., 2006). 

•• 
Major depressive disorder is the leading cause 
of disability in the United States for ages 15–44 
(NIMH, 2006), and is a major contributor to the 
global burden of disease (WHO, 2004). 

The high risk of relapse (Scott, 2000), high resource 
utilization (Howland, 1993), and loss of human capital 
(Berndt et al., 2000) associated with depression reveal 
the seriousness of the problem. The WHO (2004) projects 
that depression will be among the top three causes 
of the total number of years of life lost to illness, disability, 
or premature death by 2030. As these reports 
indicate, depression is widespread, debilitating, costly, 
and potentially devastating. 

No amount of data can adequately capture or convey 
the personal pain and suffering experienced in depression. 
Many depressed people do not get professional 
help (Frank & Thase, 1999; Jarrett, 1995; Wang et al., 
2005), and although the number seeking help increased 
over the last decade, undertreatment remains a serious 
problem (Olfson et al., 2002; Wang et al., 2005). 
The cost and/or lack of sufficient coverage by health 
insurance companies, concerns about confidentiality, 
continued social stigma, and the lack of information regarding 
where to go and what type of services to obtain 
are still obstacles to receiving appropriate and adequate 
mental health services (SAMHSA, 2008). Obtaining 

the right type of help can be at once inhibiting and 
overwhelming, especially to those already impaired. 
The following quote remains relevant today: 

Americans who do seek treatment for depressive symptoms 
must decide where to seek which treatment and 
from what type of practitioner. . . . The clinician must 
select a somatic, psychological, or combination of 
treatment, at a given dose and/or schedule of appointments. 
. . . Throughout this procedure, the patient decides 
to what extent he/she will comply with the recommendations, 
for how long, against recognized and 
unrecognized economic, practical, physical, and emotional 
costs. . . . Sadly, the lack of information as well 
as the continued social stigma of psychiatric illness and 
treatment influence decision-making. Simultaneously, 
the decisions occur in an environment filled with social, 
political, and economic debate, and tension among 
policy makers, third-party payers, and clinicians, as 
well as among different types of practitioner guilds. 
(Jarrett, 1995, p. 435) 

When care is provided, it is frequently inadequate or 
minimally adequate (Wang et al., 2005). Evidencedbased 
treatments have not been widely adopted in clinical 
practice (Stirman et al., in press), reflecting a public 
health crisis (Keller & Boland, 1998). The need for 
delivery of treatments with proven and rapid efficacy 
remains paramount. 

One of the major developments in the treatment of 
depression has been the emergence of cognitive therapy, 
which has expanded exponentially since Beck’s publication 
of a detailed treatment manual for depression in 
1979 (Beck, 1967, 1976; Beck, Rush, Shaw, & Emery, 
1979). The work of Beck and his colleagues has led 
to a paradigm shift within psychotherapy (Salkovskis, 
1996). Due in part to Beck’s development of testable 
hypotheses and clinical protocols, cognitive therapy 
has received an enormous amount of professional attention 
(Hollon, 1998; McGinn & Young, 1996; Rehm, 
1990). Of all the cognitive-behavioral treatment approaches 
to depression, Beck’s paradigm (Beck, 1967; 
Beck et al., 1979) has received the greatest amount of 
empirical study, validation, and clinical application 
(Barlow & Hofmann, 1997; de Oliveira, 1998; Dobson 
& Pusch, 1993; Hollon, 1998; Hollon, Thase, & 
Markowitz, 2002; Jarrett & Thase, 2010; Rehm, 1990; 
Roberts & Hartlage, 1996; Scott, 1996a). Cognitive 
therapy has become the treatment of choice for many 
disorders (Clark & Beck, 2010; Newman, Leahy, Beck, 
Reilly-Harrington, & Gyulai, 2002). There are many 


Cognitive Therapy for Depression 

excellent books for practitioners who teach cognitive 
therapy procedures (e.g., J. S. Beck, 2011), as well as 
workbooks and/or guides for clients (e.g., Gilson, Freeman, 
Yates, & Freeman, 2009; Leahy, 2010; Wright & 
McCray, 2011). 

Along with this attention, however, has come confusion 
about what is actually meant by the term “cognitive 
therapy.” The actual cognitive therapeutic strategies 
employed in “cognitive” treatments may differ in 
many ways from one another and from those explicitly 
prescribed by Beck and colleagues (1979) in their 
manual for cognitive therapy of depression. Thus, the 
reader should be aware that common use of the term 
“cognitive therapy” does not necessarily imply uniformity 
in procedures. The therapy described by Beck 
and colleagues involves the use of both cognitive and 
behavioral techniques, and can therefore be accurately 
labeled “cognitive-behavioral”; however, in the literature, 
both terms have been applied in describing Beck 
and colleagues’ procedures, with some articles utilizing 
the term “cognitive therapy” (Sacco & Beck, 1995, 
p. 345). 

Research on Treatment of the Acute Phase 

Outcome research has found cognitive therapy to be 
effective with clinical populations in numerous controlled 
trials (see review by Beck & Alford, 2009; 
Hollon & Shelton, 2001). Although some early studies 
(Blackburn, Bishop, Glen, Whalley, & Christie, 1981; 
Rush, Beck, Kovacs, & Hollon, 1977) suggested that 
cognitive therapy may be superior to drug treatment for 
depression at termination, Meterissian and Bradwejn 
(1989) noted that psychopharmacological interventions 
often were not adequately implemented. In research in 
which interventions were adequate, cognitive therapy 
generally was shown to be equivalent in efficacy to 
antidepressant medications, including tricyclic antidepressants 
(TCAs) and selective serotonin reuptake 
inhibitors (SSRIs) in the treatment of outpatients with 
nonbipolar depression (DeRubeis et al., 2005; Hollon 
et al., 1992; Murphy, Simmons, Wetzel, & Lustman, 
1984) and a monoamine oxidase inhibitor (MAOI) in 
the treatment of outpatients with atypical depression 
(Jarrett et al., 1999). Although many studies did not 
include pill-placebo conditions, the studies by Jarrett 
and colleagues and DeRubeis and colleagues (2005) 
found the active treatments superior to pill-placebos. In 
a mega-analysis by DeRubeis, Gelfand, Tang, and Simons 
(1999) of treatment outcome in four studies with 

severely depressed outpatients, cognitive therapy was 
equivalent to antidepressant medication (imipramine or 
nortriptyline). A study by Bhar and colleagues (2008) 
found that CBT and pharmacotherapy (paroxetine) produced 
similar trajectories of change in cognitive and 
vegetative symptoms of major depression throughout 
16 weeks of treatment. 

Only two studies that included a pill-placebo found 
cognitive therapy to be less effective than psychopharmacological 
intervention. The first was the NIMH 
Treatment of Depression Collaborative Research Program 
(TDCRP) with moderate to severe depression 
in adults. The second was the multisite Treatment for 
Adolescents with Depression Study (TADS) for reduction 
of depressive symptoms in adolescents. 

The NIMH TDCRP was the first major study to 
include a pill-placebo condition. The initial results of 
TDCRP (Elkin et al., 1989) suggested lower rates of 
improvement with cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) 
than did earlier studies. It also appeared that with more 
severely depressed patient groups, interpersonal psychotherapy 
and antidepressant drugs might be superior 
to CBT. The high visibility and prestige of the NIMH 
TDCRP study generated a great deal of debate (Hollon, 
DeRubeis, & Evans, 1996; Wolpe, 1993) because it appeared 
that the benefits of CBT in the acute treatment 
phase might have been overestimated in previous studies. 
However, on later examination of the data, Elkin, 
Gibbons, Shea, and Shaw (1996) acknowledged Jacobson 
and Hollon’s (1996) observation that the outcome 
results varied across sites, with cognitive therapy performing 
as well as medication at one of the three sites 
with severely depressed clients. Jacobson and Hollon 
noted that the best results were obtained at the site with 
the most experienced therapists. Hollon and colleagues 
(2002, p. 62) “suspect that the explanation is not that 
cognitive therapy cannot be effective with such patients, 
but that the therapist’s expertise makes a greater difference 
the more difficult the depression is to treat.” Additionally, 
a study by Albon and Jones (2003) raised the 
question of the distinctiveness of the two types of psychotherapy 
treatments in the TDCRP. Albon and Jones, 
expert therapists in CBT and interpersonal psychotherapy, 
respectively, developed prototypes of ideal regimens 
of their own respective treatments. Then, actual 
transcripts of treatment sessions from the TDCRP were 
compared to these expert prototypes. Albon and Jones 
found that both CBT and interpersonal psychotherapy 
sessions conformed most closely to the cognitivebehavioral 
prototype, and that closer adherence to the 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

cognitive-behavioral prototype produced more positive 
correlations with outcome measures across both types 
of treatment. Perhaps this is why Quilty, McBride, and 
Bagby (2008) found equivalent outcomes with interpersonal 
psychotherapy, CBT, and pharmacotherapy, and 
Peeters and colleagues (2013) found similar remission 
rates with CBT, interpersonal psychotherapy, and both 
treatments combined with medication. Similarly, Luty 
and colleagues (2007) found interpersonal psychotherapy 
and CBT equally effective overall but (in contrast to 
the NIMH TDCRP study) they found CBT to be more 
effective with severe depression. 

In further analysis of the same dataset used in the 
Luty and colleagues (2007) study, Joyce and colleagues 
(2007) found that comorbidity of personality and major 
depressive disorders adversely affected the treatment 
response to interpersonal psychotherapy but not CBT. 
Bellino, Zizza, Rinaldi, and Bogetto (2007) found interpersonal 
psychotherapy and CBT (each combined 
with fluoxetine) equally effective in the treatment of 
depression in patients with borderline personality and 
major depressive disorders. Fournier and colleagues 
(2008) found that at 16 weeks of treatment, CBT was 
more effective in reducing depression than medication 
(paroxetine) for patients with moderate to severe depression 
and no personality disorder, but less effective 
for those with a personality disorder. This study did not 
include patients with borderline, schizotypal, or antisocial 
personality disorders. The efficacy of CBT (alone 
or as an adjunct to psychopharmacological treatment) 
with coexisting major depressive and personality disorders 
is still not clear. 

Some writers have argued that the major psychotherapies 
are essentially equivalent in effectiveness, regardless 
of the disorder studied. To test this hypothesis, a 
recent meta-analysis examined whether CBT was superior 
to other forms of psychotherapy across a range of 
disorders (Tolin, 2010). The results showed that, across 
all disorders included in the study, CBT was superior 
to psychodynamic therapy, although not to interpersonal 
or supportive therapies, at posttreatment and at 
follow-up. However, the analysis found that CBT was 
significantly superior to the alternative therapies studied 
for depressive and anxiety disorders. Tolin (2010) 
concluded that “these results argue against previous 
claims of treatment equivalence and suggest that CBT 
should be considered a first-line psychosocial treatment 
of choice, at least for patients with anxiety and depressive 
disorders” (p. 710). 

The multisite TADS (2004) for reduction of depressive 
symptoms in adolescents found that the combination 
of medication (fluoxetine) and CBT produced the 
most positive outcome, medication alone was superior 
to pill-placebo, but CBT alone did not significantly differ 
from pill-placebo. These findings were based on 
12-week outcome measures. Analyses (TADS, 2007) 
on data from outcome measures at Weeks 18, 24, and 
36, however, indicated that by Week 36 the effectiveness 
of CBT significantly increased and was equivalent 
to medication, and that the combination of medication 
and CBT was slightly more effective than CBT or medication 
alone. 

Spirito, Esposito-Smythers, Wolff, and Uhl (2011) 
recently completed an updated review of outcome studies 
regarding CBT for adolescent depression and suicidality. 
They summarized the data regarding depression 
by concluding: “CBT for adolescent depression has 
received considerable support in the research literature. 
Individual and group CBT, with and without a parent 
component, appears to be well established and/or efficacious 
for the majority of participants.” Regarding 
CBT and suicidality in adolescents, the authors concluded 
that “the majority of studies of CBT for depressed 
adolescents have found a reduction in suicidal 
ideation regardless of CBT format (i.e., individual, 
group). It should be noted that reductions in suicidality 
have also been found in response to family therapy, 
supportive therapy, and pharmacotherapy. Nonetheless, 
while various forms of therapy resulted in comparable 
reductions in adolescent suicidality, CBT has shown 
the most promise in concurrently reducing MDD diagnoses/
symptoms and suicidal ideation.” 

Several studies have not found the combination of 
CBT and drugs to be superior to either treatment alone 
with depressed outpatients in the acute phase of treatment 
(Biggs & Rush, 1999; Evans et al., 1992; Hollon, 
Shelton, & Loosen, 1991; Scott, 1996a; Shaw & Segal, 
1999). The increment in efficacy appears to be modest 
in the acute phase of treatment at best, with increases 
in efficacy from 10 to 20% (Conte, Plutchik, Wild, & 
Karasu, 1986). Studies regarding treatment with depressed 
inpatients suggest beneficial results when CBT 
is combined with medication (Bowers, 1990; Miller, 
Norman, Keitner, Bishop, & Dow, 1989; Stuart & Bowers, 
1995; Wright, 1996). Although cognitive therapy 
appears to be a useful adjunct to standard care with inpatients, 
it remains unclear whether cognitive therapy 
alone is sufficient (Hollon et al., 2002). 


Cognitive Therapy for Depression 

In attempts to make traditional cognitive therapy 
more accessible and/or affordable for the general public, 
Internet-based (ICBT) and group (CBGT) CBTs 
have been explored. In a review of rapidly accumulating 
data on ICBT, Johansson and Andersson (2012) 
concluded that there is mounting support for the effectiveness 
of guided ICBT (structured self-help materials 
with therapist contact via e-mail) over unguided 
ICBT (no therapist contact); the research indicates that 
guided ICBT is comparable to face-to-face therapy in 
effectiveness; tailored treatments (which include additional 
specific techniques for coexisting diagnoses) are 
superior to nontailored treatments (same material for 
all patients) with severe depression. 

Regarding CGBT, a recent meta-analysis (Feng 
et al., 2012) on studies published from 2000 to 2010 
revealed that CBGT was more effective with mild to 
moderate depression. The effect decreased as depression 
severity increased. The optimal length of session 
was 60–90 minutes. Take-home assignments improved 
results. Higher turnover rates were related to poorer 
outcomes. Feng and colleagues (2012) found a small 
effect on relapse rates at 6 months. The relapse rates 
were lowest, with no residual symptoms posttreatment. 

Research on Relapse Prevention1 

Even though the vast majority of patients recover from 
an episode of depression, they nevertheless remain vulnerable 
to future depression. 

Recurrence is a major problem for many individuals 
suffering from depression: at least 50% of individuals 
who suffer from one depressive episode will have 
another within 10 years. Those experiencing two episodes 
have a 90% chance of suffering a third, while 
individuals with three or more lifetime episodes have 
relapse rates of 40% within 15 weeks of recovery from 
an episode (Kupfer, Frank, & Wamhoff, 1996, p. 293). 

Other investigators have estimated that 85% of patients 
with unipolar depression are likely to experience 
recurrences (Keller & Boland, 1998, p. 350). Wang 
(2004), through a 6-year follow-up, found that 49.8% 
of those treated for major depression developed subsequent 
major depressive episodes. As these numbers 
clearly show, there is an urgent need for treatments capable 
of minimizing and preventing relapse. 

What we consider a very exciting finding in the treatment 
of depression with cognitive therapy is the con


sistent observation (Paykel, 2007) that patients treated 
with cognitive therapy alone or with a combination 
of cognitive therapy and medication fare far better in 
terms of relapse than do patients treated with medication 
alone (when both treatments are stopped at termination). 
Despite differences in sample characteristics 
and methodologies across studies, cognitive therapy appears 
to have important prophylactic properties. After a 
1-year follow-up, numerous studies have reported lower 
relapse rates for patients treated with cognitive therapy 
than for patients treated with antidepressants. Simons, 
Murphy, Levine, and Wetzel (1986) found relapse rates 
of 12% with cognitive therapy versus 66% with antidepressants; 
Bowers (1990) found relapse rates of 20% 
with cognitive therapy versus 80% with antidepressants; 
Shea and colleagues (1992) reported 9% relapse 
with cognitive therapy versus 28% with antidepressants; 
Hollon and colleagues (2005) reported rates of 
31% relapse with cognitive therapy versus 76% with 
antidepressants. Results from the most extensive metaanalysis 
to date revealed that “on average, only 29.5% 
of the patients treated with cognitive therapy relapsed 
versus 60% of those treated with antidepressants” (Gloaguen, 
Cottraux, Cucherat, & Blackburn, 1998, p. 68). 
The prophylactic benefits of cognitive therapy are all 
the more significant because 

there is no evidence that pharmacotherapy confers any 
protection against the return of symptoms after treatment 
has been terminated.2 Since the majority of depressed 
individuals will experience multiple episodes, 
the capacity of an intervention to prevent the return of 
symptoms after treatment may be at least as important 
as its ability to treat the current episode. (Evans et al., 
1992, p. 802) 

A related concern—and one of the most salient (but 
not exclusively associated) with psychotropic agents— 
is the presence of residual symptoms after treatment: 
“Treatment of depression by pharmacological means is 
likely to leave a substantial amount of residual symptoms 
in most patients” (Fava, Rafanelli, Grandi, Conti, 
& Belluardo, 1998, p. 820). Inevitably, patients who 
improve on antidepressants continue to manifest some 
of the symptoms of depression and, as numerous investigators 
have concluded, unless patients achieve full recovery, 
residual symptoms increase the risk of relapse 
(Evans et al., 1992; Fava, Rafanelli, Grandi, Conti, et 
al., 1998; Hardeveld, Spijker, de Graaf, Nolen, & Beekman, 
2010; Keller & Boland, 1998; Rush et al., 2006). 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

A group of investigators who were concerned about 
the risk of relapse associated with residual symptoms 
looked at the lingering symptoms after treatment with 
fluoxetine (Prozac). They found that 

even among subjects who are considered full responders 
to fluoxetine 20 mg for 5 weeks, more than 80% had 
1 or more residual DSM-III-R symptoms of major depressive 
disorder, more than 30% had 3 or more symptoms, 
and 10.2% met formal criteria for either minor 
or subsyndromal depression. . . . These findings imply 
that minimal depressive symptoms are prodromal and 
increase the risk of developing an initial full-blown 
episode of major depression. (Nierenberg et al., 1999, 
pp. 224–225) 

Cognitive therapy has been found to be effective in 
reducing both residual symptoms and relapse after the 
termination of medication: “Short-term CBT after successful 
antidepressant drug therapy had a substantial 
effect on relapse rate after discontinuation of antidepressant 
drugs. Patients who received CBT reported a 
substantially lower relapse rate (25%) during the 2-year 
follow-up than those assigned to [clinical management] 
(80%)” (Fava, Rafanelli, Grandi, Conti, et al., 1998, 

p. 818). The protective benefits of cognitive therapy 
were still noticeable in a 4-year follow-up study, although 
the benefits faded after a 6-year period (Fava, 
Rafanelli, Grandi, Canestrari, & Morphy, 1998). Another 
study found that only 5% of the “CBT treated 
and recovered” group sought additional treatment 
compared with 39% of the antidepressant group (see 
Williams, 1997). Paykel and colleagues (1999) found 
significantly lower cumulative relapse rates at 68 weeks 
in patients who received 16 sessions of CBT following 
a partial response to pharmacotherapy. Bockting and 
colleagues (2005) compared treatment as usual (TAU, 
which included continuation of medication) with TAU 
augmented with brief cognitive therapy and found relapse 
significantly reduced in patients with five or more 
previous episodes of depression. The relapse rates were 
72% for TAU versus 46% for TAU augmented with 
brief cognitive therapy. 
A preventive strategy used by psychiatrists to deal 
with high relapse rates associated with antidepressant 
medication is “continuation medication,” which is longterm 
(and in many cases lifelong) maintenance treatment 
(Evans et al., 1992; Fava, Rafanelli, Grandi, Conti, 
et al., 1998; Thase, 1999)—usually at the same dosage 
provided during the acute phase of treatment. The research 
comparing relapse rates in patients continuing 

medication over the long term versus those treated and 
then withdrawn from cognitive therapy does not suggest 
a significant advantage to this practice. For example, 
DeRubeis and colleagues (2005) found that both 
groups had equivalent relapse rates (40%); Hollon and 
colleagues (2005) found that 31% relapsed when treated 
and then withdrawn from cognitive therapy compared 
to 47% that relapsed when treated with continuation 
medication. Fournier and colleagues (2008) found that 
patients with both major depression and a personality 
disorder who responded positively to 16 weeks of CBT, 
with three optional booster sessions over a 12-month 
period, showed superior sustained improvement with 
CBT compared to pharmacotherapy withdrawal, and 
equivalent improvement to pharmacotherapy with continuation 
over those 12 months. Dobson and colleagues 
(2008) followed patients who responded to a treatment 
of CBT, behavioral activation, or pharmacotherapy 
for acute depression. During a 2-year follow-up, psychotherapy 
patients received no further treatment and 
pharmacotherapy patients received either continuation 
pharmacotherapy or continuation pill-placebo. They 
found that CBT provided the strongest protection; both 
psychotherapies were equivalent to pharmacotherapy 
with continuation; both psychotherapies were superior 
to continuation pill-placebo. 

Some researchers have pointed out the tautological 
nature of this solution: “Drug treatment results in a 
higher relapse rate than cognitive-behavioral therapy; 
therefore patients should be maintained on drugs to 
prevent relapse” (Antonuccio, Danton, & DeNelsky, 
1995, p. 578). Although drugs are still the initial and 
most frequently prescribed form of treatment for major 
depression in the United States (Antonuccio et al., 
1995; Cipriani et al., 2009), and the most commonly 
used method to maintain treatment gains (Geddes et 
al., 2003), three important points need to be considered: 
premature termination, iatrogenic effects of pharmacotherapy, 
and cost-effectiveness. 

Research has shown that “a sizeable group of patients 
either chooses not to continue long-term pharmacotherapy 
in the absence of any depressive symptoms, 
cannot take medication due to a medical condition that 
precludes the use of antidepressants, or suffer from side 
effects that are intolerable to them” (Spanier, Frank, 
McEachran, Grochocinski, & Kupfer, 1999, p. 250). 
Although the newer “first-line” medications are more 
tolerable than older medications, 70% of patients continue 
to experience significant depressive symptoms 
with one of these medications, and up to 50% discon



Cognitive Therapy for Depression 

tinue trials due to unwanted side effects (Connolly & 
Thase, 2012). Thase (2011) has noted that various combinations 
of antidepressants are widely prescribed as 
the result of problems with insufficient or nonresponse, 
even though properly controlled and adequately powered 
clinical trials have not yet been conducted on such 
combinations. 

Regarding iatrogenic effects, one group of researchers 
concluded that “there is much evidence that antidepressant 
medications are not benign treatments. . . . 
Many antidepressants are cardiotoxic, have dangerous 
side effects, and are often used in suicide attempts. . . . 
[They also] result in relatively poorer compliance than 
psychotherapy, have a higher dropout rate, and result 
in as much as a 60% non-response rate with some patient 
populations” (Antonuccio et al., 1995, p. 581). We 
should note that psychotherapy also may have unintended 
and undesirable side effects (Mohr, 1995), but 
very little is known about negative effects associated 
with cognitive therapy. 

The third consideration is the cost-effectiveness of 
treatment. The research on this topic is surprisingly 
limited. Antonuccio, Thomas, and Danton (1997) conducted 
a cost-effectiveness analysis on several outcome 
studies on depression and found that over a 2-year period 
the cost of fluoxetine alone was 33% higher than 
individual CBT, and that the cost of the combined treatment 
of fluoxetine with CBT was 23% higher than CBT 
alone. An Australian study (Vos, Corry, Haby, Carter, 
& Andrews, 2005) examined the costs and benefits of 
CBT and drugs in the episodic and maintenance treatment 
of depression. They found maintenance treatment 
with SSRIs to be the most expensive option, nearly 
double that of bibliotherapy, group CBT, individual 
CBT, and TCAs. Scott, Palmer, Paykel, Teasdale, and 
Hayhurst (2003) compared the cost-effectiveness of relapse 
prevention in depression by comparing CBT as 
an adjunctive treatment to antidepressants and clinical 
management, and with antidepressants and clinical 
management alone, over a 17-month period. They 
found the addition of CBT was more expensive but also 
more effective in reducing cumulative relapse rates 
(relapse rates were 29% with adjunctive CBT vs. 47% 
without adjunctive CBT). Importantly, they noted that 
the costs associated with adjunctive CBT in their study 
were a “worst-case” scenario because the follow-up 
extended only 17 months; other research (as noted in 
the previous section) has demonstrated maintenance 
of gains and lowered relapse rates up to 6 years with 
CBT. Sava, Yates, Lupu, Szentogatai, and David (2009) 

conducted a cost comparison of CBT, rational–emotive 
therapy, and pharmacotherapy (fluoxetine), and found 
all three treatments equally effective with symptom 
reduction, but both psychotherapies were more costeffective 
than pharmacotherapy for the number of 
depression-free days/month over a 40-week period. 
Although Dobson and colleagues (2008) did not conduct 
a formal statistical comparisons of costs among 
treatment conditions, they noted that the “cumulative 
cost of continued medications proved to be more expensive 
by the end of the first year of follow-up in this 
study” (p. 471). Scott and colleagues (2003) argued that 
the incrementally adjusted costs over time to relapse 
should be considered in decision making on the value 
of various treatments. These findings suggest that CBT, 
either alone or in combination with drugs, can enhance 
cost-effectiveness, particularly when higher short-term 
costs of combined treatments are balanced against better 
outcomes and lower marginal costs in the long term. 

What is the optimum frequency and duration of 
sessions for cognitive therapy to be effective, both at 
termination and at long-term follow-up? According to 
Sacco and Beck (1995, p. 332): 

General guidelines suggest 15 to 25 (50-minute) sessions 
at weekly intervals, with more seriously depressed 
clients usually requiring twice-weekly meetings for the 
initial 4–5 weeks. To avoid an abrupt termination, a 
“tapering off” process is recommended, with the last 
few sessions occurring once every 2 weeks. After termination, 
some clients may also need a few booster sessions 
(four or five are common). 

Some writers have noted that longer courses of 
treatment may be necessary for full and more lasting 
recovery (Elkin et al., 1996; Thase, 1992). Research 
by Jarrett and colleagues (2001) suggests that relapse 
rates in high-risk patients with an early age of onset 
or unstable remission might possibly be reduced further 
with “continuation-phase cognitive therapy” (C-
CT), which consists of 10 sessions (biweekly during 
the first 2 months and once a month for the following 
6 months) following the acute phase of treatment. The 
focus in the continuation phase is on relapse prevention 
and the generalization of skills (across responses, settings, 
stimuli, and times). This strategy is supported by 
studies (Jarrett et al., 2001; Vittengl, Clark, Dunn, & 
Jarrett, 2007; Vittengl, Clark, & Jarrett, 2009) aimed 
at preventing relapse in responders to a variety treatment 
modalities (pharmacotherapy, interpersonal psy



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

chotherapy, and/or CBT) for the acute phase of depression. 
While more research is being conducted on this 
strategy (Jarrett & Thase, 2010; Jarrett, Vittengl, and 
Clark (2008) have suggested using scores on a variety 
of measures (Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression, 
Beck Depression Inventory [BDI], Inventory for Depressive 
Symptomatology, and the Longitudinal Interval 
Follow-Up Evaluation) to help cognitive therapists 
decide how many more sessions may be needed to help 
avoid relapse or recurrence. 

Another alternative for relapse prevention is mindfulness-
based cognitive therapy (MBCT), developed 
by Teasdale, Segal, and Williams (1995). MBCT draws 
from acceptance and meditation strategies that are also 
central to dialectical behavior therapy for borderline 
personality (Linehan, 1993a, 1993b). “MBCT aims at 
developing participants’ awareness of, and changing 
their relationship to, unwanted thoughts, feelings, and 
body sensations, so that participants no longer avoid 
them or react to them in an automatic way but rather 
respond to them in an intentional and skillful manner” 
(Ma & Teasdale, 2004, p. 32). Teasdale and colleagues 
(Ma & Teasdale, 2004; Teasdale, 1997a, 1997b; Teasdale 
et al., 1995, 2002) have argued that the primary 
mechanism of therapeutic change in cognitive therapy 
is in distancing or decentering from cognition rather 
than changing the content of thought. Two studies conducted 
on MBCT found that TAU followed by MBCT, 
in comparison with TAU alone, significantly reduced 
relapse in patients with three or more episodes of depression. 
In the first study, 66% relapsed with TAU 
alone versus 37% with TAU followed by MBCT (Teasdale 
et al., 2000); in the second study, 78% relapsed 
with TAU alone versus 36% with TAU followed by 
MBCT (Ma & Teasdale, 2004). Extending the followup 
period to 2 years, Matthew, Whitford, Kenny, and 
Denson (2010) found TAU followed by MBCT more 
effective than TAU alone in the “decrease of depressive 
symptoms, worry and rumination, and improvement 
in mindfulness skills” (p. 998) but noted a weakening 
of effects over time that appeared to be related to the 
amount of formal MBCT practice. 

Although prior researchers (Segal, Williams, & 
Teasdale, 2002) presumed that the difficulty concentrating 
and negative thinking during a depressive episode 
would preclude training in attentional control 
skills with MBCT, van Aalderen and colleagues (2012) 
recently found that MBCT plus TAU, compared to TAU 
alone, showed equivalent gains in effectiveness for patients 
in remission as for those currently depressed. 

Manicavasagar, Perich, and Parker (2012) also examined 
the effectiveness of MBCT in reducing current depression. 
They compared CBGT and MBCT, and found 
equivalent improvements in depression. Interestingly, 
they found no significant differences between the two 
conditions in mindfulness or rumination scores. The 
potential for lower costs associated with treatments that 
can be implemented in a group format suggest that they 
may be attractive for not only relapse prevention but 
also recurrent depression. 

Research on Chronic Depression 

As the previous data demonstrate, CBT has been shown 
to be an effective treatment across a wide range of depressed 
populations. Nevertheless, many depressed patients 
still do not respond to treatment. Depression that 
is resistant to current treatments remains a major public 
health problem. Of patients, 40–50% of patients may 
not complete or respond to CBT treatment for acute depression 
(DeRubeis et al., 2005; Jarret & Thase, 2010). 
Fifty percent of patients do not achieve full remission 
in depressive symptoms after two trials of medication 
(Mathys & Mitchell, 2011; Rush et al., 2006; Trivedi et 
al., 2006). Wiersma and colleagues (2008) note from 
current research that 20% of depressions persist after 
2 years and that 25–35% of outpatient mental health 
patients suffer from chronic depression. 

McCullough (2003) has proposed, on the basis of 
existing research, that there are qualitative differences 
between chronic and nonchronic forms of depression, 
and that they require different treatment strategies. 
According to McCullough, research “shows that the 
chronic disorders, when compared with acute/episodic 
major depression (both single and recurrent episodes 
with interepisode full recovery), differ significantly in 
terms of age of onset, clinical course patterns, developmental 
history, modal Axis II comorbidity profiles, 
characteristic response-to-treatment rates, predictable 
relapse percentages, and need for long-term treatment” 

(p. 243). He notes that these differences largely have not 
been addressed in the treatment literature; consequently, 
therapeutic work by psychologists, psychiatrists, and 
social workers has been conducted as if patients with 
depression are an undifferentiated population. Young, 
Klosko, and Weishaar (2003) noted that although traditional 
CBT is highly effective for many patients, there 
remain a significant number who either are not helped 
or continue to experience emotional distress and impaired 
functioning, particularly those with significant 

Cognitive Therapy for Depression 

character pathology. For those with chronic problems, 
a more extensive treatment approach may be required. 

Before discussing specific treatments for chronic depression, 
we describe the general characteristics of this 
population. An early age of onset (usually in midadolescence, 
before age 20) in the form of dysthymia tends 
to differentiate between the chronic and nonchronic 
forms of depression in 70–75% of clinical populations 
(Keller & Boland, 1998; Keller & Hanks, 1995; Mc-
Cullough, 2000). Early life trauma or adverse family 
relations (loss of a parent in childhood; sexual, physical, 
and/or verbal abuse; neglect; and overprotection) 
are more evident in those with chronic depression 
(Chapman et al., 2004; Cong et al., 2012; Dube et al., 
2001; Heim & Nemeroff, 2001; Kendler et al., 1995; 
Lizardi et al., 1995; Randolph & Dykman, 1998; Sachs-
Ericsson, Verona, Joiner, & Preacher, 2006). In patients 
with early-onset dysthymia who experience chronic 
stress, those with the addition of an adverse family history 
evidence an increase in depression severity over 
time, compared to those without such adverse family 
histories but with familial loadings for dysthymic disorder 
(Dougherty, Klein, & Davila, 2004). There is a 
higher prevalence of comorbid disorders, particularly 
personality disorders (Garyfallos et al., 1999; Pepper 
et al., 1995). Cluster C personality disorders are associated 
with chronic depression (Hayden & Klein, 2001). 

Five potentially promising treatments that expand on 
CBT have been developed that can address chronic depression. 
These treatments are Harley, Sprich, Safren, 
Jacob, and Fava’s (2008) application of Linehan’s 
(1993b) dialectical behavior therapy (DBT) skills training; 
applications (Barnhofer et al., 2009; Eisendrath 
et al., 2011) of Segal and colleagues’ (2002) MBCT; 
Wells and colleagues’ (2012) metacognitive therapy 
(MCT); McCullough’s (2000) cognitive-behavioral 
analysis system of psychotherapy (CBASP); and Young 
and colleagues’ (2003) schema therapy (ST). 

Harley and colleagues (2008) have provided preliminary 
evidence that DBT skills training conducted 
in groups may be an effective alternative for treatmentresistant 
depression. Patients who had not achieved remission 
with antidepressant medication were assigned 
to either a 16-session, once-weekly DBT skills training 
condition (mindfulness, interpersonal effectiveness, 
emotion regulation, and distress tolerance) or a 
wait-list condition. They found significantly greater 
improvement (with large effect sizes on the Hamilton 
Rating Scale and BDI) in depressive symptoms in the 
DBT skills training group. Feldman, Harley, Kerrigan, 

Jacobo, and Fava (2009) hypothesized that DBT skills 
training helps patients process their emotional experience 
in a way that reduces rather than exacerbates their 
depressive symptoms. 

Another preliminary study (Barnhofer et al., 2009) 
and one case study (Eisendrath, Chartier, & McLane, 
2011) successfully used MBCT to treat chronic depression. 
Barnhofer and colleagues (2009) compared 
MBCT plus TAU and TAU alone, and found significantly 
greater improvement in the MBCT plus TAU group. 
Eisendrath and colleagues (2011) successfully treated a 
patient with a modified version of MCBT. They added 
exercises and metaphors from acceptance and commitment 
therapy (ACT; Luoma, Hayes, & Walser, 2007; 
Zettle, 2007) and focused on current depression in their 
MCBT treatment. These are intriguing initial results, 
especially since these treatments are of relatively short 
duration and conducive to a group format. 

Wells and colleagues (2012) also conducted a preliminary 
study in which they used MCT to treat patients 
with treatment-resistant depression. Attentional 
control, rumination, worry, and metacognitive beliefs 
were targeted in eight treatment sessions. They found 
significant improvements both posttreatment and at 
12-month follow-up. This treatment will be of further 
interest if the positive results can be replicated in a randomized 
controlled trial. 

McCullough’s (2000) CBASP is an integrative, 
time-limited treatment that contains elements of cognitive, 
behavioral, interpersonal, and psychodynamic 
psychotherapies. McCullough (2003) states: 

Treatment begins with a cognitive-emotionally retarded 
adult child who brings a negative “snapshot” view 
of the world to the session. The chronic patient functions, 
at least in the social–interpersonal arena, with 
the structural mindset of a 4–6 year old preoperational 
(Piaget) child. . . . The patient must be taught to function 
formally, to perceive that his or her behavior has 
consequences, be taught to generate authentic empathy, 
and to learn to assert himself or herself effectively. Psychotherapy 
begins with an “adult child” who must be 
assisted to mature developmentally in the cognitive– 
emotive sphere. (pp. 247, 248) 

Change is brought about through a contingency program 
that relies on negative reinforcement. First, contingencies 
between behaviors and consequences are 
exposed. Then, as the result of positive changes in behavior, 
discomfort and distress are reduced or eliminated. 
Three techniques are used to bring about change: 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

situational analysis, interpersonal discrimination exercise, 
and behavioral skill training/rehearsal. Two 
studies have used CBASP with chronically depressed 
outpatients. The first (Keller et al., 2000) compared the 
effects of CBASP alone, Serzone (nefazodone) alone, 
and combined treatment after a 12-week acute phase 
of treatment. The overall response rate was 48% for 
both monotherapies, compared with 73% for the combined 
treatment. Among the 76% (519 out of 681) completers 
of the study, 52% responded to CBASP, 55% 
responded to Serzone, and 85% responded to combined 
treatments. The second (Klein et al., 2004), a 1-year 
follow-up to this initial study, examined relapse and depressive 
symptoms over time in the CBASP responders 
by comparing the effects of continuation CBASP therapy 
(16 sessions over 52 weeks) with assessment only. 
There were significantly fewer relapses and depressive 
symptoms for those in the continuation CBASP 
therapy. A more recent study, however, has provided 
mixed results. Kocsis and colleagues (2009) compared 
pharmacotherapy augmented with CBASP, pharmacotherapy 
augmented with brief supportive therapy, and 
continued pharmacotherapy alone with nonresponders 
and partial responders to an initial medication trial. 
Although 37.5% experienced a partial response or remitted 
with these three treatments, the researchers did 
not find significant differences among the three groups. 
Two more studies currently are in progress (Schramm 
et al., 2011; Wiersma et al., 2008) to help clarify the 
specific utility of CBASP for chronic depression. 

ST (or schema-focused therapy) also is an integrative 
therapy (Young et al., 2003), with elements of cognitive, 
behavioral, interpersonal, and emotion-focused 
therapies. Hawke and Povencher (2011) note that 
“Young’s schema theory does not attempt to compete 
with traditional Beckian theory, but rather expands on 
it for treatment-resistant clientele whose psychological 
problems are thought to be maintained by complex 
characterological underpinnings. It does so by placing 
greater emphasis on the developmental origins of severe 
psychopathology” (p. 258). 

A study by Giesen-Bloo and colleagues (2006) 
found surprisingly strong and significant results in 
favor of ST over transference-focused therapy with 
the chronic disorder of borderline personality. After 
3 years of treatment (sessions twice per week), 45% 
of the patients in schema-focused therapy (vs. 24% in 
transference-focused therapy) completely recovered. 
One year later, over half (52%) in ST fully recovered 
(vs. 29% in transference-focused therapy) and two


thirds (70%) in ST showed significant improvement. In 
addition, patients in ST were significantly less likely to 
drop out of therapy (27% dropped out of ST vs. 50% 
out of transference-focused therapy). Even stronger results 
were reported (Farrell, Shaw, & Webber, 2009) 
for group schema-focused therapy (GST; see Farrell 
& Shaw, 2012) for people with borderline personality 
disorder. This study compared individual TAU (CBT 
or psychodynamic) plus adjunct GST with TAU alone. 
Ninety-four percent receiving TAU plus GST, compared 
to 16% receiving TAU alone, no longer met criteria for 
borderline personality disorder at the end of 20 months 
of treatment. In addition, there was a 0% dropout rate 
in the TAU plus GST condition compared to 25% in the 
TAU condition. Given the high degree of similarities 
between patients with chronic disorders (adverse childhood 
histories, early-onset depression, and a multitude 
of schemas), we believe that ST is very likely to be an 
effective treatment for the chronically depressed population 
as well. Fritz Renner, at Maastricht University in 
the Netherlands, is currently conducting a study on the 
effectiveness of ST with chronic depression (Web link: 
clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/nct01153867). 

Current Status and Future Research 
on Treating Depression 

There is now a considerable body of research on treatments 
for depression. Certainly there are enough inconsistencies 
in the literature to warrant continued debate 
and research regarding the relative merits of different 
treatments for depression. Nevertheless, the overall efficacy 
of cognitive therapy for depression is clearly a 
replicable and robust finding. 

Many important, unanswered questions—along with 
inconsistent research findings—will probably make 
it impossible for proponents of any single treatment 
to make firm recommendations favoring one treatment 
for depression over another across disorders and 
populations. In the spirit of Beck’s emphasis on testable 
hypotheses and clinical protocols, we hope that, 
through more sophisticated research studies, it will 
eventually be possible to better understand which types 
of depressed patients benefit most from which type of 
treatment, or combination of treatments, and in what 
sequence. 

The remainder of this chapter is devoted to describing 
the cognitive model of depression and schema theory; 
detailing the basic characteristics of cognitive and 


Cognitive Therapy for Depression 

schema therapies; and demonstrating applications of 
cognitive and schema therapies to depression in clinical 
practice. 

coGNitive MoDel of DePressioN 

The cognitive model assumes that cognition, behavior, 
and biochemistry are all important components 
of depressive disorders. We do not view them as competing 
theories of depression but as different levels of 
analysis. Each treatment approach has its own “focus 
of convenience.” The pharmacotherapist intervenes at 
the biochemical level; the cognitive therapist intervenes 
at the cognitive, affective, and behavioral levels. Our 
experience suggests that when we change depressive 
cognitions, we simultaneously change the characteristic 
mood, behavior, and, as some evidence suggests 
(Free, Oei, & Appleton, 1998; Joffe, Segal, & Singer, 
1996), the biochemistry of depression. Although the 
exact mechanism of change remains a target of considerable 
investigation, speculation, and debate (Barber 
& DeRubeis, 1989; Castonguay, Goldfried, Wiser, 
Raue, & Hayes, 1996; Crews & Harrison, 1995; DeRubeis 
et al., 1990; DeRubeis & Feeley, 1990; Hayes & 
Strauss, 1998; Oei & Free, 1995; Oei & Shuttlewood, 
1996; Shea & Elkin, 1996; Sullivan & Conway, 1991; 
Whisman, 1993), “there are indications that cognitive 
therapy works by virtue of changing beliefs and 
information-processing proclivities and that different 
aspects of cognition play different roles in the process 
of change” (Hollon et al., 1996, p. 314). 

Our focus in this chapter is on the cognitive disturbances 
in depression. Cognitive science research emphasizes 
the importance of information processing in 
depressive symptomatology (Ingram & Holle, 1992). 
According to these theories, negatively biased cognition 
is a core process in depression. This process is 
reflected in the “cognitive triad of depression”: Depressed 
patients typically have a negative view of themselves, 
of their environment, and of the future. They 
view themselves as worthless, inadequate, unlovable, 
and deficient. Depressed patients view the environment 
as overwhelming, as presenting insuperable obstacles 
that cannot be overcome, and that continually result in 
failure or loss. Moreover, they view the future as hopeless: 
Their own efforts will be insufficient to change the 
unsatisfying course of their lives. This negative view 
of the future often leads to suicidal ideation and actual 
suicide attempts. 

Depressed patients consistently distort their interpretations 
of events, so that they maintain negative views 
of themselves, their environment, and the future. Beck 
suggests that much of this distorted cognitive processing 
takes place outside of conscious awareness, in the 
form of “automatic thoughts,” those thoughts that intervene 
between life events and the patient’s emotional 
reactions to those events. Automatic thoughts often go 
unnoticed by the patient because they are out of awareness, 
they are part of a repetitive or habitual way of 
thinking, and because they occur so often. Automatic 
thoughts are often contrary to what a patient logically 
and consciously knows to be true, and most patients, 
prior to therapy, cannot stop them through rational 
thought processes. 

This process of cognitive distortion is far more common 
in depressed patients than in nondepressed individuals. 
For example, a depressed woman whose husband 
comes home late one night may conclude that he 
is having an affair with another woman, even though 
there is no other evidence supporting this conclusion. 
This example illustrates an “arbitrary inference,” 
reaching a conclusion that is not justified by the available 
evidence. Other distortions include all-or-nothing 
thinking, overgeneralization, selective abstraction, and 
magnification (Beck et al., 1979). 

scheMa theory 

According to subsequent developments within the 
cognitive model, an important predisposing factor for 
many patients with depression is the presence of schemas 
(Stein & Young, 1992; Young, 1990/1999).3 Beck 
(1976) emphasized the importance of schemas in depression 
and provided the following definition: 

A schema is a cognitive structure for screening, coding, 
and evaluating the stimuli that impinge on the organism. 
. . . On the basis of this matrix of schemas, the 
individual is able to orient himself in relation to time 
and space and to categorize and interpret experiences 
in a meaningful way. (p. 233) 

Furthermore, Beck, Freeman, and Associates (1990) 
noted: 

In the field of psychopathology, the term “schema” has 
been applied to structures with a highly personalized 
idiosyncratic content that are activated during disorders 
such as depression, anxiety, panic attacks, and 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

obsessions, and become prepotent. . . . Thus, in clinical 
depression, for example, the negative schemas are 
in ascendancy, resulting in a systematic negative bias 
in the interpretation and recall of experiences as well 
as in short-term and long-term predictions, whereas 
the positive schemas become less accessible. It is easy 
for depressed patients to see the negative aspects of an 
event, but difficult to see the positive. They can recall 
negative events much more readily than positive ones. 
They weigh the probabilities of undesirable outcomes 
more heavily than positive outcomes. (p. 32) 

There has also been increasing recognition that “focusing 
on core schemas is a key to effective short-term 
therapy” (Freeman & Davison, 1997, p. 8). 

Through clinical observation, Young has identified 
a subset of schemas that he terms early maladaptive 
schemas (EMSs): “Early Maladaptive Schemas refer 
to extremely stable and enduring themes that develop 
during childhood and are elaborated upon throughout 
the individual’s lifetime and that are dysfunctional to 
a significant degree” (Young, 1990/1999, p. 9). The 18 
EMSs identified by Young are listed in Figure 7.1.4 

According to Young’s (see Young et al., 2003) theory, 
early schemas5 result from an interaction between 
the child’s innate temperament and early negative life 
experiences, especially with significant others. Children 
gradually construct pervasive, maladaptive views 
of themselves and others that are filtered through, and 
consistent with, their schemas. 

According to Young, EMSs are (1) a priori truths 
about oneself and/or the environment; (2) selfperpetuating 
and resistant to change; (3) dysfunctional; 

(4) often triggered by some environmental change (e.g., 
loss of a job or mate); (5) tied to high levels of affect 
when activated; and (6) as noted earlier, usually result 
from an interaction of the child’s temperament with 
dysfunctional developmental experiences with family 
members, caretakers, and peers (Young, 1990/1999). 
Young goes on to elaborate that when an EMS is triggered, 
specific early memories, core beliefs, strong 
emotions, and physiological reactions are also activated. 
(In Young’s model, core beliefs represent the cognitive 
component of schemas.6) 
EMSs are likely to develop when the environment 
does not meet the child’s core needs for safety, stability 
or predictability, love, nurturance and attention, acceptance 
and praise, empathy, realistic limits, and validation 
of feelings and needs. When their core needs are 
not met, children often internalize attitudes and beliefs 

that later prove maladaptive. For example, a child who 
is criticized repeatedly may develop a Failure schema: 
a sense that no matter what he/she does, his/her performance 
will never be good enough. 

A schema usually occurs outside of awareness and 
may remain dormant until a life event (e.g., being fired 
from a job) activates it. In this example, once the Failure 
schema has been activated, the patient categorizes, 
selects, and encodes information in such a way that 
the schema is maintained. EMSs therefore predispose 
many depressed patients to distort events in a characteristic 
fashion, leading to a negative view of themselves, 
the environment, and the future. 

For patients who have a large number of strong and 
deeply entrenched EMSs, and for patients who cope 
with their schemas by rigidly avoiding life situations 
or by overcompensating for them, we have found that 
the concept of “schema modes” (Young et al., 2003) is 
very often invaluable in understanding and changing 
patients’ thoughts, feelings, and behaviors. Mode work 
strengthens and develops healthy modes and weakens 
dysfunctional modes, thereby increasing control over 
one’s responding. 

Young’s concept of a mode is similar to that of an 
ego state. A “mode” is defined as “those schemas or 
schema operations—adaptive or maladaptive—that are 
currently active for an individual” (Young et al., 2003, 

p. 271). Modes include whatever an individual is thinking, 
feeling, and doing at a given point in time, and may 
therefore be thought of as states rather than traits. A 
dysfunctional mode is activated when specific maladaptive 
schemas have erupted into distressing emotions, 
avoidance responses, or self-defeating behaviors 
that take over and control an individual’s functioning 
at a given point in time. An individual may “flip” from 
one mode to another; as that shift occurs, an individual’s 
cognitions, emotions, and coping responses change 
as well. Young and colleagues have identified four main 
types of modes: Child modes (Figure 7.2a), Maladaptive 
Coping modes (Figure 7.2b), Dysfunctional Parent 
modes (Figure 7.2c), and the Healthy Adult mode. The 
Healthy Adult mode is 
the healthy, adult part of the self that serves an “executive” 
function relative to the other modes. The Healthy 
Adult helps meet the child’s basic emotional needs. 
Building and strengthening the patient’s Healthy Adult 
to work with the other modes more effectively is the 
overarching goal of mode work in ST (Young et al., 
2003, p. 277). 


Cognitive Therapy for Depression 

1. ABANDONMENT/INSTABILITY 
The perceived instability or unreliability of those available for support and connection. Involves the sense that 
significant others will not be able to continue providing emotional support, connection, strength, or practical 
protection because they are emotionally unstable and unpredictable (e.g., angry outbursts), or unreliable or erratically 
present; because they will die imminently; or because they will abandon the patient in favor of someone better. 
2. MISTRUST/ABUSE 
The expectation that others will hurt, abuse, humiliate, cheat, lie, manipulate, or take advantage. Usually involves 
the perception that the harm is intentional or the result of unjustified and extreme negligence. May include the sense 
that one always ends up being cheated relative to others or “getting the short end of the stick.” 
3. EMOTIONAL DEPRIVATION 
Expectation that one’s desire for a normal degree of emotional support will not be adequately met by others. The 
three major forms of deprivation are as follows: 
A. Deprivation of nurturance: Absence of attention, affection, warmth, or companionship. 
B. Deprivation of empathy: Absence of understanding, listening, self-disclosure, or mutual sharing of feelings from 
others. 
C. Deprivation of protection: Absence of strength, direction, or guidance from others. 
4. DEFECTIVENESS/SHAME 
The feeling that one is defective, bad, unwanted, inferior, or invalid in important respects; or that one would 
be unlovable to significant others it exposed. May involve hypersensitivity to criticism, rejection, and blame; 
self-consciousness, comparisons, and insecurity around others; or a sense of shame regarding one’s perceived 
flaws. These flaws may be private (e.g., selfishness, angry impulses, unacceptable sexual desires) or public (e.g., 
undesirable physical appearance, social awkwardness). 
5. SOCIAL ISOLATION/ALIENATION 
The feeling that one is isolated from the rest of the world, different from other people, and/or not part of any group 
or community. 
6. DEPENDENCE/INCOMPETENCE 
Belief that one is unable to handle one’s everyday responsibilities in a competent manner, without considerable help 
from others (e.g., take care of oneself, solve daily problems, exercise good judgment, tackle new tasks, make good 
decisions). Often presents as helplessness. 
7. VULNERABILITY TO HARM OR ILLNESS 
Exaggerated fear that imminent catastrophe will strike at any time and that one will be unable to prevent it. 
Fears focus on one or more of the following: (A) medical catastrophes (e.g., heart attacks, AIDS); (B) emotional 
catastrophes (e.g., going crazy); (C) external catastrophes (e.g., elevators collapsing, victimized by criminals, airplane 
crashes, earthquakes). 
8. ENMESHMENT/UNDEVOLOPED SELF 
Excessive emotional involvement and closeness with one or more significant others (often parents), at the expense 
of full individuation or normal social development. Often involves the belief that at least one of the enmeshed 
individuals cannot survive or be happy without the constant support of the other. May also include feelings of being 
smothered by, or fused with, others OR insufficient individual identity. Often experienced as a feeling of emptiness 
and floundering, having no direction, or in extreme cases questioning one’s existence. 
(continued) 

figUre 7.1. Early maladaptive schemas. Copyright 1999 by Jeffrey E. Young. Reprinted by permission. 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

9. FAILURE 
The belief that one has failed, will inevitably fail, or is fundamentally inadequate relative to one’s peers, in areas of 
achievement (school, career, sports, etc.) Often involves beliefs that one is stupid, inept, untalented. ignorant, lower 
in status, less successful than others, and so forth. 
10. ENTITLEMENT/GRANDIOSITY 
The belief that one is superior to other people; entitled to special rights and privileges; or not bound by the rules 
of reciprocity that guide normal social interaction. Often involves insistence that one should be able to do or have 
whatever one wants regardless of what is realistic, what others consider reasonable, or the cost to others; OR an 
exaggerated focus on superiority (e.g., being among the most successful, famous, and wealthy) in order to achieve 
power or control (not primarily for attention or approval). Sometimes includes excessive competitiveness toward, or 
domination of others: asserting ones power, forcing one’s point of view, or controlling the behavior of others in line 
with one’s own desires—without empathy or concern for others’ needs or feelings. 
11. INSUFFICIENT SELF-CONTROL/SELF-DISCIPLINE 
Pervasive difficulty or refusal to exercise sufficient self-control and frustration tolerance to achieve one’s personal 
goals, or to restrain the excessive expression of one’s emotions and impulses. In its milder form, patient presents 
with an exaggerated emphasis on discomfort avoidance: avoiding pain, conflict, confrontation, responsibility, or 
overexertion—at the expense of personal fulfillment, commitment, or integrity. 
12. SUBJUGATION 
Excessive surrendering of control to others because one feels coerced—usually to avoid anger, retaliation, or 
abandonment. There are two major forms of subjugation: 
A. Subjugation of needs: Suppression of one’s preferences, decisions, and desires. 
B. Subjugation of emotion: Suppression of emotional expression, especially anger. 
Usually involves the perception that one’s own desires, opinions, and feelings are not valid or important to others. 
Frequently presents as excessive compliance, combined with hypersensitivity to feeling trapped. Generally leads to a 
buildup of anger, manifested in maladaptive symptoms (e.g., passive–aggressive behavior, uncontrolled outbursts of 
temper, psychosomatic symptoms, withdrawal of affection, “acting out,” substance abuse). 

13. SELF-SACRIFICE 
Excessive focus on voluntarily meeting the needs of others in daily situations at the expense of one’s own 
gratification. The most common reasons are to prevent causing pain to others, to avoid guilt from feeling selfish, 
or to maintain the connection with others perceived as needy. Often results from an acute sensitivity to the pain of 
others. Sometimes leads to a sense that one’s own needs are not being adequately met and to resentment of those 
who are taken care of. (Overlaps with concept of codependency.) 
14. APPROVAL SEEKING/RECOGNITION SEEKING 
Excessive emphasis on gaining approval, recognition or attention from other people or fitting in, at the expense of 
developing a secure and true sense of self. One’s sense of esteem is dependent primarily on the reactions of others 
rather than on one’s own natural inclinations. Sometimes includes an overemphasis on status, appearance, social 
acceptance, money, or achievements—as a means of gaining approval, admiration, or attention (not primarily for 
power or control). Frequently results in major life decisions that are inauthentic or unsatisfying, or in hypersensitivity 
to rejection. 
(continued) 

figUre 7.1. (continued) 


Cognitive Therapy for Depression 

15. NEGATIVITY/PESSIMISM 
A pervasive, lifelong focus on the negative aspects of life (pain, death, loss, disappointment, conflict, guilt, 
resentment, unsolved problems, potential mistakes, betrayal, things that could go wrong, etc.), while minimizing or 
neglecting the positive or optimistic aspects. Usually includes an exaggerated expectation—in a wide range of work, 
financial, or interpersonal situations—that things will eventually go seriously wrong, or that aspects of one’s life that 
seem to be going well will ultimately fall apart. Usually involves an inordinate fear of making mistakes that might 
lead to financial collapse, loss, humiliation or being trapped in a bad situation. Because potential negative outcomes 
are exaggerated, these patients are frequently characterized by chronic worry, vigilance, complaining, or indecision. 
16. EMOTIONAL INHIBITION 
The excessive inhibition of spontaneous action, feeling, or communication—usually to avoid disapproval by others, 
feelings of shame, or losing control of one’s impulses The most common areas of inhibition involve (A) inhibition of 
anger and aggression; (B) inhibition of positive impulses (e.g., joy, affection, sexual excitement, play); (C) difficulty 
expressing vulnerability or communicating freely about one’s feelings, needs, etc.; or (D) excessive emphasis on 
rationality while disregarding emotions. 
17. UNRELENTING STANDARDS/HYPERCRITICALNESS 
The underlying belief that one must strive to meet very high internalized standards of behavior and performance 
usually to avoid criticism. Typically results in feelings of pressure or difficulty slowing down and in hypercriticalness 
toward oneself and others. Must involve significant impairment in pleasure, relaxation, health, self-esteem sense of 
accomplishment, or satisfying relationships. Unrelenting standards typically present as (A) perfectionism, inordinate 
attention to detail, or an underestimate of how good one’s own performance is relative to the norm; (B) rigid rules 
and “shoulds” in many areas of life, including unrealistically high moral, ethical, cultural or religious precepts; or (C) 
preoccupation with time and efficiency so that more can be accomplished. 
18. PUNITIVENESS 
The belief that people should be harshly punished for making mistakes. Involves the tendency to be angry, 
intolerant, punitive, and impatient with those people (including oneself) who do not meet one’s expectations or 
standards. Usually includes difficulty forgiving mistakes in oneself or others because of a reluctance to consider 
extenuating circumstances, allow for human imperfection, or empathize with feelings. 
figUre 7.1. (continued) 

Research Related to Schema Theory 

A large number of research studies have examined the 
18 EMSs, as measured by the Young Schema Questionnaire 
(YSQ; Young, 2005). While the results have varied 
somewhat across different populations, all 18 EMSs 
have generally been supported (Lee, Taylor, & Dunn, 
1999; Schmidt, 1994; Schmidt, Joiner, Young, & Telch, 
1995). 

Numerous studies have looked at EMSs in depressed 
patients. Hawke and Provencher (2011) provide an 
excellent review of research on EMSs in both mood 
(Bailleux, Romo, Kindynis, Radtchenko, & Debray, 
2008; Halvorsen et al., 2009; Halvorsen, Wang, Eisemann, 
& Waterloo, 2010; Riso et al., 2003, 2006; 
Wang, Halvorsen, Eisemann, & Waterloo, 2010) and 
anxiety disorders. Elevations across most, if not all, 

schema domains have been evident when comparing 
depressed patients with never-ill controls. In a study 
specifically comparing EMSs in patients with chronic 
depression, nonchronic depression, and healthy controls, 
Riso and colleagues (2003) found that both depressed 
groups scored higher on all schema domains 
compared to healthy controls. However, the scores in 
the chronic depression group were highest on schemas 
in the disconnection and rejection, impaired autonomy 
and performance, and overvigilance domains, even 
when researchers controlled for depressive and personality 
disorder symptoms. Hawke and Provencher (2011, 

p. 261) note: “This suggests that chronic depression 
is associated more strongly with EMSs than the nonchronic 
form, and that this association is not simply a 
function of current depressive or Axis II symptoms.” 

CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

Child Mode Description Common associated schemas 

Vulnerable Child Experiences dysphoric or anxious affect, 
especially fear, sadness, and helplessness, 
when “in touch” with associated schemas. 
Abandonment, Mistrust/Abuse, Emotional 
Deprivation, Defectiveness, Social Isolation, 
Dependence/Incompetence, Vulnerability to 
Harm or Illness, Enmeshment/Undeveloped 
Self, Negativity/Pessimism. 
Angry Child Vents anger directly in response to perceived 
unmet core needs or unfair treatment related to 
core schemas. 
Abandonment, Mistrust/Abuse, Emotional 
Deprivation, Subjugation (or, at times, any of the 
schemas associated with the Vulnerable Child). 
Impulsive/ 
Undisciplined Child 
Impulsively acts according to immediate desires 
for pleasure without regard to limits or others’ 
needs or feelings (not linked to core needs). 
Entitlement, Insufficient Self-Control/Self-
Discipline. 
Happy Child Feels loved, connected, content, satisfied. None. Absence of activated schemas. 

figUre 7.2a. Child modes. From Young, Klosko, and Weishaar (2003). Copyright 2003 by The Guilford Press. Reprinted 
by permission. 

Maladaptive Coping Modes Description 

Compliant Surrenderer Adopts a coping style of compliance and dependence. 
Detached Protector Adopts a coping style of emotional withdrawal, 
disconnection, isolation, and behavioral avoidance. 
Overcompensator Adopts a coping style of counterattack and control. 
May overcompensate through semiadaptive means, 
such as workaholism. 

figUre 7.2b. Maladaptive Coping modes. From Young, Klosko, and Weishaar (2003). Copyright 2003 by The Guilford 
Press. Reprinted by permission. 

Dysfunctional Parent Mode Description Common associated schemas 

Punitive/Critical Parent Restricts, criticizes, or punishes the self or 
others. 
Subjugation, Punitiveness, Defectiveness, 
Mistrust/Abuse (as abuser). 
Demanding Parent Sets high expectations and high level of 
responsibility toward others; pressures the self 
or others to achieve them. 
Unrelenting Standards, Self-Sacrifice. 

figUre 7.2C. Dysfunctional Parent modes. From Young, Klosko, and Weishaar (2003). Copyright 2003 by The Guilford 
Press. Reprinted by permission. 


Cognitive Therapy for Depression 

Renner and colleagues (2012) also found EMSs, particularly 
those in the disconnection and rejection and 
impaired autonomy and performance domains, to be 
related to severity of depressive symptoms. They note 
that, consistent with Beck’s theory, “these findings are 
consistent with the cognitive model of depression, placing 
schemas or core beliefs in the domains of failure, 
loss, and worthlessness at the core of depressive symptoms” 
(p. 587). In their examination of the robustness of 
EMSs with evidence-based treatments (CBT and interpersonal 
psychotherapy [IPT], with and without medication) 
for depression, they found that EMSs remained 
relatively stable over time (pre- and posttreatment). This 
finding is consistent with Young and colleagues’ (2003) 
notion of EMSs as stable, trait-like beliefs that remain 
even after successful treatment of Axis I symptoms. According 
to the schema model, these results should not 
be surprising, since none of the treatments in this study 
specifically targeted change in EMSs. 

In a recent study, Eberhart, Auerbach, Bigda-Peyton, 
and Abela (2011) examined how EMSs and stress impact 
depressive symptoms by comparing two models 
of stress: diathesis–stress and stress-generation. The 
diathesis–stress model posits that EMSs only create 
vulnerability to depression when interacting with high 
levels of stressors. The stress generation model posits 
that EMSs are instrumental in creating stressful conditions 
which then increase depression. The results supported 
the stress generation hypothesis. The researchers 
noted that 

a number of maladaptive schemas in the domains of 
disconnection and rejection, impaired autonomy and 
performance, and other-directedness predicted the 
generation of dependent, interpersonal stressors. These 
dependent interpersonal stressors, in turn, predicted increases 
in depressive symptoms. Moreover, there was 
evidence that these stressors mediated the relationships 
between maladaptive schemas and depressive symptoms. 
In particular, mediation effects were observed for 
subjugation schemas, failure schemas, and a number of 
schemas related to disconnection and rejection” (p. 96). 
[body]This research highlights the importance of targeting 
EMSs in the treatment of chronic depression. 

In the following sections we present information 
about the general characteristics and nature of cognitive 
therapy, a discussion of the process of cognitive 
therapy, then two case examples that illustrate cognitive 
therapy in action. The patient in the first case has 
a nonchronic form of depression and is treated with 

“standard” cognitive therapy (as originally outlined in 
Beck et al.’s 1979 book). The focus of standard cognitive 
therapy is on changing depressive thinking in the 
present. The patient in the second case has chronic depression 
and is treated with both cognitive and schema 
therapies. The focus of ST, in this case, is on identifying 
and modifying the patient’s underlying schemas 
through mode work. 

characteristics of theraPy 

Cognitive therapy with adult depressed outpatients is 
usually undertaken in the therapist’s office. It has most 
frequently been applied in a one-to-one setting. However, 
group cognitive therapy has also been shown to 
be successful with many depressed outpatients (Beutler 
et al., 1987; Jarrett & Nelson, 1987), although it may 
not be as effective as individual treatment (Wierzbicki 
& Bartlett, 1987). Additionally, computer-assisted cognitive 
therapy for depression (50-minute vs. 25-minute 
sessions with computer assistance) also has been 
found effective (Wright et al., 2005). It is not unusual 
to involve spouses, partners, parents, and other family 
members during treatment. For example, they may provide 
information that helps patients test the validity of 
their thinking with respect to how other family members 
view them. Moreover, couple therapy based on 
the cognitive model is often very effective in relieving 
depression related to chronic interpersonal problems 
(Beck, 1988; O’Leary & Beach, 1990). 

In our clinical experience, a number of therapist 
characteristics contribute to effective cognitive therapy. 
First, cognitive therapists ideally should demonstrate 
the “nonspecific” therapy skills identified by other 
writers (see, e.g., Truax & Mitchell, 1971): They should 
be able to communicate warmth, genuineness, sincerity, 
and openness. Second, the most effective cognitive 
therapists seem to be especially skilled at seeing events 
from their patients’ perspectives (accurate empathy). 
They are able to suspend their own personal assumptions 
and biases while listening to depressed patients 
describe their reactions and interpretations. Third, 
skilled cognitive therapists can reason logically and 
plan strategies; they are not “fuzzy” thinkers. In this 
respect they resemble good trial lawyers, who can spot 
the sometimes subtle flaws in another individual’s reasoning 
and skillfully elicit a more convincing interpretation 
of the same events. Skilled cognitive therapists 
plan strategies several steps ahead, anticipating the 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

desired outcome. Fourth, the best practitioners of this 
approach are active. They have to be comfortable taking 
the lead, providing structure and direction to the 
therapy process. 

Although patient characteristics have received some 
empirical attention (Eifert, Beach, & Wilson, 1998; 
Padesky, with Greenberger, 1995; Persons, Burns, & 
Perloff, 1988; Shea et al., 1990), we do not yet have 
adequate knowledge as to which patient characteristics 
are related to success in cognitive therapy. Our experience 
suggests that patients with major depressive disorder 
(or milder forms of depression) respond well to the 
cognitive therapy approach described in this chapter. 
To the extent that the patient is diagnosed with Axis 
II personality disorders and/or his/her depression is 
chronic, the combination of cognitive and schema therapies 
may be significantly longer in duration and more 
crucial in obtaining a more complete and lasting positive 
response to treatment. 

Cognitive therapy can serve an important adjunctive 
role to pharmacotherapy for bipolar disorders (Ball et 
al., 2006; Basco & Rush, 1996; Colom, Vieta, Martinez, 
Jorquera, & Gastó, 1998; Craighead, Miklowitz, 
Vajk, & Frank, 1998; Lam, Hayward, Watkins, Wright, 
& Sham, 2005; Scott, 1996b), and is effective in treating 
patients with severe endogenous depression (Thase, 
Bowler, & Harden, 1991; Whisman, 1993). Preliminary 
evidence also suggests that cognitive therapy is effective 
in the treatment of women with postpartum depression 
(Bledsoe & Grote, 2006). 

It is advisable to assess patients’ suitability for cognitive 
therapy (Padesky, with Greenberger, 1995; Safran 
& Segal, 1990; Safran, Segal, Vallis, Shaw, & Samstag, 
1993). In our experience, certain patient characteristics 
are predictive of a more rapid response. “Ideal” cognitive 
therapy patients are appropriately introspective and 
can reason abstractly; are well organized, good planners, 
and conscientious about carrying out responsibilities; 
are employed or have a history of employment; are 
not excessively angry at either themselves or at other 
people; are less dogmatic and rigid in their thinking; 
can identify a clear precipitating event for the depressive 
episode; and have close relationships with others. 
Most patients deviate in some ways from this prototype, 
and these characteristics are not essential to successful 
treatment. However, patients with more of these 
attributes often show faster improvement in depressive 
symptoms through cognitive therapy. 

Age is not an obstacle: Patients across the lifespan 
seem to benefit from cognitive therapy (Beutler et al., 

1987; Floyd, Scogin, McKendree-Smith, Floyd, & 
Rokke, 2004; Gallagher-Thompson, Hanley-Peterson, 
& Thompson, 1990; Harrington, Wood, & Verduyn, 
1998; Koder, Brodaty, & Anstey, 1996; Levendusky 
& Hufford, 1997; Reinecke, Ryan, & DuBois, 1998). 
Many studies have indicated that children and adolescents 
show significant clinical improvement following 
CBT (Curry, 2001). Studies of older patients show that 
“various forms of cognitive and behavioral psychotherapy 
can be as effective in treating geriatric depression 
as depressions occurring earlier in life” (Futterman, 
Thompson, Gallagher-Thompson, & Ferris, 1995, 
p. 511). 

collaBoratioN 

Basic to cognitive therapy is a collaborative relationship 
between patient and therapist. When therapist 
and patient work together, the learning experience is 
enhanced for both, and the cooperative spirit that is developed 
contributes greatly to the therapeutic process. 
Equally important, the collaborative approach helps to 
ensure compatible goals for treatment, and to prevent 
misunderstandings and misinterpretations between patient 
and therapist. Because of the importance of the 
collaborative relationship, we place great emphasis on 
the interpersonal skills of the therapist, the process of 
joint selection of problems to be worked on, regular 
feedback, and the investigative process we call “collaborative 
empiricism.” 

Interpersonal Qualities 

Because collaboration requires that the patient trust 
the therapist, we emphasize those interpersonal qualities 
that contribute to trust. As noted earlier, warmth, 
accurate empathy, and genuineness are desirable personal 
qualities for the cognitive therapist, as well as for 
all psychotherapists. It is important that the cognitive 
therapist not seem to be playing the role of therapist. 
The therapist should be able to communicate both verbally 
and nonverbally that he/she is sincere, open, concerned, 
and direct. It is also important that the therapist 
not seem to be withholding impressions or information, 
or evading questions. The therapist should be careful 
not to seem critical or disapproving of the patient’s perspective. 


Rapport between patient and therapist is crucial in 
the treatment of depressed patients. When rapport is 


Cognitive Therapy for Depression 

optimal, patients perceive the therapist as someone who 
is tuned in to their feelings and attitudes, who is sympathetic 
and understanding, and with whom they can 
communicate without having to articulate feelings in 
detail or qualify statements. When the rapport is good, 
both patient and therapist feel comfortable and secure. 

A confident, professional manner is also important 
in cognitive therapy. A therapist should convey relaxed 
confidence in his/her ability to help a depressed patient. 
Such confidence can help to counteract the patient’s initial 
hopelessness about the future. Because the cognitive 
therapist must sometimes be directive and impose 
structure, especially in the early stages of treatment, it 
is helpful to maintain a clear sense of professionalism. 

Joint Determination of Goals for Therapy 

The patient and therapist collaboratively work together 
to set therapeutic goals, determine priorities among 
them, and create an agenda for each session. Problems 
to be addressed over the course of therapy include specific 
depressive symptoms (e.g., hopelessness, crying, 
and difficulty concentrating) and external problems 
(e.g., couple difficulties, career issues, childrearing 
concerns). Priorities are then jointly determined in 
accordance with how much distress is generated by a 
particular problem and how amenable that particular 
problem is to change. During the agenda-setting portion 
of each therapy session (discussed in detail in the 
next section), therapist and patient together determine 
the items to be covered in that session. Through this 
collaborative process, target problems are selected on 
a weekly basis. 

The process of problem selection often presents difficulties 
for the novice cognitive therapist, including 
failure to reach agreement on specific problems on 
which to focus, selection of peripheral concerns, and 
the tendency to move from problem to problem instead 
of persistently seeking a satisfactory solution to only 
one problem at a time. Because the problem selection 
process entails both structuring and collaboration on 
the part of the therapist, considerable skill is necessary. 

Regular Feedback 

Feedback is especially important in therapy with depressed 
patients; it is a crucial ingredient in developing 
and maintaining the collaborative therapeutic relationship. 
The cognitive therapist initiates the feedback 
component early in therapy by eliciting the patient’s 

thoughts and feelings about many aspects of the therapy, 
such as the handling of a particular problem, the 
therapist’s manner, and homework assignments. Since 
many patients misconstrue therapists’ statements and 
questions, it is only through regular feedback that the 
therapist can ascertain whether he/she and the patient 
are on the same “wavelength.” The therapist must also 
be alert for verbal and nonverbal clues to covert negative 
reactions. 

As part of the regular feedback process, the cognitive 
therapist shares the rationale for each intervention. This 
helps to demystify the therapy process and facilitates 
the patient’s questioning of the validity of a particular 
approach. In addition, when a patient understands how 
a particular technique or assignment may help solve a 
particular problem in the patient’s life, he/she is more 
likely to participate conscientiously. 

Another key element of the feedback process is for 
the therapist to check regularly to determine whether 
the patient understands his/her formulations. Patients 
sometimes agree with a formulation simply out of compliance, 
and depressed patients frequently exhibit both 
compliance and reluctance to “talk straight” with their 
therapists for fear of being rejected or criticized, or of 
making a mistake. Therefore, the therapist must make 
an extra effort to elicit the patient’s feelings or wishes 
relevant to compliance (e.g., anxiety about rejection, 
wish to please) and be alert for verbal and nonverbal 
clues that the patient may indeed not understand the 
explanations. 

At the close of each session the cognitive therapist 
provides a concise summary of what has taken place, 
and asks the patient to abstract and write down the main 
points from the session. The patient keeps this summary 
for review during the week. In practice, the therapist 
uses capsule summaries frequently during a standard 
therapeutic interview: in preparing the agenda, in a 
midpoint recapitulation of the material covered up to 
that point, and in the final summary of the main points 
of the interview. Patients generally respond favorably to 
the elicitation of feedback and presentation of capsule 
summaries. We have observed that the development of 
empathy and rapport is facilitated by these techniques. 

Collaborative Empiricism 

When the collaborative therapeutic relationship has 
been successfully formed, patient and therapist act as 
an investigative team. Though we elaborate on the investigative 
process later, it is appropriate to introduce 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

it in the context of the collaborative relationship. As a 
team, patient and therapist approach the patient’s automatic 
thoughts and schemas in the same manner that 
scientists approach questions: Each thought or schema 
becomes a hypothesis to be tested, and evidence is 
gathered that supports or refutes the hypothesis. Events 
in the past, circumstances in the present, and possibilities 
in the future are the data that constitute evidence, 
and the conclusion to accept or reject the hypothesis 
is jointly reached as patient and therapist subject the 
evidence to logical analysis. Experiments may also be 
devised to test the validity of particular cognitions. 
Cognitive therapists need not persuade patients of illogicality 
or inconsistency with reality because patients 
“discover” their own inconsistencies. This guided discovery 
process, a widely accepted educational method, 
is one of the vital components of cognitive therapy. 

the Process of coGNitive theraPy 

Here we attempt to convey a sense of how cognitive 
therapy sessions are structured and of the course of 
treatment. Detailed discussion of particular techniques 
follows this section. 

The Initial Sessions 

A main therapeutic goal of the first few sessions is to 
produce some symptom relief. Reducing the patient’s 
suffering helps to increase rapport, collaboration, and 
confidence in the therapeutic process. Symptom relief, 
however, should be based on more than rapport, sympathy, 
and implied promise of “cure.” In the first few 
sessions, the cognitive therapist starts the process of defining 
the patient’s problems and demonstrating some 
of the strategies that will be used in the therapy to deal 
with those problems. 

Problem definition is a primary goal in the early stages 
of therapy. The therapist collaboratively works with 
the patient to define the specific problems on which 
they will focus during therapy sessions. The cognitive 
therapist does this by obtaining as complete a picture as 
possible of the patient’s psychological and life situation 
difficulties. The therapist also seeks details concerning 
the depth of depression and particular symptomatology. 
Cognitive therapists are especially concerned with how 
patients see their problems. 

Once the specific problems have been defined, patient 
and therapist establish priorities among them. 

Decisions are made on the basis of amenability to 
therapeutic change and centrality of the life problem or 
cognition to the patient’s emotional distress. To help establish 
priorities effectively, the therapist must see the 
relationships among particular thoughts, particular life 
situations, and particular distressing emotions. 

Another goal of the initial session is to illustrate 
the close relationship between cognition and emotion. 
When the therapist is able to observe the patient’s mood 
change (e.g., crying), he/she points out the alteration 
in affect and asks for the patient’s thoughts just before 
the mood shift. The therapist then labels the negative 
thought and points out its relationship to the change in 
mood. He/she initially gears homework assignments 
toward helping the patient see the close connection between 
cognition and emotion. 

A frequent requirement in the early stage of therapy 
is to socialize the patient to cognitive therapy. A patient 
who has previously undertaken analytically oriented 
or Rogerian therapies may begin cognitive therapy 
expecting a more insight-oriented, nondirective therapeutic 
approach. The cognitive therapist can facilitate 
the transition to a more active and structured approach 
by maintaining a problem-oriented stance, which often 
entails gently interrupting a patient who tends to speculate 
about the sources of the problems and to seek interpretations 
from the therapist. 

Finally, the therapist must communicate the importance 
of self-help homework assignments during the 
initial session by stressing that doing the homework is 
actually more important than the therapy session itself. 
The therapist also can enhance motivation by explaining 
that patients who complete assignments generally 
improve more quickly. The nature and implementation 
of self-help homework assignments are considered in 
further detail in a later section of this chapter. 

The Progress of a Typical Therapy Session 

Each session begins with the establishment of an agenda 
for that session. This ensures optimal use of time 
in a relatively short-term, problem-solving therapeutic 
approach. The agenda generally begins with a short 
synopsis of the patient’s experiences since the last session, 
including discussion of the homework assignment. 
The therapist then asks the patient what he/she wants 
to work on during the session, and often offers topics 
to be included. 

When a short list of problems and topics has been 
completed, patient and therapist determine the order 


Cognitive Therapy for Depression 

in which to cover them and, if necessary, the time to 
be allotted to each topic. There are several issues to 
consider in establishing priorities, including stage of 
therapy, severity of depression, likelihood of making 
progress in solving the problem, and potential pervasiveness 
of the effect of a particular theme or topic. 
The cognitive therapist is sensitive to a patient’s occasional 
desire to talk about something that seems important 
to him/her at the moment, even if such discussion 
seems not to be productive in terms of other goals. 
This kind of flexibility characterizes the collaborative 
therapeutic relationship. 

After these preliminary matters have been covered, 
patient and therapist move on to the one or two problems 
to be considered during the session. The therapist 
begins the discussion of a problem by asking the patient 
a series of questions designed to clarify the nature of 
the patient’s difficulty. In doing so, the therapist seeks 
to determine whether early maladaptive schemas, misinterpretations 
of events, or unrealistic expectations are 
involved. The therapist also seeks to discover whether 
the patient had unrealistic expectations, whether the 
patient’s behavior was appropriate, and whether all 
possible solutions to the problem were considered. The 
patient’s responses suggest to the therapist a cognitivebehavioral 
conceptualization of why the patient is having 
difficulty in the area of concern. The therapist by 
now has discerned the one or two significant thoughts, 
schemas, images, or behaviors on which to work. When 
this target problem has been selected, the therapist 
chooses the cognitive or behavioral techniques to apply 
and shares their rationale with the patient. The specific 
techniques used in cognitive therapy are explained in 
the following sections of this chapter. 

At the close of the session, the therapist asks the patient 
for a summary, often in writing, of the major conclusions 
drawn during the session. The therapist asks 
for the patient’s reactions to the session to ascertain 
whether anything disturbing was said and to forestall 
any delayed negative reactions following the interview. 
Finally, the therapist gives a homework assignment designed 
to assist the patient in applying the particular 
skills and concepts from the session to the problem during 
the following week. 

Progression of Session Content over Time 

Although the structure of cognitive therapy sessions 
does not change during the course of treatment, the 
content often changes significantly. The first phase of 

treatment, symptom reduction, focuses on overcoming 
hopelessness, identifying problems, setting priorities, 
socializing the patient to cognitive therapy, establishing 
a collaborative relationship, demonstrating the relationship 
between cognition and emotion, labeling errors 
in thinking, and making progress on a target problem. 
Therapy is initially centered on the patient’s symptoms, 
with attention given to behavioral and motivational difficulties. 


In the second phase, which is focused on changing 
schemas for relapse prevention and chronic cases, 
therapist and patient turn from specific thoughts about 
particular problems to core schemas about the self and 
others, and to the modes associated with those schemas. 
Therapist and patient explore how the schemas 
and modes initiate, exacerbate, and maintain many of 
the patient’s problems. Therapist and patient then work 
collaboratively to restructure and modify the schemas 
and modes through a variety of techniques, which 
eventually brings about a broader and more pervasive 
improvement in life functioning and mood. 

Over the course of therapy, the patient assumes increased 
responsibility for identifying problems, coming 
up with solutions, and implementing the solutions 
through homework assignments. The therapist increasingly 
assumes the role of advisor or consultant as the patient 
learns to implement therapeutic techniques without 
constant support. As the patient becomes a more 
effective problem solver, the frequency of sessions is 
reduced, and therapy is eventually discontinued. 

The remainder of this chapter is devoted to a detailed 
description of cognitive- and schema-based treatment 
strategies. 

syMPtoM reDuctioN 

Behavioral Techniques 

Behavioral techniques are used throughout the course 
of cognitive therapy, but they are generally concentrated 
in the earlier stages of treatment. Behavioral techniques 
are especially necessary for those more severely 
depressed patients who are passive, anhedonic, socially 
withdrawn, and unable to concentrate for extended periods 
of time. By engaging such a patient’s attention 
and interest, the cognitive therapist tries to induce the 
patient to counteract withdrawal and become more involved 
in constructive activity. From a variety of be



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

havioral techniques, the therapist selects those that will 
help the patient cope more effectively with situational 
and interpersonal problems. Through homework assignments, 
the patient implements specific procedures 
for dealing with concrete situations or for using time 
more adaptively. 

The cognitive therapist uses behavioral techniques, 
with the goal of modifying automatic thoughts. For 
example, a patient who believes “I can’t get anything 
done any more” can modify this thought after completing 
a series of graded tasks designed to increase 
mastery. The severely depressed patient is caught in a 
vicious cycle, in which a reduced activity level leads 
to a negative self-label, which in turn results in even 
further discouragement and consequent inactivity. Intervention 
with behavioral techniques can change this 
self-destructive pattern. 

The most commonly used behavioral techniques 
include scheduling activities that include both mastery 
and pleasure exercises, cognitive rehearsal, selfreliance 
training, role playing, and diversion techniques. 
The scheduling of activities is frequently used 
in the early stages of cognitive therapy to counteract 
loss of motivation, hopelessness, and excessive rumination. 
The therapist uses the Weekly Activity Schedule 
for planning activities hour by hour, day by day (see 
Figure 7.3). Patients maintain an hourly record of the 
activities in which they engaged. Activity scheduling 
also helps patients obtain more pleasure and a greater 
sense of accomplishment from activities on a daily 
basis. The patients rate each completed activity (using 
a 0- to 10-point scale) for both mastery and pleasure. 
The ratings usually contradict patients’ beliefs that they 
cannot accomplish or enjoy anything anymore. To as-

Note: 
Grade 
activities 
M 
for 
mastery 
and 
P 
for 
pleasure 
0–10. 


Mon.Tues.Wed.Thurs.Fri.Sat.Sun.
Morning6–77–88–99–1010–1111–12Afternoon12–11–22–33–44–55–6Evening6–77–88–99–1010–1111–1212–6
figUre 7.3. Weekly Activity Schedule. 


Cognitive Therapy for Depression 

sist some patients in initiating mastery and pleasure activities, 
the therapist may sometimes find it necessary 
to subdivide an activity into segments, ranging from the 
simplest to the most difficult and complex aspects of 
the activity. We call this the “graded task” approach. 
The subdivision enables depressed patients to undertake 
tasks that were initially impossible, thus providing 
proof of success. 

Cognitive rehearsal entails asking a patient to picture 
or imagine each step involved in the accomplishment 
of a particular task. This technique can be especially 
helpful with those patients who have difficulty 
carrying out a task that requires successive steps for 
its completion. Sometimes impairment in the ability to 
concentrate creates difficulties for the patient in focusing 
attention on the specific task. The imagery evoked 
by the cognitive rehearsal technique helps the patient to 
focus and the therapist to identify obstacles that make 
the assignment difficult for the particular patient. 

Some depressed patients rely on others to take care 
of most of their daily needs. With self-reliance training, 
patients learn to assume increased responsibility 
for routine activities such as showering, making their 
beds, cleaning the house, cooking their own meals, and 
shopping. Self-reliance involves gaining increased control 
over emotional reactions. 

Role playing has many uses in cognitive therapy. 
First, it may be used to bring out automatic thoughts 
through the enactment of particular interpersonal situations, 
such as an encounter with a supervisor at work. 
Second, through homework assignments, it may also 
guide the patient in practicing and attending to new 
cognitive responses in problematic social encounters. 
A third use of role playing is to rehearse new behaviors. 
Thus, role playing may be used as part of assertiveness 
training and is often accompanied by modeling and 
coaching. 

Role reversal, a variation of role playing, can be very 
effective in helping patients test how other people might 
view their behavior. This is well illustrated by a patient 
who had a “humiliating experience” while buying some 
clothes in a store. After playing the role of the clerk, the 
patient had to conclude that she had insufficient data 
for her previous conclusion that she appeared clumsy 
and inept. Through role reversal, patients begin to view 
themselves less harshly as “self-sympathy” responses 
are elicited. 

Finally, the therapist may introduce various distraction 
techniques to assist the patient in learning to reduce 
the intensity of painful affects. The patient learns 

to divert negative thinking through physical activity, 
social contact, work, play, and visual imagery. Practice 
with diversion techniques also helps the patient gain 
further control over emotional reactivity. 

Cognitive Techniques 

The specific cognitive techniques provide points of 
entry into the patient’s cognitive organization. The 
cognitive therapist uses techniques for eliciting and 
testing automatic thoughts, and identifying schemas to 
help both therapist and patient understand the patient’s 
construction of reality. In applying specific cognitive 
techniques in therapy, it is important that the therapist 
work within the framework of the cognitive model of 
depression. Each set of techniques is discussed in turn. 

Eliciting Automatic Thoughts 

“Automatic thoughts” are those thoughts that intervene 
between outside events and the individual’s emotional 
reactions to them. They often go unnoticed because 
they are part of a repetitive pattern of thinking, and 
because they occur so often and so quickly. People 
rarely stop to assess their validity because they are so 
believable, familiar, and habitual. The patient in cognitive 
therapy must learn to recognize these automatic 
thoughts for therapy to proceed effectively. The cognitive 
therapist and the patient make a joint effort to 
discover the particular thoughts that precede emotions 
such as anger, sadness, and anxiety. The therapist uses 
questioning, imagery, and role playing to elicit automatic 
thoughts. 

The simplest method to uncover automatic thoughts 
is for therapists to ask patients what thoughts went 
through their minds in response to particular events. 
This questioning provides a model for introspective 
exploration that patients can use on their own, when 
the therapist is not present, and after the completion of 
treatment. 

Alternatively, when a patient is able to identify those 
external events and situations that evoke a particular 
emotional response, the therapist may use imagery by 
asking the patient to picture the situation in detail. The 
patient is often able to identify the automatic thoughts 
connected with actual situations when the image 
evoked is clear. In this technique, therapists ask patients 
to relax, close their eyes, and imagine themselves 
in the distressing situation. Patients describe in detail 
what is happening as they relive the event. 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

If a distressing event is an interpersonal one, cognitive 
therapists also can utilize role playing. The therapist 
plays the role of the other person in the encounter, 
while the patient plays him/herself. The automatic 
thoughts can usually be elicited when the patient becomes 
sufficiently engaged in the role play. 

In attempting to elicit automatic thoughts, the 
therapist is careful to notice and point out any mood 
changes that occur during the session, and to ask the 
patient his/her thoughts just before the shift in mood. 
Mood changes include any emotional reaction, such as 
tears or anger. This technique can be especially useful 
when the patient is first learning to identify automatic 
thoughts. 

Once patients become familiar with the techniques 
for identifying automatic thoughts, they are asked to 
keep a Daily Record of Dysfunctional Thoughts (Beck 
et al., 1979; see Figure 7.4), in which they record the 
emotions and automatic thoughts that occur in upsetting 
situations between therapy sessions. In later sessions, 
patients are taught to develop rational responses 
to their dysfunctional automatic thoughts and to record 

them in the appropriate column. Therapist and patient 
generally review the daily record from the preceding 
week, near the beginning of the next therapy session. In 
sessions, the therapist also teaches chronic patients to 
recognize modes. Various affective exercises are then 
used to bring about change in the underlying schemas 
associated with those modes. 

Eliciting automatic thoughts should be distinguished 
from the interpretation process of other psychotherapies. 
In general, cognitive therapists work only with 
those automatic thoughts mentioned by patients. Suggesting 
thoughts to patients may undermine collaboration 
and inhibit patients from learning to continue the 
process on their own. As a last resort, however, when 
nondirective strategies fail, a cognitive therapist may 
offer several possible automatic thoughts, then ask the 
patient whether any of these choices fit. 

Even when many efforts to elicit automatic thoughts 
have been made by the therapist, sometimes the thought 
remains inaccessible. When this is the case, the cognitive 
therapist tries to ascertain the particular meaning 
of the event that evoked the emotional reaction. For ex-

DATE 
SITUATION 
Describe: 
1. Actual event leading to 
unpleasant emotion, or 
2. Stream of thoughts, 
daydream, or 
recollection, leading to 
unpleasant emotion. 
EMOTION(S) 
1. Specify sad/ 
anxious/ 
angry, etc. 
2. Rate degree 
of emotion, 
1–100. 
AUTOMATIC 
THOUGHT(S) 
1. Write automatic 
thought(s) that preceded 
emotion(s). 
2. Rate belief in automatic 
thought(s), 0–100%. 
RATIONAL 
RESPONSE 
1. Write rational response 
to automatic thought(s). 
2. Rate belief in rational 
response, 0–100%. 
OUTCOME 
1. Rerate belief 
in automatic 
thought(s), 
0–100%. 
2. Specify and 
rate 
subsequent 
emotions, 
0–100%. 

Explanation: 
When you experience an unpleasant emotion, note the situation that seemed to stimulate the emotion. (If the emotion 
occurred while you were thinking, daydreaming, etc., please note this.) Then note the automatic thought associated with the emotion. 
Record the degree to which you believe this thought: 0% = not at all; 100% = completely. In rating degrees of emotion: 1 = a trace; 
100 = the most intense possible. 

figUre 7.4. Daily Record of Dysfunctional Thoughts. 


Cognitive Therapy for Depression 

ample, one patient began to cry whenever she had an 
argument with her roommate, who was a good friend. 
Efforts to elicit automatic thoughts proved unsuccessful. 
Only after the therapist asked a series of questions 
to determine the meaning of the event did it become 
clear that the patient associated having an argument or 
fight with ending the relationship. Through this process, 
therapist and patient were able to see the meaning 
that triggered the crying. 

Testing Automatic Thoughts 
with Nonchronic Patients 

When therapist and patient have managed to isolate a 
key automatic thought, they approach the thought as a 
testable hypothesis. In this “scientific” approach, which 
is fundamental to cognitive therapy, the patient learns 
to think in a way that resembles the investigative process. 
Through the procedures of gathering data, evaluating 
evidence, and drawing conclusions, patients learn 
firsthand that their view of reality can be quite different 
from what actually takes place. By designing experiments 
that subject their automatic thoughts to objective 
analysis, patients learn how to modify their thinking 
because they learn the process of empirical thinking. 
Patients who learn to think this way during treatment 
are better able to continue the empirical approach after 
the end of formal therapy. 

The cognitive therapist approaches the testing of automatic 
thoughts by asking the patient to list evidence 
from his/her experience for and against the hypothesis. 
Sometimes, after considering the evidence, the patient 
immediately rejects the automatic thought, recognizing 
that it is either distorted or actually false. 

When previous experience is not sufficient or appropriate 
to test a hypothesis, the therapist asks the patient 
to design an experiment for that purpose. The patient 
then makes a prediction and proceeds to gather data. If 
the data contradict the prediction, the patient can reject 
the automatic thought. The outcome of the experiment 
may, of course, confirm the patient’s prediction. It is 
therefore very important for the therapist not to assume 
that the patient’s automatic thought is distorted. 

Some automatic thoughts do not lend themselves to 
hypothesis testing through the examination of evidence. 
In these cases, two options are available: The therapist 
may either produce evidence from his/her own experience 
and offer it in the form of a question that reveals 
the contradiction or ask a question designed to uncover 
a logical error inherent in the patient’s beliefs. The 

therapist might say, for example, to a male patient who 
is sure he cannot survive without a close personal relationship, 
“You were alone last year, and you got along 
fine; what makes you think you can’t make it now?” 

In testing automatic thoughts, it is sometimes necessary 
to refine the patient’s use of a word. This is particularly 
true for global labels such as “bad,” “stupid,” 
or “selfish.” What is needed in this case is an operational 
definition of the word. To illustrate, a patient at 
our clinic had the recurring automatic thought, “I’m a 
failure in math.” Therapist and patient had to narrow 
down the meaning of the word before they could test 
the thought. They operationalized “failure” in math 
as “being unable to achieve a grade of C after investing 
as much time studying as the average class member.” 
Now they could examine past evidence and test 
the validity of the hypothesis. This process can help 
patients to see the overinclusiveness of their negative 
self-assessments and the idiosyncratic nature of many 
automatic thoughts. 

Reattribution is another useful technique for helping 
the patient to reject an inappropriate, self-blaming 
thought. It is a common cognitive pattern in depression 
to ascribe blame or responsibility for adverse events to 
oneself. Reattribution can be used when the patient unrealistically 
attributes adverse occurrences to a personal 
deficiency, such as lack of ability or effort. Therapist 
and patient review the relevant events and apply logic 
to the available information to make a more realistic 
assignment of responsibility. The aim of reattribution 
is not to absolve the patient of all responsibility but to 
examine the many factors that contribute to adverse 
events. Through this process, patients gain objectivity, 
relieve themselves of the burden of self-reproach, and 
can then search for ways to solve realistic problems or 
prevent their recurrence. 

Another strategy involving reattribution is for therapists 
to demonstrate that patients’ criteria for assigning 
responsibility to their own unsatisfactory behavior are 
stricter than criteria they use in evaluating the behavior 
of others. Cognitive therapists also use reattribution to 
show patients that some of their thinking or behavior 
problems can be symptoms of depression (e.g., loss of 
concentration) and not signs of physical decay. 

When a patient is accurate in identifying a realistic 
life problem or skills deficit, the cognitive therapist can 
use the technique of generating alternatives, in which 
therapist and patient actively search for alternative solutions. 
Because a depressed person’s reasoning often 
becomes restricted, an effort to reconceptualize the 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

problem can result in the patient’s seeing a viable solution 
that he/she may previously have rejected. 

It should be noted that all the cognitive techniques 
outlined here entail the use of questions by the therapist. 
A common error we observe in novice cognitive 
therapists is an exhortative style. We have found that 
therapists help patients to change their thinking more 
effectively by using carefully formed questions. If patients 
are prompted to work their own way through 
problems and reach their own conclusions, they learn 
an effective problem-solving process. We next elaborate 
on the use of questioning in cognitive therapy. 

Questioning 

As we have stressed throughout this chapter, questioning 
is a major therapeutic device in cognitive therapy. A 
majority of the therapist’s comments during the therapy 
session are questions. Single questions can serve several 
purposes at one time, whereas carefully designed 
series of questions can help patients consider a particular 
issue, decision, or opinion. The cognitive therapist 
seeks through questioning to elicit what patients are 
thinking, instead of telling patients what he/she believes 
they are thinking. 

In the beginning of therapy, questions are employed 
to obtain a full and detailed picture of a patient’s particular 
difficulties; to obtain background and diagnostic 
data; to evaluate the patient’s stress tolerance, capacity 
for introspection, coping methods, and so on; to obtain 
information about the patient’s external situation and 
interpersonal context; and to modify vague complaints 
by working with the patient to arrive at specific target 
problems on which to work. 

As therapy progresses, the therapist uses questioning 
to explore approaches to problems, to help the patient 
to weigh advantages and disadvantages of possible solutions, 
to examine the consequences of staying with 
particular maladaptive behaviors, to elicit automatic 
thoughts, and to demonstrate EMSs and their consequences. 
In short, the therapist uses questioning in most 
cognitive therapeutic techniques. 

Although questioning is itself a powerful means of 
identifying and changing automatic thoughts and schemas, 
it is important that the questions be carefully and 
skillfully posed. If questions are used to “trap” patients 
into contradicting themselves, patients may come to 
feel that they are being attacked or manipulated by the 
therapist. Too many open-ended questions can leave 
patients wondering what the therapist expects of them. 

Therapists must carefully time and phrase questions 
to help patients recognize their thoughts and schemas, 
and to weigh issues objectively. 

Self‑Help Homework Assignments 

Rationale 

Regular homework assignments are very important in 
cognitive therapy. When patients systematically apply 
what they have learned during therapy sessions to their 
outside lives, they are more likely to make significant 
progress in therapy and to be able to maintain their 
gains after termination of treatment. Burns and Spangler 
(2000) found that patients who did the most homework 
showed larger and more significant decreases in 
depression than those who were less compliant. Homework 
assignments are often the means through which 
patients gather data, test hypotheses, and begin to modify 
their thoughts and schemas. In addition, the data 
provided through homework assignments help to shift 
the focus of therapy from the subjective and abstract 
to more concrete and objective concerns. When a patient 
and therapist review the previous week’s activities 
during the agenda-setting portion of the interview, they 
may do so quickly, and the therapist can draw relationships 
between what takes place in the session and specific 
tasks, thereby avoiding tangents and side issues. 
Homework assignments further patients’ self-reliance 
and provide them with methods to continue working on 
problems after the end of treatment. Cognitive therapists 
emphasize the importance of homework by sharing 
with patients their rationale for assigning homework 
in therapy. They are also careful to explain the 
particular benefits to be derived from each individual 
assignment. 

Assigning and Reviewing Homework 

The cognitive therapist designs each assignment for the 
particular patient. The assignment should be directly 
related to the content of the therapy session, so that the 
patient understands its purpose and importance. Each 
task should be clearly articulated and very specific in 
nature. Near the end of each session, the assignment is 
written in duplicate, with one copy going to the therapist 
and the other to the patient. 

Some typical homework assignments include reading 
a book or article about a specific problem, practicing 
distraction or relaxation techniques, counting auto



Cognitive Therapy for Depression 

matic thoughts on a wrist counter, rating activities for 
pleasure and mastery on the Weekly Activity Schedule, 
maintaining a Daily Record of Dysfunctional 
Thoughts, and listening to a tape of the therapy session. 

During the therapy session, the therapist asks for 
the patient’s reactions to homework assignments. For 
example, the therapist might ask whether the assignment 
is clear and manageable. To determine potential 
impediments, the therapist may ask the patient to imagine 
taking the steps involved in the assignment. This 
technique can be especially helpful during the earlier 
stages of therapy. The patient assumes greater responsibility 
for developing homework assignments as therapy 
progresses through the middle and later stages. 

It is essential that patient and therapist review the 
previous week’s homework during the therapy session 
itself. If they do not, the patient may conclude that the 
homework assignments are not important. During the 
first part of the therapy sessions, therapist and patient 
discuss the previous week’s assignment, and the therapist 
summarizes the results. 

Difficulties in Completing Homework 

When a patient does not complete homework assignments, 
or does them without conviction, the cognitive 
therapist elicits automatic thoughts, schemas, or 
behavioral problems that may help them both understand 
where the difficulty resides. The therapist does 
not presuppose that the patient is being “resistant” or 
“passive–aggressive.” When the difficulties have been 
successfully identified, therapist and patient work collaboratively 
to surmount them. It is, of course, common 
for patients to have difficulties in completing homework, 
and here we consider some of the typical problems 
and ways to counteract them. 

When patients do not understand the assignment 
completely, the therapist should explain it more fully, 
specifying his/her expectations in detail. Sometimes 
using the behavioral technique of cognitive rehearsal 
(described earlier) can be helpful in such situations. 

Some patients believe that they are naturally disorganized 
and cannot maintain records and follow 
through on detailed assignments. Therapists can usually 
help to invalidate such general beliefs by asking 
patients about other circumstances in which they make 
lists—for example, when planning a vacation or shopping 
trip. Therapists can also ask these patients whether 
they could complete the assignment if there were a substantial 
reward entailed. This kind of question helps 

such patients recognize that self-control is not the problem; 
rather, they do not believe that the reward is great 
enough. When patients realize that the problem is an attitudinal 
one, therapist and patient can proceed to enumerate 
the advantages of completing the assignment. 

More severely depressed patients may need assistance 
to structure their time, so that homework 
becomes a regular activity. This can generally be accomplished 
by setting a specific time each day for the 
homework assignment. If necessary, patient and therapist 
can set up a reward system to increase motivation 
to complete the homework. For example, patients can 
reward themselves for doing the assignment by making 
a special purchase. 

Some patients are afraid of failing the assignments 
or of doing them inadequately. In these cases, the therapist 
can explain that self-help assignments cannot be 
“failed”: Doing an assignment partially is more helpful 
than not doing it at all, and mistakes provide valuable 
information about problems that still need work. In addition, 
because performance is not evaluated, patients 
cannot lose if they view the activity from a more adaptive 
perspective. 

Sometimes patients believe their problems are too 
deeply embedded and complex to be resolved through 
homework assignments. The therapist can explain to 
these patients that even the most complex undertakings 
begin with and comprise small, concrete steps. 
A writer, for example, may resolve “writer’s blocks” 
by taking the attitude, “If I can’t write a book, I can 
at least write a paragraph.” When enough paragraphs 
have been written, the result is a book. Therapist and 
patient can consider the advantages and disadvantages 
of the patient’s belief that problems cannot be solved by 
doing homework. Or the therapist can ask the patient 
to experiment before reaching such a conclusion. In instances 
in which a patient believes that he/she has not 
made enough progress and that the homework is therefore 
not helpful, the therapist can detail the progress the 
patient has made or help the patient see that it may take 
more time before substantial change can be perceived. 

When patients seem to resent being given assignments, 
the therapist can encourage them to develop 
their own assignments. He/she might also offer patients 
alternative assignments from which to choose, making 
one of the alternatives noncompliance with homework 
assignments. If patients choose noncompliance, the 
therapist can help to examine the consequences of that 
choice. Still another strategy is to present patients with 
a consumer model of therapy: Patients have a certain 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

goal (overcoming depression), and the therapist offers 
a means to achieve that goal; patients are free to use or 
reject the tools, just as they are free to buy or not to buy 
in the marketplace. 

Some patients believe that they can improve just as 
readily without homework. In this case, therapists have 
two options. First, they can offer their own clinical 
experience (which is supported by existing empirical 
evidence) that most patients who do not actively engage 
with and complete therapeutic homework progress 
more slowly in therapy. The other option is to set up an 
experiment for a given period of time, during which patients 
do not have to complete assignments. At the end 
of the predetermined period, therapists and patients 
can evaluate patients’ progress during that time interval. 
Once again, it is important for cognitive therapists 
to keep an open mind: Some patients do indeed effect 
significant change without formally completing homework 
assignments. 

Special Problems 

The novice cognitive therapist often errs by staying with 
the standard method we have outlined here, even if it is 
not working very well. The cognitive therapist should 
be flexible enough to adapt to the needs of patients and 
to the several special problems that commonly arise 
in therapy. We have grouped these special problems 
into two categories: difficulties in the therapist–patient 
relationship, and problems in which the therapy itself 
seems not to be working. 

Therapist–Patient Relationship Difficulties 

The first set of problems concerns the therapist–patient 
relationship itself. When the therapist first perceives a 
patient to be dissatisfied, oppositional, angry, or hostile, 
it is imperative that he/she present these observations 
to the patient in an empathic manner. It is important 
that the therapist refrain from responding to the patient 
simply with an increased and rigid adherence to prescribed 
techniques or the therapeutic rationale. It also 
is important that the therapist refrain from self-critical 
statements. Research indicates that such responses 
have detrimental effects on the therapeutic relationship 
(Castonguay et al., 1996; Henry, Strupp, Butler, 
Schact, & Binder, 1993; Piper et al., 1999). Instead, 
preliminary research (Castonguay et al., 2004; Safran, 
Muran, Samstag, & Stevens, 2002) indicates that 

the therapist’s use of metacommunication skills (open 
discussion about the patient’s negative reaction, exploration 
of the patient’s experience, recognition and acknowledgment 
of the therapist’s contribution to those 
negative reactions) is significantly more likely to repair 
and restore—and even improve—the therapeutic bond. 

It is essential for therapists to be aware that many 
interventions can be misinterpreted in a negative way 
by depressed patients. Therapists approach problems of 
misinterpretation in the same way that they approach 
other thoughts: They work with patients to gather data 
and search for alternative accounts of the evidence. Difficulties 
in the therapist–patient relationship can generally 
be resolved through dialogue. There are times when 
a therapist may need to tailor behavior to the particular 
needs of an individual patient. For instance, a therapist 
may become freer with appropriate self-disclosure and 
personal reactions to meet the needs of a patient who 
persists in seeing the therapist as impersonal. Similarly, 
the therapist can make a point of checking formulations 
of the patient’s thoughts more frequently to meet 
the needs of a patient who continues to believe that the 
therapist does not understand him/her. 

It is imperative in situations like these for the therapist 
not to assume that the patient is being stubbornly 
resistant or irrational. Therapeutic reactance (“a motivational 
state characterized by the tendency to restore 
or re-assert one’s ability to engage in freedoms 
perceived as lost or threatened” [Arnow et al., 2003, 

p. 1026]) was found to be a positive predictor of treatment 
outcome in directive therapy with chronically 
depressed patients. Arnow and colleagues found that 
treatment was enhanced when therapists responded in 
a flexible manner to such patient behaviors. Cognitive 
therapists collaborate with patients to achieve a better 
understanding of patients’ responses. The reactions 
themselves often provide data regarding the kinds of 
distortions patients make in their other social and personal 
relationships. Therefore, patients’ responses give 
therapists the opportunity to work with them on their 
maladaptive interpretations in relationships. 
Unsatisfactory Progress 

A second set of problems occurs when the therapy appears 
not to be working, even when the patient conscientiously 
completes homework assignments and the 
collaborative relationship seems successful. Sometimes 
problems stem from inappropriate expectations 


Cognitive Therapy for Depression 

on the part of the patient—or unrealistic expectations 
on the part of the therapist—regarding the rapidity and 
consistency of change. When therapy seems not to be 
progressing as quickly as it “should,” both patient and 
therapist must remember that ups and downs are to be 
anticipated in the course of treatment. It is important 
for therapists to keep in mind that some patients simply 
progress more slowly than others. The therapist or 
patient, or both, may be minimizing small changes that 
have indeed been taking place. In this case the therapist 
can emphasize the small gains that have been made and 
remind the patient that large goals are attained through 
small steps toward them. 

At times, hopelessness can lead patients to invalidate 
their gains. Therapists should seek to uncover the maladaptive 
automatic thoughts, cognitive distortions, and 
early schemas that contribute to the pervasive hopelessness. 
In these cases, therapists must work to correct 
mistaken notions about the process of change and the 
nature of depression before further progress in therapy 
can occur. 

In some cases in which therapy seems not to be 
working successfully, it may be that some of the therapeutic 
techniques have not been correctly used. Problems 
often arise when patients do not really believe the 
rational responses or are not able to remember them in 
times of emotional distress. It is important for a therapist 
to determine the amount of a patient’s belief in the 
rational responses and help him/her use the new responses 
as closely as possible to the moment when the 
automatic thoughts occur. To the patient who does not 
fully believe a rational response, the therapist can suggest 
an experimental stance—taking the new belief and 
“trying it on for size.” The patient who cannot think of 
answers because of emotional upset should be told that 
states of emotional distress make reasoning more difficult, 
and that thoughts such as “If this doesn’t work, 
nothing will” can only aggravate the problem. Patients 
should be assured that they will be able to think of rational 
responses more readily with practice. 

Another problem that derives from the misapplication 
of cognitive therapy techniques occurs when 
the therapist uses a particular technique inflexibly. It 
is often necessary for the therapist to try out several 
behavioral or cognitive techniques before finding an 
approach to which a patient responds well. The cognitive 
therapist must stay with a particular technique 
for a while to see whether it works, but he/she must 
also be willing to try an alternative technique when 

it becomes apparent that the patient is not improving. 
To give a specific example, behavioral homework assignments 
are sometimes more helpful with particular 
patients, even though the therapist has every reason to 
predict in advance that cognitive assignments will be 
more effective. 

In some instances in which it appears that little progress 
is being made in therapy, it turns out that the therapist 
has selected a tangential problem. The cognitive 
therapist should be alert to this possibility, especially 
during the early stages of therapy. When there appears 
to be little or no significant change in depression level, 
even when the patient seems to have made considerable 
progress in a problem area, the therapist should consider 
the possibility that the most distressing problem 
has not yet been uncovered. A typical example of this 
kind of difficulty is the patient who presents difficulty 
at work as the major problem, when it turns out that 
relationship problems are contributing significantly to 
the work difficulties. The real issue may be avoided by 
the patient because it seems too threatening. 

Finally, cognitive therapy is not for everyone. If the 
therapist has tried all available approaches to the problem 
and has consulted with other cognitive therapists, it 
may be best to refer the patient to another therapist with 
either the same or a different orientation. 

Regardless of why therapy is not progressing satisfactorily, 
cognitive therapists should attend to their own 
affect and cognitions. They must maintain a disciplined, 
problem-solving stance. If the cognitive therapist finds 
him/herself unduly influenced by a patient’s despair or 
begins to notice that his/her own schemas are triggered 
by therapeutic interactions, then he/she should seek supervision. 
Hopelessness in patients or therapists is an 
obstacle to problem solving. If therapists can effectively 
counteract their own negative self-assessments and 
other dysfunctional thoughts, then they will be better 
able to concentrate on helping patients find solutions to 
their problems. 

Case Study of Denise: Nonchronic Depression 

In the case study that follows, we describe the course 
of treatment for a nonchronically depressed woman 
seen at our Center. Through the case study, we illustrate 
many of the concepts described earlier in this 
chapter, including elicitation of automatic thoughts, the 
cognitive triad of depression, collaborative empiricism, 
structuring a session, and feedback. 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

Assessment and Presenting Problems 

At the initial evaluation, Denise, a 59-year-old widow, 
reported that she had been living alone for the last year. 
Denise’s husband had been diagnosed with brain cancer 
three years earlier and had died approximately 1 year 
ago. She had two grown, unmarried children (27 and 25 
years old) who were pursuing careers in other parts of 
the country. Denise had an undergraduate degree and 
had worked until age 30 but stopped after marrying. 
Denise described her major problems as depression 
(over the last year and a half), difficulty coping with 
daily life, and loneliness. She reported one prior episode 
of major depression around age 25, following the 
death of her father. 

Denise said she had become increasingly socially 
isolated with the onset of her husband’s illness (brain 
cancer). She reported having had normal friendships as 
a child, teenager, and young adult. She and her husband 
had led a relatively quiet life together, with a focus on 
raising their children and their respective work. When 
they had free time, they had enjoyed intellectual and 
cultural activities together (museums, lectures, concerts, 
and fine restaurants). The few close friends with 
whom they socialized had retired to Florida and Arizona 
during the time of the husband’s illness. 

Denise was diagnosed with a major depressive disorder, 
recurrent. Her test scores verified the diagnosis of 
depression. Denise’s BDI-II score was 28, placing her 
in the moderate to severe range of depression. Her most 
prominent depressive symptoms included loss of pleasure, 
irritability, social withdrawal, inability to make 
decisions, fatigue, guilt, difficulty motivating herself to 
perform daily functions, and loneliness. 

Session I 

The session began with Denise describing the “sad 
feelings” she was having. The therapist almost immediately 
started to elicit Denise’s automatic thoughts 
during these periods. 

tHeraPist: What kind of thoughts went through your 
mind when you had these sad feelings this past week? 

Denise: Well, I guess I’m thinking what’s the point of 
all this. My life is over. It’s just not the same. I have 
thoughts like “What am I going to do?” Sometimes I 
feel mad at him, you know, my husband. How could 
he leave me? . . . Isn’t that terrible of me? What’s 

wrong with me? How can I be mad at him? He didn’t 
want to die a horrible death. I should have done 
more. I should have made him go to the doctor when 
he first started getting headaches. . . . Oh, what’s the 
use? 

tHeraPist: It sounds like you are feeling quite bad 
right now. Is that right? 

Denise: Yes. 

tHeraPist: Keep telling me what’s going through your 
mind right now? 

Denise: I can’t change anything. It’s over. I don’t 
know. . . . It all seems so bleak and hopeless. What do 
I have to look forward to . . . sickness and then death? 

tHeraPist: So one of the thoughts is that you can’t 
change things, and that it’s not going to get any better? 


Denise: Yes. 

tHeraPist: And sometimes you believe that completely? 
Denise: Yeah, I believe it, sometimes. 

tHeraPist: Right now do you believe it? 

Denise: I believe it—yes. 

tHeraPist: Right now you believe that you can’t 
change things and it’s not going to get better? 
Denise: Well, there is a glimmer of hope, but it’s mostly 
. . . 
tHeraPist: Is there anything that you kind of look forward 
to in terms of your own life from here on? 

Denise: Well, what I look forward to . . . I enjoy seeing 
my kids, but they are so busy right now. My son is 
a lawyer and my daughter is in medical school. So, 
they are very busy. They don’t have time to spend 
with me. 

By inquiring about Denise’s automatic thoughts, the 
therapist began to understand her perspective—that she 
would go on forever, mostly alone. This illustrates the 
hopelessness about the future that is characteristic of 
most depressed patients. A second advantage to this 
line of inquiry is that the therapist introduced Denise 
to the idea of looking at her own thoughts, which is 
central to cognitive therapy. 

As the session continued, the therapist probed Denise’s 
perspective regarding her daily life. The therapist 
chose to focus on her inactivity and withdrawal. This is 


Cognitive Therapy for Depression 

frequently the first therapeutic goal in working with a 
severely depressed patient. 

In the sequence that follows, the therapist guided 
Denise to examine the advantages and disadvantages 
of staying in her house all day. 

Denise: Usually I don’t want to leave my house. I want 
to stay there and just keep the shades closed; you 
know, I don’t want to do anything. I just want to keep 
everything out, keep everything away from me. 

tHeraPist: Now, do you feel better when you stay in 
the house all day trying to shut everything out? 
Denise: Sort of . . . 

tHeraPist: What do you mean? 

Denise: Well, I can watch TV all day and just lose myself 
in these silly shows. I feel better when I see other 
people and their problems on these shows. It makes 
me feel less lonely and like my problems aren’t so 
bad. 

tHeraPist: And so how much time do you spend doing 
that? 

Denise: Now, lately? . . . Most of the time. Staying inside 
and watching TV feels safe, sort of secure, everything 
. . . like my loneliness, feels more distant. 

tHeraPist: Now, after you have spent some time like 
this, how do you feel about yourself? 
Denise: Afterwards? I usually try not to pay much attention 
to how I’m feeling. 

tHeraPist: But when you do, how do you feel? 

Denise: I feel bad. I feel bad for wasting the day. I don’t 
get to things that I need to take care of . . . like my 
bills, like cleaning, like taking a shower. I usually 
end up feeling kind of pathetic . . . and guilty. 

tHeraPist: On the one hand you seem to feel soothed 
and on the other hand, afterwards, you’re a bit critical 
of yourself? 

Note that the therapist did not try to debate or exhort 
Denise to get out of the house or become involved with 
necessary daily tasks. Rather, through questioning, the 
therapist encouraged her to examine more closely her 
assumption that she was really better off watching TV 
all day in her house. This is the process we call “collaborative 
empiricism.” By the second session, Denise 
had reexamined her hypothesis about watching TV and 
remaining in the house all day. 

Denise: About watching TV in the house versus getting 
out, I thought about that the other day. I remember 
telling you that it made me feel better to stay 
there. When I paid attention to what I really felt, it 
didn’t make me feel better. It just kind of blocked out 
feeling bad, but I didn’t feel better. 

tHeraPist: It is funny then that when you talked about 
it, your recollection of the experience was more positive 
than it actually was, but that sometimes happens 
with people. It happens to me, too. I think that something 
is good that’s not so hot when I actually check 
it out. 

We now return to the first session. After some probing 
by the therapist, Denise mentions that it sometimes 
feels like cognitive therapy “is my last hope.” The therapist 
uses this as an opportunity to explore her hopelessness 
and suicidal thinking. 

tHeraPist: What was going through your mind when 
you said, “This is my last hope”? Did you have some 
kind of vision in your mind? 

Denise: Yeah, that if this doesn’t work, I feel like I 
couldn’t take living like this the rest of my life. 

tHeraPist: If it doesn’t work out, then what? 

Denise: Well, I don’t really care what happens to 
me . . . 

tHeraPist: Did you have something more concrete in 
mind? 

Denise: Well, right this minute I don’t think I could 
commit suicide, but if I keep feeling this way for a 
long time, maybe I could. I don’t know, though— 
I’ve thought about suicide before, but I have never 
really thought about how I would do it. I know certain 
things stop me, like my kids. I think it would 
really hurt them and some other people, too, like my 
mother. My mom is in good health now, but she may 
need me someday. . . . Yeah, those are the two things 
that stop me, my children, and my mother. 

tHeraPist: Now those are the reasons for not committing 
suicide. Now what are some of the reasons why 
you might want to, do you think? 

Denise: Because sometimes it just feels so empty and 
hopeless. There’s nothing to look forward to—every 
day is the same. My life is such a waste, so why not 
just end it? 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

The therapist wanted Denise to feel as free as possible 
to discuss suicidal thoughts; thus, he tried hard to 
understand both the reasons for her hopelessness and 
the deterrents to suicide. After determining that she 
had no imminent plans to make an attempt, the therapist 
said that he would work with her to make some 
changes. He then asked her to select a small problem 
that they could work on together. 

tHeraPist: Now are there any small things that you 
could do that would affect your life right away? 

Denise: I don’t know. Well, I guess just calling my 
friend Diane in Florida. She called about a month 
ago and then again last week. Both times I told her I 
was busy and would call her back, but I haven’t. I’ve 
felt so down. I have nothing to say to her. 

tHeraPist: Well, when she lived in the area, what 
kinds of things did you talk about? 

Denise: We have kids about the same age, so we would 
talk about our kids. We both like to read and we 
used to go to a book club together—so we would 
talk about the books we were reading. Both of us 
liked art. We used to attend lectures at the museum 
during the week, so we would talk about art and the 
lectures. We would spend time making plans to do 
things together in our free time. It always was very 
interesting when I spent time and with her. We had 
so much in common. I do miss her. 

tHeraPist: It sounds like you used to be involved in 
a number of interesting activities. What about now? 

Denise: After my husband got sick and then my friends 
moved, I just stopped. I haven’t done any of those 
things in quite a while. 

tHeraPist: What do you think about attending a lecture 
series now? 

Denise: I don’t know. 

tHeraPist: Well, what do you think about that idea? 

Denise: It’s an OK idea, but it just seems like too much. 
I don’t think I’ll enjoy it . . . the way I feel . . . I don’t 
know. 

tHeraPist: Would you be willing to test out that 
thought that you won’t be able to enjoy it now? 

Denise: I don’t know . . . I guess so. 

tHeraPist: Is that a “yes”? 

Denise: Yes, but I don’t see how I’m going to get myself 
to do it. 

tHeraPist: Well, how would you go about finding out 
about a lecture series? 

Denise: You look online at the museum’s website to 
see what’s available. 

tHeraPist: OK. Do you have a computer? 

Denise: Yes. 

tHeraPist: Is it working? 

Denise: Yes. 

tHeraPist: How do you feel about doing that? 

Denise: I guess I could do that. . . . I’m so pathetic, I 
know what to do. I don’t need you to spell it out for 
me. Why didn’t I just do this before? 

tHeraPist: Well, you probably had good reasons for 
not doing it before. Probably you were just so caught 
up in the hopelessness. 

Denise: I guess so. 

tHeraPist: When you are hopeless you tend to deny, 
as it were, or cut off possible options or solutions. 

Denise: Right. 

tHeraPist: When you get caught up in hopelessness 
then, there is nothing you can do. Is that what you 
think? 

Denise: Yeah. 

tHeraPist: So, then, rather than be down on yourself 
because you haven’t looked this up online before, 
why don’t we carry you right through? 

This excerpt illustrates the process of graded tasks 
that is so important in the early stages of therapy with a 
depressed patient. The therapist asked the patient a series 
of questions to break down the process of attending 
a lecture series into smaller steps. Denise realized that 
she had known all along what to do, but, as the therapist 
pointed out, her hopelessness prevented her from seeing 
the options. 

Denise: Taking this step is going to be hard for me. 

tHeraPist: First steps are harder for everybody, but 
that’s why there is an old expression: “A journey of a 
thousand miles starts with the first step.” 

Denise: That’s very true. 

tHeraPist: It’s the first step that is so very important, 
and then you can ready yourself for the second step, 
and then the third step, and so on. Eventually, you 
build up some momentum, and each step begins to 


Cognitive Therapy for Depression 

follow more naturally. But first, all you have to do 
is take one small step. You don’t have to take giant 
steps. 

Denise: Well, yeah, I can see that. I guess I was thinking 
every step was just as hard as the first. Maybe it 
will get easier. 

In the second session, Denise reported success. 

Denise: I checked online about the lecture series and I 
surprised myself. One actually sounded interesting, 
and I’m thinking that I might just register for it online. 
I really didn’t think any of those feelings were 
still there. I’m kind of looking forward to that next 
step. 

At the end of the first session, the therapist helped 
Denise fill out the Weekly Activity Schedule for the 
coming week. The activities were quite simple, such as 
getting up and taking a shower, fixing meals, going out 
shopping, and checking out the lecture series online. 
Finally, the therapist asked Denise for feedback about 
the session and about her hopelessness. 

tHeraPist: Do you have any reactions? 

Denise: I’m still feeling down, but I’m also feeling a 
little better. It’s interesting that just the idea of looking 
at what lectures might be available is making me 
feel a little lighter. I even had the thought of calling 
Diane to talk over the options. . . . Is this a sign of 
better things to come? 

tHeraPist: What do you think? 

Denise: Maybe. 

Session 2 

In the second session, the therapist began by collaborating 
with Denise to set an agenda. Denise wanted to 
discuss the fact that she had not been attending to her 
bills or to her housework and was still spending a good 
part of the day alone in front of the TV; the therapist 
utilized this as an opportunity to discuss the issue of 
activity versus inactivity on the agenda. They then reviewed 
the previous homework. Denise had carried out 
all the scheduled activities and had also listed some of 
her negative thoughts in between sessions. Her BDI-II 
score had dropped somewhat. (Patients routinely fill 
out the BDI-II before each session, so that both patient 
and therapist can monitor the progress of treatment.) 

Denise then shared her list of negative thoughts with 
the therapist. One concern was that she had expressed 
angry feelings about her husband during the first session. 


Denise: I don’t like revealing things about myself, but 
you told me to write down my thoughts. So here it is. 
When I went to bed the night after of our first session, 
I thought about what I said to you, you know, 
about being angry at my husband. I was thinking 
that you probably think I am this really harsh and 
cold person. I mean, here my husband died this horrible 
death and I have this hard, insensitive reaction. 
I started thinking that now you probably feel really 
negatively toward me because of that statement and 
that you don’t want to work with me. 

tHeraPist: I’m really glad you’re telling me these 
thoughts. Let me start by asking you who is having 
these negative thoughts? 

Denise: You? Well, no. Actually, it’s me. 

tHeraPist: Right. Do you think that someone like me 
might have another reaction to what you said? 

Denise: I don’t know. I mean it is pretty harsh being 
angry at someone who had no control over what was 
happening. 

The therapist then offered Denise an alternative perspective: 


tHeraPist: Do you think that someone might react to 
your statements with empathy? 

Denise: How could they? 

tHeraPist: I imagine it would be very upsetting and 
annoying to have lost both your husband and your 
friends—all around the same time. Even though you 
love and care about all of them, feeling angry is understandable. 
It sounds like a basic human reaction 
to some very difficult life events. 

Denise: Yeah, I guess that does make sense. Thanks. 

This illustrates how a cognitive therapist can utilize 
events during the session to teach a patient to identify 
automatic thoughts and to consider alternative interpretations. 
In addition, the therapist provided a summary 
of a key theme he had identified from listening 
to Denise’s automatic thoughts about her husband and 
about therapy. The theme was her fear of being harshly 
judged and potentially punished for her statement (pu



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

nitiveness schema). Cognitive therapists often identify 

and begin to correct EMSs during the first phase of 

treatment. More intensive work on changing schemas 

in a later phase of treatment may be required to inocu


late against relapse. We elaborate on this process in the 

next section of this chapter. 
In the segment that follows, the therapist explained 

how he arrived at the conclusion that punitiveness was 

an important schema for Denise. 

tHeraPist: When you said that you thought I would 
have a negative opinion about you and not want to 
work with you because you said you felt angry at 
your husband, it sounded as though you were really 
concerned that you would be harshly judged and 
punished for your statements. 

Denise: Yes, that’s right. 

tHeraPist: I don’t want to make too much out of this at 
the moment, but you also said that after your friends 
had moved, you felt angry at them and judgmental 
of their decision. Even though you knew that each 
set of friends had to move for specific financial or 
health reasons and had been in the process of completing 
their moves over several years, part of you 
still felt very angry with them. You mentioned that 
you strongly believe that friends should be there for 
each other, especially in times of great need, and if 
a friend lets another friend down, that relationship 
should end. Is that right? 

Denise: Right. 

tHeraPist: So here, you largely have withdrawn from 
these important relationships and now you’re feeling 
quite lonely. The thought of talking to these friends 
again brings fears that they will now be angry and 
punitive with you for your reaction to them. You’re 
caught in a no-win situation. Is that right? 

Denise: Yes, that sounds right. 

tHeraPist: So one of the things that can really grab 
hold of you—and make you feel terrible—is this notion 
that people, including yourself, should behave 
in specific ways, and if they or you don’t behave the 
“right” way, then harsh punishment should result. Is 
that correct? 

Denise: Yes, that sounds right. But hearing you say it 
makes me realize that it doesn’t really sound right. 

tHeraPist: What do you mean? 

Denise: It’s too extreme. It’s too harsh. People are 

human and they have limitations, and they make 
mistakes sometimes. 

tHeraPist: It’s good that you are starting to notice 
and evaluate these thoughts rather than just responding 
to them automatically. What this tells us is that 
you have to be alert for whenever you have the sense 
that either you or others should be strongly punished 
for not behaving in a specified way. The idea that 
people should not be cut a break, even under very 
difficult circumstances, may not work very well in 
real life with real people. You mentioned that both 
friends told you they felt terrible about leaving you 
at this time, and both have called you regularly since 
leaving the area. Do you think that if you begin to 
respond to and return their calls, they might react 
differently—in the same way that I reacted differently 
from what you expected? 

Denise: Yes, that is very likely. 

About halfway through the session, the therapist 
asked the patient for feedback thus far. 

tHeraPist: Now, at this point, is there anything that 
we have discussed today that bothered you? 
Denise: That bothered me? 

tHeraPist: Yeah. 

Denise: I feel like I’m a bit of a freak. 

tHeraPist: That is important. Can you . . . 

Denise: Well, I’m trying not to feel that way, but I do. 

tHeraPist: Well, if you are, you are. Why don’t you 
just let yourself feel like a freak and tell me about it? 

Denise: Well, I’m feeling like I’m just so different from 
everyone else. Other people don’t seem to have my 
problems. They’re still happily married and carrying 
on with life. I just feel so different from everyone. 

This comment led to identification of a third theme, 
the social isolation/alienation schema. Denise had been 
viewing herself as increasingly different for the past 
couple of years. By this point, however, she was beginning 
to catch on to the idea of answering her thoughts 
more rationally. After the therapist pointed out the 
negative thought in the preceding excerpt, the patient 
volunteered: 

Denise: I know what to do with the thought “I’m a 
freak.” 


Cognitive Therapy for Depression 

tHeraPist: What are you going to do with it right this 
minute? 

Denise: I am going to say to myself, “I’m not so different 
from other people. Other people have lost their 
mates. I’m not the only one. I’m just the first one in 
my group of friends. Eventually, they will all have 
the same situation as me. It’s just a part of life.” Seeing 
you for help doesn’t mean I’m a freak. You probably 
see lots of people and help them with problems 
like mine. 

tHeraPist: Right. 

The same automatic thoughts arose later in the session, 
when Denise noticed the therapist’s wedding ring. 
In the extended excerpt below, the therapist helped her 
set up an experiment to test the thought “I’m so different 
from him.” 

tHeraPist: OK, now let’s just do an experiment and 
see if you yourself can respond to the automatic 
thought, and let’s see what happens to your feeling. 
See if responding rationally makes you feel worse 
or better. 

Denise: OK. 
tHeraPist: OK. “I’m so different from him.” What is 
the rational answer to that? A realistic answer? 
Denise: You are wearing a wedding ring and that is 
different from me because I’m alone, without a mate. 

tHeraPist: Yes. And? 

Denise: And? . . . I don’t really know much about you, 
other than you’re married. I guess from what I do 
know, that information could also be viewed as a 
similarity. We both have gotten married and know 
what it’s like to be married. I assume that you’ve 
never lost a mate, but maybe that is not true. You 
may have lost a mate as well. 

tHeraPist: So, is it that you’re different or that I’m different? 
Or is it that we just have different situations 
with respect to our mates at this point in time? 

Denise: We just have different situations right now. 

The preceding exchange demonstrates the use of reattribution. 
At first, Denise interpreted the therapist’s 
ring as evidence that they were very different. As a result 
of the guided discovery approach, she reattributed 
the difference to one of two factors: that either she or 
the therapist was different or that the situation with re


spect to mates was different for each. At the end of the 
experiment, Denise expressed satisfaction that she was 
finally recognizing this tendency to distort her appraisals. 


Denise: Right now I feel glad. I’m feeling a little better 
that at least somebody is pointing these things out to 
me. I never realized I was so judgmental of myself 
and other people, and that I’m assuming I’m so different 
from everyone. 

tHeraPist: So you feel good that you have made this 
observation about yourself? 

Denise: Yes. 

After summarizing the main points of the second 
session, the therapist assigned homework for the coming 
week: to fill out the Daily Record of Dysfunctional 
Thoughts (see Figure 7.4) and the Weekly Activity 
Schedule (with mastery and pleasure ratings; see Figure 
7.3). 

Session 3 

By the beginning of the third session, Denise’s mood 
had visibly improved. She had registered for a lecture 
series at the museum and was looking forward 
to attending the first lecture. She also had called her 
friend Diane, with very positive results. She was catching 
negative and punitive thoughts toward others and 
herself and challenging these thoughts. The primary 
agenda item Denise chose to work on was “how I back 
away from other people,” an aspect of her unrelenting 
standards, punitiveness, and social isolation/alienation 
schemas. 

Denise: I want to stop withdrawing from people. I want 
to be more accepting and engaged with others. 

tHeraPist: What holds you back? 

Denise: I guess I believe that I have to be a bit removed 
and strict in relation to others or they’ll just behave 
in whatever way they want. People have to know my 
rules and abide by them if they want to have a relationship 
with me. 

The therapist continued probing to understand why 
Denise believed she had to have others adhere to such a 
strict set of rules to have a relationship. As the discussion 
progressed, it became obvious that, in the abstract, 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

she could see that such hard-and-fast rules were not 
necessarily conducive to having a good relationship— 
in fact, such rules sometimes put others off. But in reallife 
situations, Denise never felt she was wrong. 

The therapist’s next task was to help Denise bring 
her rational thinking to bear on her distorted thinking 
in the context of a concrete event. At the therapist’s 
request, Denise then described a conversation with 
her friend Diane, and how her intolerance for Diane’s 
deviation from her rules created distance. Denise had 
wanted Diane and her husband to come for a visit the 
following summer. Diane, however, told her that their 
dog had been quite sick, and that if the dog was still 
alive she could not leave it. Denise thought this was 
ridiculous. She believed a relationship with a pet should 
never take precedence over a human relationship. This 
occurred when Denise actually had wanted and hoped 
to get closer to Diane again. The therapist helped her 
use logic to evaluate her maladaptive schema. 

tHeraPist: You had the thought “I’m right to set the 
record straight with her. She can’t put me in second 
place to her dog. She can’t do that without consequence.” 
It seems likely that you believed that 
thought, and that you believed the thought was right. 
And since you believed that thought was right, you 
then felt you had to withdraw your affection from her 
if she didn’t abide by your wishes. 

Denise: Right. 

tHeraPist: Now, let’s look at it. Do you think that 
thought is correct? 

Denise: Well, yes, it’s insulting. 

tHeraPist: What’s insulting? 

Denise: She’s putting her dog in a higher priority position. 


tHeraPist: Have you ever had a pet? 

Denise: No. 

tHeraPist: Do you think that maybe Diane feels like 
her dog is a part of her family? 
Denise: I never thought of it that way. 

tHeraPist: If you look at the situation from that perspective, 
how do you feel? 

Denise: I feel like I’m being a little insensitive. . . . 
That’s not right. I’m not allowing for any other perspective. 
I’ve never had a pet, so I don’t really know 
what it’s like to have a pet. It’s not right for me to be 

so judgmental of Diane. I need to be more understanding. 
I wasn’t very caring. I am actually behaving 
in a way that goes directly against my deepest 
values. 

tHeraPist: So, according to your own values, was this 
right? 

Denise: No, it’s not right. I wasn’t respecting her feelings. 
I was just demanding that she respect mine. 
That wasn’t right. 

tHeraPist: OK, now this is one of the problems. If you 
want to get over this sense that you should never give 
in or bend your rules for others, one of the things you 
can do is look for this thought, “I’m right and you 
should have a negative consequence for your ‘wrong’ 
decision”—and refer back to this conversation we are 
having now and decide for yourself whether, indeed, 
you were right. Now, if every time you approach a 
conflict in a relationship and allow for the possibility 
that you might not fully understand, but really think 
underneath, “But I know I’m right,” you are going 
to feel put out, and then you are not going to want to 
engage with that person. Is that right? 

Denise: Yeah, that sounds right. 

tHeraPist: So we have to decide here and now. Do you 
indeed think that you are right to suspend your initial 
negative judgment to leave open the possibility of re


evaluating your reaction to her behavior? 

Denise: Yes. 

tHeraPist: Now, the next time you get the thought, 
“I’m right and I’m going to make sure this other 
person knows it,” how are you going to answer that 
thought? 

Denise: If I’m right? But I’m not necessarily right. I 
need to consider the other person’s perspective. I 
need to try to understand them and then see if what 
I’m thinking fits. 

tHeraPist: Now are you saying that because that is 
the correct answer, or because you really believe it? 

Denise: No, I really believe it. 

The therapist followed this discussion with a technique 
called “point–counterpoint” to help Denise 
practice rational responses to her automatic thoughts 
even more intensively. In this excerpt, the therapist expressed 
Denise’s own negative thinking as Denise tried 
to defend herself more rationally. 


Cognitive Therapy for Depression 

tHeraPist: Now I am going to be like the prosecuting 
attorney, and I’ll say, “Now I understand you let your 
friend violate one of your rules of friendship. Is that 
true?” 

Denise: Yes. 

tHeraPist: “Now it seems to me that that was a very 
bad thing for you to do.” 

Denise: No, it wasn’t. 

tHeraPist: “You don’t think it was?” 

Denise: No, I should try to understand her perspective. 

tHeraPist: “Well, you can sit there and say you should 
be more understanding, but I thought you said before 
that you wanted people to respect you.” 

Denise: I do, but I also need to respect others. 

tHeraPist: “I know, but now you are saying that you 
are going to let her get away with this. What’s next?” 

Denise: What’s next can only be a better understanding 
of one another. We’ll feel closer. 

tHeraPist: “But how can you feel closer if she’s not 
respecting your rules of friendship?” 

Denise: Maybe my rules are not appropriate in this 
situation. I need to learn to be more understanding, 
flexible, and tolerant of some deviations from my 
rules. 

tHeraPist: “But then you’ll lose control of the situation.” 


Denise: No, that’s an exaggeration. I don’t need to control 
the whole situation. I can still decide what makes 
sense. I am still in control of what’s important. 

tHeraPist: “How can that be?” 

Denise: Because I can respect myself and respect my 
friend as well. I don’t have to turn everything into 
an either–or situation to try to make her see and do 
it my way. That just makes it difficult for her to get 
along with me, and I’ll lose out on the relationship in 
the long run if I keep on insisting that she either do it 
my way or we do nothing. 

Finally, the therapist returned to the schema and 

asked the patient how much she believed the new per


spective. 

tHeraPist: If you’re flexible, you’ll lose control. Now 
do you believe that? 

Denise: No. 

tHeraPist: Do you believe it partially? 

Denise: No. In fact, I’m more likely to lose control of 
any possibility of getting what I want if I’m so inflexible. 
It’s like I lose sight of the importance of the 
relationship when I get so stuck on thinking that I 
have to be in control and that the other person has to 
do it my way. 

tHeraPist: OK, so right now, how much do you believe 
that? 

Denise: Completely. 

tHeraPist: 100%? 

Denise: Yes. 

tHeraPist: You are sure 100%, not 90 or 80%? 

Denise: No, 100%. 

For the remainder of Session 3, Denise and the 
therapist reviewed other instances in which she noticed 
that her standards were not flexible and felt the urge to 
be punitive when her rules were not met. The session 
ended with a summary of the main issues raised in the 
first three sessions. 

Summary of Initial Sessions 

In the first three sessions, the therapist laid the groundwork 
for the remainder of treatment. He began immediately 
by teaching Denise to identify her negative automatic 
thoughts. By doing this, the therapist began to 
understand her feelings of hopelessness and to explore 
her isolation. By identifying her thoughts in a variety 
of specific situations, he was able to deduce several key 
schemas that later proved central to Denise’s thinking: 
(1) unrelenting standards, (2) punitiveness, and 

(3) social isolation/alienation. All appeared to be contributing 
to Denise’s social isolation and depression. 
The therapist made especially skillful use of Denise’s 
thoughts during the second therapy session to help her 
see that she was distorting evidence about the therapeutic 
interaction and coming to the inaccurate conclusion 
that the therapist would be judgmental and punitive 
with her, and withdraw positive feelings for her, in the 
same way that Denise tends to respond to others. 
Beyond identifying thoughts and distortions, the 
therapist guided Denise to take concrete steps to overcome 
her inactivity and withdrawal. He asked her to 
weigh the advantages and disadvantages of staying in 
the house all day watching TV; he broke down the task 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

of attending a lecture series at the museum into small, 
manageable steps; and he worked with her to develop 
an activity schedule to follow during the week. 

Finally, the therapist employed a variety of strategies 
to demonstrate to Denise that she could test the validity 
of her thoughts, develop rational responses, and feel 
better. For example, during the course of the three sessions 
the therapist set up an experiment, used reattribution, 
offered alternative perspectives, and practiced the 
point–counterpoint technique. 

One final point we want to emphasize is that the primary 
therapeutic mode was questioning. Most of the 
therapist’s comments were in the form of questions. 
This helped Denise to evaluate her own thoughts outside 
of the session and prevented her from feeling attacked 
by the therapist. 

By the end of these initial sessions, Denise reported 
being more optimistic that her life could change. 

Later Sessions 

Denise continued to fill out the Daily Record of Dysfunctional 
Thoughts and gathered evidence that she 
could relax her standards and be more tolerant of others’ 
viewpoints and foibles. She discovered that she felt 
happier, both with herself and others, as a result. 

The therapist set up several experiments with Denise 
to test a series of beliefs: that her friends would become 
punitive with her when she did not behave perfectly, 
and that her relationships would become unpleasant 
and undesirable if she relaxed any of her rigid standards 
regarding how others should behave in relationships. 

Through graded tasks, Denise counteracted her tendency 
to withdraw by gradually approaching new and 
sometimes unfamiliar situations. When she noticed 
herself imposing her standards of behavior on others, 
or noticed in herself the urge to become punitive, Denise 
practiced more open and accepting behaviors (by 
asking open-ended questions that reflected back her 
understanding of others’ responses, and by inhibiting 
harsh and judgmental statements). She practiced tolerating 
the discomfort associated with these new behaviors 
until they began to feel more comfortable and 
natural. 

When Denise terminated therapy, her BDI-II score 
was in the normal range. The symptom reduction phase 
of treatment was successfully completed in 20 sessions. 

The next section describes and includes a case example 
of ST for chronic depression. 

st for chroNic DePressioN 

ST, developed by Young (1990/1999; Young et al., 
2003), can be used with patients who present with recurrent 
depressive episodes; dysthymic disorder; early age 
onset of depression; early life trauma or adverse family 
relations (e.g., the loss of a parent in childhood; sexual, 
physical or verbal abuse, neglect, and overprotection); 
comorbid personality disorders; or a large number of 
EMSs (identified with the YSQ [Young, 2005]).Young 
and Klosko (1994) have published a self-help book to 
help patients better understand their schemas. 

Beck and colleagues (1990, p. 10) have noted that 

schemas are difficult to alter. They are held firmly in 
place by behavioral, cognitive, and affective elements. 
The therapeutic approach must take a tripartite approach. 
To take a strictly cognitive approach and try 
to argue patients out of their distortions will not work. 
Having the patients abreact within the session to fantasies 
or recollections will not be successful by itself. 
A therapeutic program that addresses all three areas 
is essential. A patient’s cognitive distortions serve as 
signposts that point to the schema. 

As a result, ST represents a significant expansion of 
traditional CBT. It places more emphasis on early developmental 
patterns and origins, long-term interpersonal 
difficulties, the patient–therapist relationship, and 
emotion-focused or experiential exercises. 

Case Study of Barbara: Chronic Depression 

The second case study demonstrates the use of ST with 
a chronically depressed patient. 

History and Presenting Problems 

The patient “Barbara” was an extremely attractive, 
46-year-old woman who had been married for the past 
20 years to George, a functional alcoholic working on 
Wall Street in investment banking. It was the first marriage 
for both, but it had been extremely rocky throughout. 
Barbara had wanted children in the marriage but 
had been unable to conceive naturally. Although fertility 
treatments and adoption had been discussed, Barbara 
reported that George resisted following through 
on these options because he questioned her ability to be 
an adequate parent. 

At the beginning of George and Barbara’s relationship, 
Barbara reported extremely strong sexual chem



Cognitive Therapy for Depression 

istry. However, she stated that the chemistry had been 
erratic and often disappeared for long periods over the 
course of their relationship. She said that she had only 
felt real happiness with George in the first few months 
of the relationship, when he was extremely generous 
and attentive. Her decision to marry George was based 
on a feeling that they were meant for each other. They 
initially met at a high-end bar, where Barbara had 
worked as a cocktail waitress. Once their relationship 
was established, however, George continued to spend 
most of his free time in cocktail lounges without her, as 
she did not like to drink. 

At the time she came in for her first interview, Barbara 
was spending most of her time in bed or watching 
TV. She rarely left the house except to go shopping. 
Outings with her mom or friends “to lift her spirits” 
often culminated in shopping sprees, followed by extended 
verbal berating by George, drunk upon his return 
home from the bar, because of what he perceived 
as her lack of taste, judgment, and intelligence regarding 
purchases. Barbara entered treatment because her 
husband told her that she “was driving him crazy with 
all her ridiculous behavior” and that she should “go get 
fixed.” Barbara acknowledged feeling very depressed. 
She stated that this latest episode of depression started 
after a particularly upsetting fight with her husband 
over adopting a child. 

Barbara reported having mild to moderate depression 
most of her life, interspersed with multiple episodes of 
major depression. She first became aware of feeling 
moderately depressed around age 11. An only child, she 
initially described her childhood family as “fine.” Barbara 
described her mother as extremely attentive and 
devoted, a “very good mother who did everything for 
me.” Barbara stated that her mother lived for her, but 
she also remembered her mother occasionally falling 
into depressions. As early as age 6, she recalled that her 
mother was emotionally unavailable when depressed. 

Barbara described her father as a workaholic who 
was almost never home. When he did come home, he 
was remote, preferring the solitude of his study over 
interacting with her and her mother. If Barbara tried to 
engage him as a child, he would upbraid her by calling 
her “an annoying simpleton” and demand that she leave 
him alone. 

Barbara described her first major depressive episode, 
which occurred around age 16, after a breakup with her 
first serious boyfriend. Later episodes were triggered 
by other breakups and the fertility problems. 

Barbara scored 29 on the BDI-II, placing her in the 

severe range of depression. She also completed the 
third edition of the YSQ (Long Form; Young, 2005), 
and received very high scores on the Emotional Deprivation, 
Defectiveness, Abandonment, Dependence/ 
Incompetence, Entitlement, Failure, Subjugation, Approval 
Seeking, and Negativity/Pessimism schemas. 
Her Schema Mode Questionnaire (Young et al., 2008) 
indicated that she primarily functioned in the following 
modes: Detached Protector, Compliant Surrender, 
Punitive Parent, and Vulnerable Child. 

At Barbara’s initial consultation, the therapist conducted 
additional assessment work through imagery 
(a standard assessment procedure for ST). During this 
assessment, Barbara was instructed: “Close your eyes 
and let your mind float to your earliest memories of 
your mother.” Barbara reported painful recollections 
of being 6 years old with her mother in bed, depressed 
and emotionally unavailable. She reported feeling very 
scared and lost at these times. The same imagery exercise 
was utilized in a subsequent session in which 
Barbara was asked to retrieve an early memory of her 
father. In this image, Barbara’s father displayed intolerant, 
demeaning, and rejecting behavior toward her as a 
child. During the exercise, she reported feeling unacceptable, 
ashamed of herself, and unwanted by him. 

On the Multimodal Life History Inventory (Lazarus 
& Lazarus, 1991), a 15-page assessment tool covering 
a wide range of issues dealing with feelings, thoughts, 
behaviors, and a variety of other psychotherapeutic issues, 
Barbara reported her main problems as depression, 
being unhappy with herself, feeling empty and 
unloved, and feeling unappreciated. She also listed 
the following behaviors as applicable: procrastination, 
withdrawal, concentration difficulties, sleep disturbance, 
crying, and occasional outbursts of temper. She 
further indicated that she often felt sad, depressed, unhappy, 
hopeless, useless, and lonely. She endorsed the 
following statements: “I don’t know what to do with my 
life,” “Life is empty, a waste,” and “There is nothing to 
look forward to.” 

Based on the initial interview, Barbara was diagnosed 
with major depressive disorder, recurrent episode 
on Axis I, and dependent personality disorder on 
Axis II. 

Schema Mode Work 

This section demonstrates the use of schema mode 
work—an important component of the ST approach— 
with Barbara. 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

The therapist shifted to ST because Barbara’s depression 
was not lifting with standard cognitive therapy. 
Although Barbara had learned how to challenge her 
automatic thoughts, identified and challenged her core 
beliefs with rational responses, and followed through 
on graded behavioral assignments to test her thoughts 
and beliefs, she never emotionally accepted the rational 
viewpoint, despite much concrete evidence. Barbara 
remained convinced that she was worthless, useless, 
and hopeless. Her EMSs continued to be stubbornly entrenched. 
The therapist decided that the next step would 
be to introduce emotion-focused exercises to access 
Barbara’s schemas on a deeper emotional level, utilizing 
the schema mode approach. 

There are seven general steps in schema mode work: 

(1) Increase awareness of modes by identifying and labeling 
modes with the patient; (2) explore the origins of 
modes in childhood and adolescence, and discuss their 
adaptive value; (3) link current problems and symptoms 
to the patient’s maladaptive modes; (4) uncover 
the advantages and disadvantages of each mode; (5) use 
imagery to access the Vulnerable Child mode; (6) conduct 
dialogues between modes; and (7) generalize the 
results from mode work in session to the patient’s life 
outside of sessions. The following sections illustrate 
each step of mode work in helping Barbara. 
Step 1: Increase Awareness of Modes by Identifying 
and Labeling Modes with the Patient 

This first step helps both therapist and patient conceptualize 
the problems in terms of different parts of the 
self or modes. From the Schema Mode Questionnaire, 
the therapist already was aware that Barbara primarily 
functioned in the Detached Protector, Compliant Surrenderer, 
Punitive Parent, and Vulnerable Child modes. 
The session reveals how the therapist queries the patient, 
so that she can begin to recognize and differentiate 
these parts within herself. 

Throughout this section, the patient is encouraged 
to label modes with terms that feel right—rather than 
simply applying generic terms from the Schema Mode 
Questionnaire. Patients are encouraged to find terms 
that best capture the thoughts, emotions, and/or behaviors 
associated with each mode. A primary goal 
with this first step is to help the patient observe these 
parts, and decenter him/herself from them. This step 
begins the process of interrupting the automaticity of 
the modes. 

tHeraPist: I’m noticing in our sessions that sometimes 
you seem very sad and upset and critical of 
yourself, and other times you seem a bit distracted 
from what you’re feeling, like when you were telling 
me about the great pair of shoes that you found on 
your shopping trip. 

BarBara: Yeah, I guess that’s true. Talking about my 
purchases makes me feel better. 

tHeraPist: When you say “better,” what do you mean? 

BarBara: I feel good. 

tHeraPist: Like happy, peaceful, and content? 

BarBara: I feel pleasure. 

tHeraPist: In what way is it pleasurable? 

BarBara: I feel pleasure when I look at pretty things 
with my mom or my friends, and I like buying those 
things. It takes my mind off of everything else. 

tHeraPist: Like you’re temporarily distracted from 
other feelings? 

BarBara: Yeah, that’s right. 

tHeraPist: What are those other feelings? 

BarBara: Just feeling real bad. I can’t stand those feelings. 


tHeraPist: So, sometimes there is this one part of you 
that just wants distance from this other part of you 
that feels bad? 

BarBara: Yes. 

tHeraPist: Are there other things you do besides 

shopping that help you distance from bad feelings? 

BarBara: Well, yeah, I sleep a lot. 

tHeraPist: Anything else? 

BarBara: I watch TV, but TV doesn’t always work. 

tHeraPist: This part of you that wants distance from 

feeling bad—what could we call that part of you? 
BarBara: That part of me? I don’t know. I don’t know 

what to call it. 

tHeraPist: What does it feel like? 

BarBara: It feels like I’m escaping. 

tHeraPist: OK. So should we call that part “the Es


capist”? 

BarBara: I guess so. . . . That sounds right. 

tHeraPist: And the part of you that you’ve escaped 

from—can you tell me more about that part of you? 


Cognitive Therapy for Depression 

BarBara: That part feels bad . . . really bad and terrible. 


tHeraPist: Let me hear that part speak about those 
feelings. 

BarBara: I’m just a bad person (Starts to cry.) ... I’m 
a useless good for nothing. I feel so hopeless. I don’t 
know what to do. I can’t figure anything out. I’m 
such a zero, such a failure. . . . Do we really have to 
talk about this? 

tHeraPist: Barbara, I know that it feels bad to be in 
touch with this part of yourself, but if you can hang 
in there for just a bit, it will help me to understand 
why you’re feeling so bad. Do you know what this 
part of you wants? 

BarBara: I want to feel good. 

tHeraPist: What do you think would help you feel 
better? 

BarBara: I don’t know. I really don’t know. I just want 
you to fix me. My husband is right. I am a ridiculous 
person. 

tHeraPist: It sounds like there is one part of you that 
feels really awful. It sounds like this part is listening 
and taking in what your husband says about you— 
that “you’re ridiculous.” I want you to hold back on 
agreeing with your husband, and I want to hear more 
about this part of you that feels awful—the part of 
you who wants everything fixed. That part . . . do 
you feel it? 

BarBara: Yes, I feel it. 

tHeraPist: Tell me more. What are the things you 
want to fix? 

BarBara: I don’t know. I just want to feel good about 
myself, proud of myself, but I just don’t. I want to 
have a child, but my husband doesn’t think I can 
handle it. He’s probably right. I need so much help 
with just everyday living. I don’t know how to handle 
anything. 

tHeraPist: So this part of you, this part that feels 
awful and helpless but also wants to feel better, what 
could we call this part? 

BarBara: I don’t know. What do you think? 

tHeraPist: Well, what does it feel like? 

BarBara: It feels helpless—ashamed and helpless. 

tHeraPist: How old do you feel when you’re in touch 
with this part of yourself? 

BarBara: I feel young, very young. 

Therapist: Do you want to call that part “Ashamed 
Little Barbara” [Vulnerable Child mode with associated 
EMSs of Defectiveness, Dependence/Incompetence, 
and Enmeshment/Undeveloped Self]? 

BarBara: Sure. 

tHeraPist: OK. And now this other part—the one that 
is agreeing with your husband and calling yourself 
ridiculous . . . 

BarBara: Well, I am ridiculous and silly. I can’t cope 
with anything. 

tHeraPist: Before you agree with that part, I want you 
to just notice how that part sounds. How does that 
part sound to you? Does it sound critical? 

BarBara: Yes, but I deserve it. I’m so useless. 

tHeraPist: It sounds like you are having a hard time 
just listening to that part without automatically 
agreeing with it? 

BarBara: Yeah, I guess that’s true. 

tHeraPist: So, what do you want to call that part? 

BarBara: I don’t know. . . . But . . . you’re not going to 
tell me what to call it, are you? 

tHeraPist: Right. 

BarBara: OK. I guess “the Critic” [Punitive Parent 
mode with associated EMSs of defectiveness and 
subjugation]. 

In this part of the session, the therapist has helped 
Barbara begin to recognize and label the modes: the Detached 
Protector as “the Escapist,” the Punitive Parent 
as “the Critic,” and the Vulnerable Child as “Ashamed 
Little Barbara.” Although not fully illustrated here, 
the therapist also used a similar sequence of questions 
to help Barbara identify other modes. From this portion 
of the session, it is clear that “the Critic” (Punitive 
Parent mode) is generating a tremendous amount 
of negative affect in Barbara. Barbara’s only apparent 
way to cope with the onslaught of punitive statements 
from this mode is “the Escapist” (Detached Protector 
mode), in which she sleeps away much of her life. Otherwise, 
Barbara’s primary experience of herself rests 
with “Ashamed Little Barbara” (the Vulnerable Child 
mode), where she feels defective, useless, hopeless, and 
helpless. 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

Step 2: Explore Origins of Modes in Childhood 
and/or Adolescence 

This section illustrates how the therapist helps Barbara 
recognize the origins of these modes. In addition, the 
therapist assesses the strength of her Healthy Parent 
mode. 

tHeraPist: Does “the Critic” sound like anyone else 
you know or have known in your life? 

BarBara: Yes, it sounds like George. 

tHeraPist: Anyone else? 

BarBara: Yeah, it also sounds like my Dad . . . just 
like my Dad. 

tHeraPist: In what way? 

BarBara: My Dad used to talk like that to me . . . 
whenever I tried to get his attention. 

tHeraPist: How old were you? 

BarBara: Young, very young . . . 3 or 4 . . . as far back 
as I remember. 

tHeraPist: Can you close your eyes and try to let yourself 
feel like that young child again with your dad? 

BarBara: (Closes her eyes.) 

tHeraPist: Tell me what’s happening. 

BarBara: He’s yelling at me because I pulled on his 
coat jacket. 

tHeraPist: Let me hear what he’s saying to you. 

BarBara: “Stop it, you little pest. You’re such a simpleton. 
Can’t you find anything better to do than pull 
on my coat? Get out of here!” 

tHeraPist: And how are you feeling as he is yelling 
these things at you? 

BarBara: I feel stupid, like I’m a jerk. I’m nothing—a 
useless pest, an annoyance. 

tHeraPist: Does it feel like he’s right, or are you angry 
at him? 

BarBara: No. I don’t feel angry. I just feel bad (starts 
to cry)—I’m just bad. 

tHeraPist: So there is part of you agreeing with him, 
punishing yourself—like your dad—thinking you’re 
bad. 

BarBara: Yeah. 

tHeraPist: And where is your mom? 

BarBara: She’s telling me to shush and leave him 

alone. She says he’s tired from working so hard all 
day. 

tHeraPist: And what are you thinking and feeling 
when she says this? 

BarBara: I’m thinking that I’m a terrible person. 

tHeraPist: So, you’re getting the message that you are 
the problem from both of your parents. It feels like 
both parents are saying you deserve this harsh treatment, 
and there is a part of you that believes them— 
you deserve to be punished because you’ve bothered 
your father. Is that right? 

BarBara: Yes, that’s right. 

tHeraPist: So there is also this punishing part of you, 
this part that accepts that message from your parents—
this punitive message that you’re bad and a 

problem, a pest. 

BarBara: Yes. 

tHeraPist: What is your mom doing? 

BarBara: After a while, she takes me out. She sees 
I’m sad and wants me to feel better. She tries to make 
me feel better by giving me something, like a toy, 
or something to eat. A lot of times she takes me out 
shopping and buys me something special. 

tHeraPist: And how do you feel when she does this? 

BarBara: I feel a little better while we are out . . . but 
later, I feel bad. I still feel shame because I’m so bad 
and useless. 

tHeraPist: So there is still the “Ashamed Little Bar


bara” underneath? 

BarBara: Yes. That is it. 

tHeraPist: If you could have rewritten the script for 

your family, a family with ideal parents, what would 
you have happen? 

BarBara: I have no idea. They weren’t bad. They were 
doing their best. 

tHeraPist: Yes, but what if you had had a daddy who 
was excited to see you at the end of his work day . . . 
a daddy who enjoyed coming home to his family . . . 
who found pleasure in talking with you and getting 
to know you, and played with you? 

BarBara: You mean . . . a daddy who loved me? 

tHeraPist: Yes. I mean a daddy who was able to show 
you his love through all sorts of actions. 

BarBara: Wow . . . that would have been so different. 


Cognitive Therapy for Depression 

tHeraPist: Do you feel any angry feelings at him now 
as you think about how he spoke to you—this very 
young child simply trying to get his attention? 

BarBara: No, I was in his way. He worked hard. I had 
to leave him alone. 

tHeraPist: What you just said—does that sound like 
anyone you know? 

BarBara: Yes. It sounds like my mother. 

tHeraPist: And what do you think of that now? 

BarBara: Well. She was just trying to keep the peace 
and fill in for him. 

tHeraPist: But what about you, this sweet innocent 
little child simply wanting what all children want— 
love and attention from her father? 

BarBara: It’s sad. I feel sad for me. 

tHeraPist: Right. It is sad for you. You are a child 
doing what all children do—children try to get their 
parents’ attention; children want to know they are 
loved, valued, appreciated. You were no different 
from any other child, but what is happening here? 

BarBara: (Cries.) 

tHeraPist: No one’s calling your dad on his horrible 
behavior toward you. Everyone’s accommodating 
him and speaking to you as if you are the problem, 
when all that you are doing is what every young child 
does. And yet your father and your mother are responding 
as if you are the problem. 

BarBara: Yeah. You’re right. Why did they do that? 

tHeraPist: Do you think there was something wrong 
with you, or do you think there was something wrong 
with the way they were behaving with you? 

BarBara: The way they were behaving with me. . . . 
It’s a problem with the way they treated me. 

tHeraPist: Right. They are the ones who should feel 
shame about their behavior. There was nothing 
shameful about you or your behavior. 

In the preceding section, the therapist helps Barbara 
to realize the origin of “the Critic,” the part of herself 
that has accepted her “Punitive Parent” message that 
she was the problem. The therapist’s questions and 
comments also help Barbara realize that the problem 
was actually her parents’ behavior toward her rather 
than an inherent defect in herself. 

The therapist now turns Barbara’s attention to the 
origin of “the Escapist” mode—the part that was seek


ing relief from these terrible feelings about herself as a 
child. The therapist also helps Barbara become more 
aware that “the Escapist” was only able to provide 
short-term relief. 

tHeraPist: Now when you had this bad feeling about 
yourself as a child, the “Ashamed Little Barbara” 
feeling, how did you cope with that feeling? What 
did you do? 

BarBara: A lot of the time, I did nothing. I just sat 
on my bed in my room daydreaming, wishing everything 
could be different. I would fantasize being 
a star, a beautiful person that everyone adored. People 
would dote on me and give me expensive gifts 
and clothes that made me look even more beautiful. 
Sometimes when my mom would take me out and 
buy me things, it kind of felt like she was making 
this dream come true. 

tHeraPist: Is that “the Escapist” part of you trying to 
help you feel better? 

BarBara: Yes, it definitely is. 

tHeraPist: And then what would happen? 

BarBara: I would feel better, especially as I got older 
and I got a lot of attention from the way I looked, but 
eventually my dad always would start yelling again. 
I remember him yelling at my mom for “spending 
too much money” simply to turn me into “a pretty 
Bimbo.” 

tHeraPist: So the efforts to feel better eventually 
backfired. 
BarBara: Right. I never felt very good for long. I never 
felt good inside. 

Step 3: Link Current Problems and Symptoms 
to Maladaptive Modes 

In this section, the therapist asks Barbara questions that 
help her to recognize how these modes that developed 
in childhood are still operating in the present. Barbara 
begins to connect these modes with why she is feeling 
so depressed, and she begins to see the repetitive patterns 
in her life. 

tHeraPist: Let’s look at what is happening now in 
your life. Do you recognize any relationship between 
what we have been talking about—these different 
parts of you—and how you are thinking and feeling 
about yourself and coping with your life now? 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

BarBara: Yeah, I’m still trying to feel good—or 
just not feel—by being “the Escapist.” When I go 
on these shopping sprees and let my mom and my 
friends dress me up, it still doesn’t work any better 
than it ever did. And sleeping all the time doesn’t 
work either. 

tHeraPist: What do you mean? 

BarBara: Well, I only feel good for a short while. 
Then, instead of my dad coming home, now I’m 
coming home to George or he’s coming home to me. 
George is just as mean and unavailable as my Dad. 

tHeraPist: And then what happens? 

BarBara: I start to feel really bad again, really depressed. 
I feel like I’m not worth spending time with, 
like I’m boring and useless. I’m saying all sorts of 
bad things about myself and I agree with everything 
George says about me. I’m my worst “Critic.” In the 
end, I still feel like the same old “Ashamed Little 
Barbara” inside who never ever really feels better. 
Then, I just want to go to sleep to get away from it 
all. I’m finally starting to see it more clearly, going 
around and around the same old circle—nothing has 
changed and nothing changes. I’ve been miserable 
my whole life. 

tHeraPist: But there is one very important change. 

BarBara: What is that? 

tHeraPist: You’re starting to see and understand 
what’s been happening for a long time instead of just 
being on the treadmill without any awareness. 

Step 4: Uncover Advantages and Disadvantages 
of Each Mode 

The therapist now begins to ask Barbara questions regarding 
the advantages and disadvantages of listening 
and acting on these different parts of herself. This helps 
Barbara to gain more distance from the modes and increases 
her awareness of a choice in how she responds. 

tHeraPist: When these different parts of yourself or 
modes developed, they served a purpose. Why don’t 
we talk about each of them and explore their advantages 
and disadvantages, both in the past and present? 
Let’s start with “the Escapist.” 

BarBara: Well, that part lets me feel good—or at least 
not feel bad. 

tHeraPist: For how long? 

BarBara: For a while. 

tHeraPist: And in the long run? Does that part help 
you feel better? 

BarBara: No, not really. I can’t really escape feeling 
bad. I can’t say I feel any better in the long run. 

tHeraPist: So, is there any advantage to this part of 

you—“the Escapist”? 

BarBara: I’m mixed about it. 

tHeraPist: Sure. I can understand that. If you don’t 

know of any other way to feel better, any relief is 
better than no relief at all. 

BarBara: Yeah. 

tHeraPist: But sometimes it’s good to let yourself feel 
bad because when you let yourself stay in touch with 
your feelings, you often can begin to recognize what 
feels better in the long run . . . like finding activities 
that are truly interesting to you, or that give you a 
sense of accomplishment and purpose, or that bring 
out a feeling of deep enjoyment. 

BarBara: That makes sense, but I have no idea how to 
find those things. 

tHeraPist: Well, that is something we can work on 
together. 

BarBara: That sounds good. 

tHeraPist: And what about “the Critic”? Is there any 
advantage to listening to “the Critic”? 

BarBara: That part tells me what’s wrong with me. 

tHeraPist: And what does “the Critic” say is wrong 
with you? 

BarBara: That I’m stupid and silly, useless and annoying. 


tHeraPist: Do you think “the Critic” is right? 

BarBara: Of course. 

tHeraPist: But if you put the words of “the Critic” 
back in your dad’s mouth and listen to him speak to 
little 3-year-old Barbara as she excitedly greets him 
coming home from work, what do you think? 

BarBara: When you put it that way, I think he’s a jerk. 
I mean, what does he think he is doing to this poor 
little girl? What’s wrong with him? 

tHeraPist: Right. So is there any advantage to listening 
to these critical words? 

BarBara: No . . . no, definitely not. 


Cognitive Therapy for Depression 

tHeraPist: Are there any disadvantages of listening 
to “the Critic”? 

BarBara: Yes. It’s getting clearer now why that part is 
making me feel so bad. I have to stop listening to that 
part. When I accept what my dad said as the truth, I 
feel bad, really bad, about myself. 

tHeraPist: You mean it brings up that “Ashamed Little 
Barbara” feeling? 

BarBara: Yes. 

tHeraPist: And what about her? What does she need? 

BarBara: She needs to feel good about herself. She 
needs to hear good things about herself. She needs 
someone to listen to her and pay attention to her—to 
love her. 

tHeraPist: I agree. 

Step 5: Use Imagery to Access the Vulnerable 
Child Mode 

The therapist now begins to engage Barbara in the Vulnerable 
Child mode. By accessing this mode, the therapist 
and patient can begin to work on the core schemas 
that are part of “Ashamed Little Barbara.” 

tHeraPist: I know it’s sometimes unpleasant to let 
yourself be in touch with “Ashamed Little Barbara,” 
but would you be willing to go there, so that we can 
get to know that part of you to find out what you need 
to truly feel better and to find out what is getting in 
the way? 

BarBara: I guess . . . (Closes her eyes.) 

tHeraPist: Tell me what you are feeling and thinking 
right now. 

BarBara: It’s the same old feelings—I feel bad . . . and 
useless. (Visibly begins to look upset, then opens her 
eyes.) 

tHeraPist: Can you go back there to “Ashamed Little 
Barbara,” can you let yourself feel her? 

BarBara: OK. (Closes her eyes again.) 

tHeraPist: Where are you? What are you doing? 

BarBara: I’m sitting on my bed in my room. My 
daddy just told me to go away. 

tHeraPist: And how are you feeling? 

BarBara: Awful. 

tHeraPist: And what do you want? 

BarBara: I want my mommy to come in and make me 
feel better. 

tHeraPist: Where is she? 

BarBara: She’s in her room, lying on her bed. She 
doesn’t feel good either. 

tHeraPist: If you could bring in a healthy mommy to 
be with you right now, what would she say to you? 
Let me hear her speak to Little Barbara. 

BarBara: You know he’s just tired from work. If you 
just leave him alone, everything will be all right. 

tHeraPist: Let me hear what Little Barbara thinks 
about this? 

BarBara: That doesn’t help much. I still feel upset and 
bad. 

tHeraPist: How about if I come in to help? 

BarBara: OK. 

tHeraPist: You are such a loving little girl. So many 
fathers would relish coming home to such a greeting 
from their little girl. Something is wrong with your 
daddy. Why doesn’t he recognize that you’re offering 
him something that is precious—so special? . . . How 
does little Barbara feel as she hears this? 

BarBara: Better. 

tHeraPist: Let me talk to your father now. 

BarBara: OK. 

tHeraPist: How can you speak to your daughter that 
way? She’s done nothing but welcome you home with 
joy and love. And look at how you are responding. 
Your response to her is completely inappropriate. 
You are so closed off and removed from everything. 
What is going on with you? Why can’t you see that 
you have a beautiful, creative, and loving daughter? 
Barbara does not deserve this type of treatment. I’m 
not going to stand for this and let you hurt her anymore. 
. . . How does little Barbara feel as she hears 
this? 

BarBara: A lot better. I wish my mom had spoken to 
my dad that way. But you know, if you really tried 
to say anything like that to him, he wouldn’t listen. 
He never listened to my mom. He’d probably just say 
something mean to you and then shut the door. 

tHeraPist: OK. Well if that happened, what would 
you want to happen next? 

BarBara: I don’t know. 

tHeraPist: Let me step in again and say this to him 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

through the door. Whether or not you choose to listen, 
there is a limit, a limit as to how long we will 
stay here for you. If you choose not to be here for us, 
we will not stay here for you. 

BarBara: I don’t think he’ll change. 

tHeraPist: Then you and I, together, will leave him 
and create a better life. 

BarBara: Is that really possible? 

tHeraPist: Do you want to make it happen? 

BarBara: Yes, but what about him? He’ll be so lonely. 

tHeraPist: Who will be lonely? 

BarBara: He will, unless we stay. 

tHeraPist: But if you stay, who will be lonely then? 

BarBara: Me. 

tHeraPist: Do you want to continue to be there for 
someone who chooses not to be there for you? 

BarBara: Well, no—no, that isn’t right. 

tHeraPist: So what do you want to do? 

BarBara: I want to leave. 

In this part of the session, the therapist has taken on 
the “Healthy Parent” mode for Barbara because she 
does not have a strong template for this mode. This is 
one example of what is meant by “limited reparenting.” 
In this role, the therapist temporarily steps in to support 
the client in relation to unmet basic needs for safety; 
stability or predictability; love, nurturance, and attention; 
acceptance and praise; empathy; realistic limits; 
and validation of feelings and needs. The therapist also 
counters and challenges any unreasonable messages 
or beliefs that such needs should remain unfulfilled. 
As she begins to feel safer and more protected by the 
“Healthy Parent” through this work, “Little Barbara” 
no longer feels so ashamed of herself. 

Step 6: Conduct Dialogues between Modes 

Once patients begin to internalize the Healthy Parent 
mode demonstrated by the therapist, their own Healthy 
Adult mode becomes stronger. The patient’s Healthy 
Adult mode can now actively challenge and combat the 
Punitive Parent mode, thereby supporting, protecting, 
and healing the Vulnerable Child, with the help of the 
therapist. 

The therapist now addresses the Escapist, or Detached 
Protector, mode. In the segment that follows, 

the therapist sets up a dialogue between the Vulnerable 
Child and Escapist modes. 

tHeraPist: How about having “Little Barbara” talk 
with “the Escapist” about things that she really enjoys? 


BarBara: OK . . . but how do we do that? 

tHeraPist: First, I want you to sit on this side of the 
couch. When you’re on this side of the couch, I want 
you to let yourself get in touch with and speak for 
“Little Barbara.” Have “Little Barbara” talk about 
all those things that interest her—those things that 
interest and excite her and help her feel alive. And 
then, I want you to get up and sit on the other side of 
the couch. When you’re on this side of the couch, I 
want you to let yourself get in touch with and speak 
for “the Escapist.” We’ll go back and forth between 
those two parts of yourself to see what comes out. I’ll 
help out “Little Barbara” if she needs me. 

BarBara: [as “Little Barbara”] You know, I once 
made a dress at school, and I noticed that I really 
liked sewing. It was a really simple pattern, nothing 
special, but I had so much fun making it. I think I 
might want to take a class to try sewing again. 

[as “the Escapist”] Why do you want to do that? If it 
doesn’t turn out, you’ll just feel bad about yourself. 
People might think you’re ridiculous at this age, trying 
to learn to sew. Why take the chance that you’ll 
feel bad or stupid? Why don’t you just lie down and 
forget about it? 

[as “Little Barbara”] But I might like it. If I don’t start 
trying the things that I think I might enjoy, I’ll never 
know what I like or what makes me happy . . . If I 
keep listening to you, I’ll do nothing but sleep away 
the rest of my life. I want to have a life. 

[as “the Escapist”] I don’t know if it’s worth the risk of 
feeling bad. 

[as “Little Barbara”] Even if I feel bad at first, it will 
only be temporary. Either I’ll get good at sewing or I 
can find something else that I’m good at. I’ll eventually 
find something if I just keep at it. 

[as “the Escapist”] Well OK, suit yourself. 

[as “Little Barbara”] I will. 


Cognitive Therapy for Depression 

At this point, the therapist is focused on helping Barbara 
discover what gives her an inner sense of joy and 
accomplishment. This task is difficult for Barbara because 
she spent so many of her early years dependent 
on her mother, not developing any special skills or talents, 
and surrendering to what others wanted her to be. 
Nevertheless, as previous segment illustrates, Barbara 
has begun to recognize the importance of trying out 
new activities that interest her, in spite of the temporary 
discomfort she may feel about the possibility of failing 
and feeling stupid again. The final step in therapy is to 
take these lessons she has learned in the sessions and 
integrate them into her everyday life experiences. 

Step 7: Generalize Results from Mode Work 
to Real Life 

Barbara decided to enroll in one sewing class and surprised 
herself by doing quite well. She then decided to 
take two more classes—a more advanced sewing class 
and a course in costume design. Following these classes, 
she started to volunteer for a local theater group, 
working on costumes. Barbara received much attention, 
praise, and appreciation from her teachers and theater 
friends. At this point in treatment, Barbara commented 
to her therapist, “You know, I think this is the first time 
I have ever really felt good and proud of myself.” 

As Barbara’s confidence and her network of friends 
grew, she became less accepting and less tolerant of 
George’s neglectful and demeaning behaviors toward 
her. She also became increasingly annoyed with her 
mother’s pattern of excusing George’s behavior for the 
sake of “being financially comfortable.” This was in 
stark contrast to Barbara’s unquestioning acceptance of 
her relationship with George at the beginning of treatment. 


As she began to see parallels between how she felt 
with George and how she felt as a child with her parents, 
Barbara began to question whether this was a healthy 
marriage for her. She recognized that many of George’s 
behaviors were damaging to her, just as her parents’ 
behaviors had been. Although Barbara still wanted to 
adopt a child, she began questioning George’s ability to 
be a good parent. 

The following vignette from a later session in Barbara’s 
treatment illustrates how much healthier and assertive 
she has become in relation to George: 

BarBara: I’m noticing that when George speaks to me 
in such a condescending tone, I feel like a little girl 

with my father again. I don’t want this. I want to be 
treated with love and respect, and as an equal. It isn’t 
right for me to accept his behavior—being ignored 
and demeaned by someone who is supposed to love 
me. 

tHeraPist: So what do you want to do? 

BarBara: I think I’m ready to confront George about 
his drinking and abusive behavior. I can’t even imagine 
adopting a child and bringing that child into our 
home if he continues to behave this way. 

tHeraPist: What do you want to happen? 

BarBara: I want him to stop drinking and start treating 
me with love and respect. 

tHeraPist: And if he doesn’t? Then what? 

BarBara: I guess I’ll leave him and seek a divorce. 

tHeraPist: And how will that be for you—in the worst 
case scenario you might imagine? 

BarBara: In the worst case . . . you know, I think I’ll 
be OK. I mean, I have my own life now. I have my 
own friends. And I have you, if things really get 
rough. 

tHeraPist: I’ll be here for you whenever you need my 
support. 

BarBara: Yeah, I think I’ll be OK. 

At this point in treatment, Barbara has fully incorporated 
the Healthy Adult mode and has healed the most 
damaging schemas that had been part of her Vulnerable 
Child mode. Along with these changes, Barbara’s 
depression went into full remission. Soon after this session, 
Barbara confronted her husband. Despite couple 
therapy, George refused to make any changes, and Barbara 
filed for divorce. 

Barbara did experience one relapse of major depression 
as her divorce was finalized. “Ashamed Little Barbara” 
and “the Escapist” temporarily returned during 
this period. Barbara, however, was able to recognize 
the reappearance of the Punitive Parent mode and successfully 
overcame it with her now stronger Healthy 
Adult mode. She was able to empathize with and forgive 
herself, and to mourn the lost opportunity to have 
her own family. She decided to go back to school and 
succeeded in becoming a certified teacher at the high 
school level, teaching costume design and drama in 
the theater department. She also developed a lasting 
relationship with a caring, emotionally available man 
who shared her passion for theater. Barbara’s chronic 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

depression lifted, and she has, for the most part, been 
symptom free since. 

coNclusioN 

Evidence demonstrating the efficacy of cognitive therapy 
in the treatment of unipolar and bipolar depression 
continues to mount. Adolescents, adults, and geriatric 
patients have all been shown to benefit from cognitive 
therapy. 

Cognitive therapy helps patients understand the relationships 
among their thoughts, behaviors, and feelings. 
Cognitions are “put to the test” by examining 
evidence, setting up in vivo experiments, weighing advantages 
and disadvantages, trying graded tasks, and 
employing other intervention strategies. Through this 
process, patients begin to view themselves and their 
problems more realistically, to feel better, to change 
their maladaptive behavior patterns, and to take steps to 
solve real-life difficulties. These changes take place as 
a direct result of carefully planned, self-help homework 
assignments—one of the hallmarks of cognitive treatment. 
Cognitive therapy reduces symptoms by helping 
patients to identify and modify automatic thoughts, and 
the behaviors associated with them. 

An expansion of cognitive therapy called schema 
therapy has been developed to deal with the deeper 
psychological structures that predispose patients to 
chronic depression. After utilizing interventions aimed 
at initial symptom reduction, a great deal of subsequent 
attention and effort are directed toward identifying 
and modifying the underlying schemas and modes that 
often predispose individuals to chronic depression. 

Following a thorough assessment, an extensive 
change component is implemented. During this phase 
of treatment, patients come to understand their own 
schemas and modes, their developmental origins, and 
how these dysfunctional schema patterns are triggered, 
reinforced, and maintained. 

Throughout the treatment, cognitive therapists maintain 
a collaborative alliance with their patients. They 
are very active in structuring sessions, yet go to considerable 
lengths to help patients reach conclusions on 
their own. Cognitive therapists serve as guides, helping 
patients maneuver through a labyrinth of dysfunctional 
cognitions and life patterns. As a result, patients develop 
the psychological tools they need to become more 
proactive in making the cognitive, affective, interper


sonal, and behavioral changes that serve to minimize 
future episodes of depression. 

notes 

1. Some researchers have found it useful to differentiate between 
“relapse” (the return of symptoms within 6 months 
after termination of treatment) and “recurrence” (a whole 
new episode of depression, occurring at least 12 months 
after treatment has ended; Gelder, 1994; see also Overholser, 
1998). However, this distinction has not been uniformly 
incorporated into the literature. 
2. Reported relapse rates for patients treated with medication 
have varied depending on the definition of “relapse,” the 
duration of the follow-up period, and the severity of depression 
within the patient population (Williams, 1997). 
Because of these differences, some of the estimates have 
ranged from 34 to 92% (Frank, 1996; Overholser, 1998; 
Versiani, 1998; Williams, 1997), though lower rates have 
also been reported (Keller & Boland, 1998). 
3. The book by Young (1990/1999) cited here and throughout 
the chapter, Cognitive Therapy for Personality Disorders: 
A Schema-Focused Approach, refers to the third edition. 
However, the ideas expressed were developed in 1990, for 
the original edition. Similarly, the Young Schema Questionnaire 
was developed in 1990, then reprinted in the 
third edition. 
4. Currently, the concept of a schema domain is not a component 
of schema theory. Although early factor-analytic research 
supported the grouping of 18 EMSs into five broader 
domains, later studies have been inconsistent regarding 
how schemas cluster together, and some domains have not 
been supported at all. Nevertheless, we have included research 
studies that focus on these five domains because the 
findings do shed light on the relationship between schemas 
and other constructs. We are in the process of reviewing 
all of the research available so that we can reexamine the 
question of how schemas cluster together. 
5. For the remainder of the chapter, we use the term “schema” 
to refer specifically to Young’s “early maladaptive 
schemas.” 
6. Many cognitive therapists also focus on “underlying assumptions,” 
which represent cognitions that are “deeper” 
than automatic thoughts but less central than schemas or 
core beliefs. Underlying assumptions are considered conditional 
beliefs, whereas most schemas are unconditional. 
In our own work, we have not found this distinction to 
be necessary in working with most patients. Thus, conditional 
and unconditional beliefs that are enduring and 
pervasive can be merged into the broader construct of a 
schema. 

Cognitive Therapy for Depression 

referenCes 

Albon, J. S., & Jones, E. E. (2003). Validity of controlled 
clinical trials of psychotherapy: Findings from the NIMH 
Treatment of Depression Collaborative Research Program. 
American Journal of Psychiatry, 159(5), 775–783. 

American Psychiatric Association. (1987). Diagnostic and 
statistical manual of mental disorders (3rd ed., rev.). 
Washington, DC: Author. 

American Psychiatric Association. (1994). Diagnostic and 
statistical manual of mental disorders (4th ed.). Washington, 
DC: Author. 

American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and 
statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.). Arlington, 
VA: Author. 

Antonuccio, D. O., Danton, W. G., & DeNelsky, G. Y. (1995). 
Psychotherapy versus medication for depression: Challenging 
the conventional wisdom with data. Professional 
Psychology: Research and Practice, 26(6), 574–585. 

Antonuccio, D. O., Thomas, M., & Danton, W. G. (1997). A 
cost-effectiveness analysis of cognitive behavior therapy 
and fluoxetine (Prozac) in the treatment of depression. Behavior 
Therapy, 28, 187–210. 

Arnow, B. A., Manber, R., Blasey, C., Klein, D. N., Blalock, 

J. A., Markowitz, J. C., et al. (2003). Therapeutic reactance 
as a predictor of outcome in the treatment of chronic depression. 
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 
71(6), 1025–1035. 
Bailleux, S., Romo, L., Kindynis, S., Radtchenko, A., & 
Debray, Q. (2008). Study of the bonds between early maladaptive 
schemas and strategies of coping (among alcoholdependent 
patients and depressed patients). Journal de 
Therapie Comportementale et Cognitive, 18(1), 19–25. 

Ball, J. R., Mitchell, P. B., Corry, J. C., Skillecorn, A., Smith, 
M., & Malhi, G. S. (2006). A randomized controlled trial 
of cognitive therapy for bipolar disorder: Focus on longterm 
change. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 67, 277–286. 

Barber, J. P., & DeRubeis, R. J. (1989). On second thought: 
Where the action is in cognitive therapy for depression. 
Cognitive Therapy and Research, 13(5), 441–457. 

Barlow, D. H., & Hofmann, S. G. (1997). Efficacy and dissemination 
of psychological treatments. In D. M. Clark & 

C. G. Fairburn (Eds.), Science and practice of cognitive 
behaviour therapy (pp. 95–117). Oxford, UK: Oxford University 
Press. 
Barnhofer, T., Crane, C., Hargus, E., Amarasinghe, M., 
Winer, R., & Williams, J. M. (2009). Mindfulness-based 
cognitive therapy as a treatment for chronic depression: 
A preliminary study, Behaviour Research and Therapy, 
47(5), 366–373. 

Basco, M. R., & Rush, A. J. (1996). Cognitive-behavioral 
therapy for bipolar disorder. New York: Guilford Press. 
Beck, A. T. (1967). Depression: Causes and treatment. Phil


adelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press. 

Beck, A. T. (1976). Cognitive therapy and the emotional disorders. 
New York: International Universities Press. 

Beck, A. T. (1988). Love is never enough. New York: Harper 
& Row. 

Beck, A. T., & Alford, B. A. (2009). Depression: Causes and 
treatment. Philadephia: University of Pennsylvania Press. 

Beck, A. T., Freeman, A., & Associates. (1990). Cognitive 
therapy of personality disorders. New York: Guilford 
Press. 

Beck, A. T., Rush, A. J., Shaw, B. F., & Emery, G. (1979). 
Cognitive therapy of depression. New York: Guilford 
Press. 

Beck, J. S. (2011). Cognitive therapy: Basics and beyond 
(2nd ed.). New York: Guilford Press. 

Bellino, S., Zizza, M., Rinaldi, C., & Bogetto, F. (2007). 
Combined therapy of major depression with concomitant 
borderline personality disorder: Comparison of interpersonal 
and cognitive psychotherapy. Canadian Journal of 
Psychiatry, 52(11), 718–725. 

Berger, T., Hammerli, K., Gubser, N., Andersson, G., & Caspar, 
F. (2011). Internet-based treatment of depression: A 
randonmized controlled trial comparing guided with unguided 
self-help. Cognitive Behavioral Therapy, 40(4), 
251–266. 

Berndt, E. R., Koran, L. M., Finkelstein, S. N., Gelenberg, A. 
J., Kornstein, S. G., Miller, I. M., et al. (2000). Lost human 
capital from early-onset chronic depression. American 
Journal of Psychiatry, 157, 940–947. 

Beutler, L. E., Scogin, F., Kirkish, P., Schretlen, D., Corbishley, 
A., Hamblin, D., et al. (1987). Group cognitive therapy 
and alprazolam in the treatment of depression in older 
adults. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 
55(4), 550–556. 

Bhar, S. S., Gelfand, L. A., Schmid, S. P., Gallop, R., DeRubeis, 
R. J., Hollon, S. D., et al. (2008). Sequence of improvement 
in depressive symptoms across cognitive therapy 
and pharmacotherapy. Journal of Affective Disorders, 
110 (1–2), 161–166. 

Biggs, M. M., & Rush, A. J. (1999). Cognitive and behavioral 
therapies alone or combined with antidepressant medication 
in the treatment of depression. In D. S. Janowsky 
(Ed.), Psychotherapy indications and outcomes (pp.121– 
172). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press. 

Blackburn, I. M., Bishop, S., Glen, A. I. M., Whalley, L. J., & 
Christie, J. E. (1981). The efficacy of cognitive therapy in 
depression: A treatment trial using cognitive therapy and 
pharmacotherapy, each alone and in combination. British 
Journal of Psychiatry, 139, 181–189. 

Bledsoe, S. E., & Grote, N. K. (2006). Treating depression 
during pregnancy and the postpartum: A preliminary 
meta-analysis. Research on Social Work Practice, 16(2), 
109–120. 

Bockting, C. L. H., Schene, A. H., Spinhoven, P., Koeter, M. 

W. J., Wouters, L. F., Huyser, J., et al. (2005). Preventing 

CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

relapse/recurrence in recurrent depression with cognitive 
therapy: A randomized controlled trial. Journal of Consulting 
and Clinical Psychology, 73, 647–657. 

Bowers, W. A. (1990). Treatment of depressed in-patients: 
Cognitive therapy plus medication, and medication alone. 
British Journal of Psychiatry, 156, 73–58. 

Bromet, E., Andrade, L. H., Hwang, I., Sampson, N. A., 
Alonso, J., de Girolamo, G., et al. (2011). Cross-national 
epidemiology of DSM-IV major depressive episode. BMC 
Medicine, 9, 90. 

Burns, D. D., & Spangler, D. L. (2000). Does psychotherapy 
homework lead to improvements in depression in 
cognitive-behavioral therapy or does improvement lead to 
increased homework compliance? Journal of Consulting 
and Clinical Psychology, 68(1), 46–56. 

Castonguay, L. G., Goldfried, M. R., Wiser, S., Raue, P. J., 
& Hayes, A. M. (1996). Predicting the effect of cognitive 
therapy for depression: A study of unique and common 
factors. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 
64(3), 497–504. 

Castonguay, L. G., Schut, A. J., Aikens, D., Constantino, M. 
J., Laurenceau, J. P., Bolough, L., et al. (2004). Integrative 
cognitive therapy: A preliminary investigation. Journal of 
Psychotherapy Integration, 14(1), 4–20. 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). (2010). 
Current depression among adults—United States, 2006 
and 2008. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 
59(38), 1229–1235. 

Chapman, D. P., Perry, G. S., & Strine, T. W. (2005). The 
vital link between chronic disease and depressive disorders. 
Preventing Chronic Disease, 2, A14. Retrieved from 
www.csc.gov/pdc/issues/jan/04_0066.htm. 

Chapman, D. P., Whitfield, C. L., Felitti, V. J., Dube, S. R., 
Edwards, V. J., & Anda, R. F. (2004). Adverse childhood 
experiences and the risk of depressive disorders 
in adulthood. Journal of Affective Disorders, 82(2), 217– 
225. 

Cipriani, A., Santilli, C., Furukawa, T. A., Signoretti, A., Nakagawa, 
A., McGuire, H., et al. (2009). Escitalopram versus 
other antidepressant agents for depression. Cochrane 
Database of Systematic Reviews, 2, CD006532. 

Clark, D. A., & Beck, A. T. (2010). Cognitive therapy of anxiety 
disorders: Science and practice. New York: Guilford 
Press, 

Colom, F., Vieta, E., Martinez, A., Jorquera, A., & Gastó, C. 
(1998). What is the role of psychotherapy in the treatment 
of bipolar disorder? Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics, 
67, 3–9. 

Cong, E., Li, Y., Shao, C., Chen, J., Wu, W., Shang, X., et al. 
(2012). Childhood sexual abuse and the risk of recurrent 
major depression in Chinese women. Psychological Medicine, 
42, 409–417. 

Connolly, K. R., & Thase, M. E. (2012). Emerging drugs for 
major depressive disorder. Expert Opinion on Emerging 
Drugs, 17(1), 105–126. 

Conte, H. R., Plutchik, R., Wild, K. V., & Karasu, T. B. (1986). 
Combined psychotherapy and pharmacotherapy for depression. 
Archives of General Psychiatry, 43, 471–479. 

Craighead, W. E., Miklowitz, D. J., Vajk, F. C., & Frank, E. 
(1998). Psychological treatments for bipolar disorder. In P. 

E. Nathan & J. M. Gorman (Eds.), A guide to treatments 
that work (pp. 240–248). New York: Oxford University 
Press. 
Crews, W. D., Jr., & Harrison, D. W. (1995). The neuropsychology 
of depression and its implications for cognitive 
therapy. Neuropsychology Review, 5(2), 81–123. 

Curry, J. F. (2001). Specific psychotherapies for childhood 
and adolescent depression. Biological Psychiatry, 49, 
1091–1100. 

de Oliveira, I. R. (1998). The treatment of unipolar major depression: 
Pharmacotherapy, cognitive behaviour therapy 
or both? Journal of Clinical Pharmacy and Therapeutics, 
23, 467–475. 

DeRubeis, R. J., & Feeley, M. (1990). Determinants of change 
in cognitive therapy for depression. Cognitive Therapy 
and Research, 14(5), 469–482. 

DeRubeis, R. J., Gelfand, L. A., Tang, T. Z., & Simons, A. 

D. (1999). Medications versus cognitive behavior therapy 
for severely depressed outpatients: Mega-analysis of four 
randomized comparisons. American Journal of Psychiatry, 
156(7), 1007–1013. 
DeRubeis, R. J., Hollon, S. D., Amsterdam, J. D., Shelton, 

R. C., Young, P. R., Salomon, R. M., et al. (2005). Cognitive 
therapy vs. medications in the treatment of moderate 
to severe depression. Archives of General Psychiatry, 62, 
409–416. 
DeRubeis, R. J., Hollon, S. D., Grove, W. M., Evans, M. D., 
Garvey, M. J., & Tuason, V. B. (1990). How does cognitive 
therapy work?: Cognitive change and symptom change in 
cognitive therapy and pharmacotherapy for depression. 
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 58(6), 
862–869. 

Dobson, K. S., Hollon, S. D., Dimidjian, S., Schmaling, K. 
B., Kohlenberg, R. J., Gallon, R., et al. (2008). Randomized 
trial of behavioral activation, cognitive therapy, and 
antidepressant medication in the prevention of relapse and 
recurrence in major depression. Journal of Consulting and 
Clinical Psychology, 76(3), 468–477. 

Dobson, K. S., & Pusch, D. (1993). Towards a definition of 
the conceptual and empirical boundaries of cognitive therapy. 
Australian Psychologist, 28(3), 137–144. 

Dougherty, L. R., Klein, D. N., & Davila, J. (2004). A growth 
curve analysis of the course of dysthymic disorder: The effects 
of chronic stress and moderation by adverse parent– 
child relationships and family history. Journal of Consulting 
and Clinical Psychology, 72(6), 1012–1021. 

Dube, S. R., Anda, R. F., Felitti, V. J., Chapman, D. P., Williamson, 
D. F., & Giles, W. H. (2001). Childhood abuse, 
household dysfunction, and the risk of attempted suicide 
throughout the life span: Findings from the adverse child



Cognitive Therapy for Depression 

hood experiences study. Journal of the American Medical 
Association, 286, 3089–3096. 

Eberhart, N. K., Auerbach, R. P., Bigda-Peyton, J., & Abela, 

J. R. Z. (2011). Maladaptive schemas and depression: Tests 
of stress generation and diathesis–stress models. Journal 
of Social and Clinical Psychology, 30(1), 75–104. 
Eifert, G. H., Beach, B. K., & Wilson, P. H. (1998). Depression: 
Behavioral principles and implications for treatment 
and relapse prevention. In J. J. Plaud & G. H. Eifers (Eds.), 
From behavior theory to behavior therapy (pp. 68–97). 
Boston: Allyn & Bacon. 

Eisendrath, S., Chartier, M., & McLane, M. (2011). Adapting 
mindfulness-based cognitive therapy for treatmentresistant 
depression: A clinical case study. Cognitive Behavioral 
Practice, 18(3), 362–370. 

Elkin, I., Gibbons, R. D., Shea, M. T., & Shaw, B. F. (1996). 
Science is not a trial (but it can sometimes be a tribulation). 
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 
64(1), 92–103. 

Elkin, I., Shea, M. T., Watkins, J. T., Imber, S. D., Sotsky, S. 
M., Collins, J. F., et al. (1989). National Institute of Mental 
Health Treatment of Depression Collaborative Research 
Program: General effectiveness of treatments. Archives of 
General Psychiatry, 46, 971–982. 

Evans, M. D., Hollon, S. D., DeRubeis, R. J., Piaseki, J. M., 
Grove, W. M., Garvey, M. J., et al. (1992). Differential relapse 
following cognitive therapy and pharmacotherapy 
for depression. In D. S. Janowsky (Ed.), Psychotherapy 
indication and outcomes (pp. 802–808). Washington, DC: 
American Psychiatric Press. 

Farrell, J., & Shaw, I. A. (2012). Group schema therapy for 
borderline personality disorder: A step-by-step treatment 
manual with patient workbook. Malden, MA: Wiley-
Blackwell. 

Farrell, J., Shaw, I. A., & Webber, M. (2009). A schemafocused 
approach to group psychotherapy for outpatients 
with borderline personality disorder: A randomized control 
trial. Journal of Behavior Therapy and Experimental 
Psychiatry, 40, 317–328. 

Fava, G. A., Rafanelli, C., Grandi, S., Canestrari, R., & Morphy, 
M. A. (1998). Six-year outcome for cognitive behavioral 
treatment of residual symptoms in major depression. 
American Journal of Psychiatry, 155(10), 1443–1445. 

Fava, G. A., Rafanelli, C., Grandi, S., Conti, S., & Belluardo, 

P. (1998). Prevention of recurrent depression with cognitive 
behavioral therapy: Preliminary findings. Archives of 
General Psychiatry, 55(9), 816–820. 
Feldman, G., Harley, R., Kerrigan, M., Jacobo, M., & Fava, 

M. (2009). Change in emotional processing during a dialectical 
behavior based skills group for major depressive 
disorder. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 47(4), 316– 
321.
Feng, C. Y., Chu, H., Chen, C. H., Chang, Y. S., Chen, T. H. 
Chou, Y. H., et al. (2012). The effect of cognitive behav


ioral group therapy for depression: A meta-analysis 2000– 
2010. Worldviews Evidence Based Nursing, 9(1), 2–17. 

Floyd, M., Scogin, F., McKendree-Smith, N. L., Floyd, D. L., 
& Rokke, P. D. (2004). Cognitive therapy for depression: 
A comparison of individual psychotherapy and bibliotherapy 
for depressed older adults. Behavior Modification, 
28(2), 297–318. 

Fournier, J. C., De Rubeis, R. J., Shelton, R. C., Gallop, R., 
Amsterdam, J. D., & Hollon, S. D. (2008). Antidepressant 
medications versus cognitive therapy in depressed patients 
with or without personality disorder. British Journal of 
Psychiatry, 192(2), 124–129. 

Frank, E. (1996). Long-term treatment of depression: Interpersonal 
psychotherapy with and without medication. 
In C. Mundt & M. J. Goldstein (Eds.), Interpersonal 
factors in the origin and course of affective disorders 
(pp. 303–315). London: Gaskell/Royal College of Psychiatrists. 


Frank, E., & Thase, M. E. (1999). Natural history and preventative 
treatment of recurrent mood disorders. Annual 
Review of Medicine, 50, 453–468. 

Free, M. L., Oei, T. P. S., & Appleton, C. (1998). Biological 
and psychological processes in recovery from depression 
during cognitive therapy. Journal of Behavior Therapy 
and Experimental Psychiatry, 29, 213–226. 

Freeman, A., & Davison, M. R. (1997). Short-term therapy 
for the long-term patient. In L. Vandecreek, S. Knapp, & 

T. L. Jackson (Eds.), Innovations in clinical practice: A 
source book (pp. 5–24). Sarasota, FL: Professional Resource 
Press. 
Futterman, A., Thompson, L., Gallagher-Thompson, D., & 
Ferris, R. (1995). Depression in later life: Epidemiology, 
assessment, etiology, and treatment. In E. E. Beckham 
& W. R. Leber (Eds.), Handbook of depression (2nd ed., 
pp. 494–525). New York: Guilford Press. 

Gallagher-Thompson, D., Hanley-Peterson, P., & Thompson, 

L. W. (1990). Maintenance of gains versus relapse following 
brief psychotherapy for depression. Journal of Consulting 
and Clinical Psychology, 58(3), 371–374. 
Garyfallos, G., Adarnopoulo, A., Karastergiou, A., Voikli, 
M., Sotiropoulo, A., Donias, S., et al. (1999). Personality 
disorders in dysthymia and major depression. Acta Psychiatrica 
Scandinavica, 99(5), 332–340. 

Geddes, J. R., Carney, S. M., Davies, C., Furukawa, T. A., 
Kupfer, D. J., Frank, E., et al. (2003). Relapse prevention 
with antidepressant drug treatment in depressive disorders: 
A systematic review. Lancet, 361, 653–661. 

Gelder, M. G. (1994). Cognitive therapy for depression. In 

H. Hippius & C. N. Stefanis (Eds.), Research in mood 
disorders: An update (Vol. 1, pp. 115–124). Goettingen, 
Germany: Hogrefe & Huber. 
Giesen-Bloo, J., van Dyck, R., Spinhoven, P., van Tilburg, 
W., Dirksen, C., van Asselt, T., et al. (2006). Outpatient 
psychotherapy for borderline personality disorder: A randomized 
trial of schema-focused therapy vs. transference



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

focused therapy. Archives of General Psychiatry, 63, 
649–658. 

Gilson, M., Freeman, A. M., Yates, J., & Freeman, S. M. 
(2009). Overcoming depression: A cognitive therapy approach 
(2nd ed.). New York: Oxford University Press. 

Gloaguen, V., Cottraux, J., Cucherat, M., & Blackburn, I. M. 
(1998). A meta-analysis of the effects of cognitive therapy 
in depressed patients. Journal of Affective Disorders, 49, 
59–72. 

Halvorsen, M., Wang, C. E., Eisemann, M., & Waterloo, K. 
(2010). Dysfunctional attitudes and early maladaptive 
schemas as predictors of depression: A 9-year follow-up 
study. Cognitive Therapy Research, 34, 368–379. 

Halvorsen, M., Wang, C. F., Richter, J., Myrland, I., Pedersen, 
S. K., Eisemann, M, et al. (2009). Early maladaptive 
schemas, temperament and character traits in clinically 
depressed and previously depressed subjects. Clinical Psychology 
and Psychotherapy, 16(5), 394–407. 

Hardeveld, F., Spijker, J., de Graaf, R., Nolen, W. A., & Beekman, 
A. T. F. (2010). Prevalence and predictors of recurrence 
of major depressive disorder in the adult population. 
Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavia, 122,184–191. 

Harley, R., Sprich, S., Safren, S., Jacob, M., & Fava, M. 
(2008). Adaptation of dialectical behavior therapy skills 
training group for treatment-resistant depression, Journal 
of Nervous and Mental Diseases, 196(2), 136–143. 

Harrington, R., Wood, A., & Verduyn, C. (1998). Clinically 
depressed adolescents. In P. J. Graham (Ed.), Cognitivebehaviour 
therapy for children and families (pp. 156– 
193). New York: Cambridge University Press. 

Hawke, L. D., & Provencher, M. D. (2011). Schema theory 
and schema therapy in mood and anxiety disorders: A 
review. Journal of Cognitive Psychotherapy: An International 
Quarterly, 25(4), 257–276. 

Hayden, E. P., & Klein, D. N. (2001). Predicting outcome 
of dysthymic disorder at a 5-year follow-up: The impact 
of familial psychopathology, early adversity, personality, 
comorbidity, and chronic stress. American Journal of Psychiatry, 
158, 1864–1870. 

Hayes, A. M., & Strauss, J. L. (1998). Dynamic systems theory 
as a paradigm for the study of change in psychotherapy: 
An application to cognitive therapy for depression. Journal 
of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 66(6), 939–947. 

Heim, C., & Nemeroff, C. B. (2001). The role of childhood 
trauma in the neurobiology of mood and anxiety disorders: 
Preclinical and clinical studies. Biological Psychiatry, 49, 
1023–1039. 

Henry, W. P., Strupp, H. H., Butler, S. F., Schacht, T. E., & 
Binder, J. L. (1993). The effects of training in time-limited 
dynamic psychotherapy: Changes in therapist behavior. 
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 61, 434– 
440. 

Hollon, S. D. (1998). What is cognitive behavioural therapy 
and does it work? Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 8, 
289–292. 

Hollon, S. D., DeRubeis, R. J., & Evans, M. D. (1996). Cognitive 
therapy in the treatment and prevention of depression. 
In P. M. Salkovskis (Ed.), Frontiers of cognitive therapy 
(pp. 293–317). New York: Guilford Press. 

Hollon, S. D., DeRubeis, R. J., Evans, M. D., Weimer, M. 
J., Garvey, M. J., Grove, W. M., et al. (1992). Cognitive 
therapy and pharmacotherapy: Singly and in combination. 
Archives of General Psychiatry, 49, 774–781. 

Hollon, S. D., DeRubeis, R. J., Shelton, R. C., Amsterdam, J. 
D., Salomon, R. M., O’Reardon, J. P., et al. (2005). Prevention 
of relapse following cognitive therapy vs. medications 
in moderate to severe depression. Archives of General Psychiatry, 
62, 417–422. 

Hollon, S. D., & Shelton, R. C. (2001). Treatment guidelines 
for major depressive disorder. Behavior Therapy, 32, 235– 
258. 

Hollon, S. D., Shelton, R. C., & Loosen, P. T. (1991). Cognitive 
therapy and pharmacotherapy for depression. Journal 
of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 59(1), 88–99. 

Hollon, S. D., Thase, M. E., & Markowitz, J. C. (2002). Treatment 
and prevention of depression. Psychological Science 
in the Public Interest, 3, 39–77. 

Howland, R. H. (1993). Chronic depression. Hospital and 
Community Psychiatry, 44, 633–639. 

Ingram, R. E., & Holle, C. (1992). Cognitive science of depression. 
In D. J. Stein & J. E. Young (Eds.), Cognitive 
science and clinical disorders (pp. 187–209). San Diego, 
CA: Academic Press. 

Jacobson, N. S., & Hollon, S. D. (1996). Cognitive-behavior 
therapy versus pharmacotherapy: Now that the jury’s returned 
its verdict, it’s time to present the rest of the evidence. 
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 
64(1), 74–80. 

Jarrett, R. B. (1995). Comparing and combining short-term 
psychotherapy and pharmacotherapy for depression. In E. 

E. Beckham & W. R. Leber (Eds.), Handbook of depression 
(2nd ed., pp. 435–464). New York: Guilford Press. 
Jarrett, R. B., Kraft, D., Doyle, J., Foster, B. M., Eaves, G. 
G., & Silver, P. C. (2001). Preventing recurrent depression 
using cognitive therapy with and without continuation 
phase. Archives of General Psychiatry, 58(4), 381–388. 

Jarrett, R. B., & Nelson, R. O. (1987). Mechanisms of change 
in cognitive therapy of depression. Behavior Therapy, 18, 
227–241. 

Jarrett, R. B., Schaffer, M., McIntire, D., Witt-Browder, A., 
Kraft, D., & Risser, R. C. (1999). Treatment of atypical 
depression with cognitive therapy or phenelzine: A double-
blind, placebo-controlled trial. Archives of General 
Psychiatry, 56, 431–437. 

Jarrett, R. B., & Thase, M. E. (2010). Comparative efficacy 
and durability of continuation phase cognitive therapy 
for preventing recurrent depression: Design of a doubleblinded, 
fluoxetine-and pill-placebo-contolled, randomized 
trial with 2-year follow-up. Contemporary Clinical 
Trials, 31(4), 355–377. 


Cognitive Therapy for Depression 

Jarrett, R. B., Vittengl, J. R., & Clark, L. A. (2008). How 
much cognitive therapy, for which patients, will prevent 
depressive relapse. Journal of Affective Disorders, 111(2– 
3), 185–192. 

Joffe, R., Segal, Z., & Singer, W. (1996). Change in thyroid 
hormone levels following response to cognitive therapy 
for major depression. American Journal of Psychiatry, 
153(3), 411–413. 

Johansson, R., & Andersson, G. (2012). Internet-based psychological 
treatments for depression. Expert Review of 
Neurotherapeutics, 12 (7), 861–870. 

Joyce, P. R., McKenzie, J. M., Carter, J. D., Rae, A. M., Luty, 

S. E., Frampton, C. M. A., et al. (2007). Temperament, 
character and personality disorders as predictors of response 
to interpersonal psychotherapy and cognitivebehavioural 
therapy for depression. British Journal of 
Psychiatry, 190, 503–508. 
Keller, M. B., & Bolland, R. J. (1998). Implications of failing 
to achieve successful long-term maintenance treatment of 
recurrent unipolar major depression. Biological Psychiatry, 
44(5), 348–360. 

Keller, M. B., & Hanks, D. L. (1995). Course and natural history 
of chronic depression. In J. H. Kocsis & D. N. Klein 
(Eds.), Diagnosis and treatment of chronic depression 
(pp. 58–72). New York: Guilford Press. 

Keller, M. B., McCullough, J. P., Klein, D. F., Arnow, B., 
Dunner, D. L., Gelenberg, A. J., et al. (2000). A comparison 
of nefazodone, the cognitive behavioral-analysis 
system of psychotherapy, and their combination for the 
treatment of chronic depression. New England Journal of 
Medicine, 342, 1462–1470. 

Kendler, K. S., Kessler, R. C., Walters, E. E., MacLean, C., 
Neale, M. C., Heath, A. C., et al. (1995). Stressful life 
events, genetic liability, and onset of an episode of major 
depression in women. American Journal of Psychiatry, 
152, 833–842. 

Kessler, R. C., Akiskal, H. S., Ames, M., Birnbaum, H., 
Greenberg, P. A., Jin, R., et al. (2006). Prevalence and 
effects of mood disorders on work performance in a nationally 
representative sample of U.S. workers. American 
Journal of Psychiatry, 163(9), 1561–1568. 

Kessler, R. C., Petukhova, M., Sampson, N. A., Zaslavsky, A. 
M., & Wittchen, H. U. (2012). Twelve-month and lifetime 
prevalence and lifetime morbid risk of anxiety and mood 
disorders in the United States. Internal Journal of Methods 
in Psychiatric Research, 21(3), 169–184. 

Klein, D. N., Santiago, N. J., Vivian, D., Blalock, J. A., Kocsis, 

J. H., Markowitz, J. C., et al. (2004). Cognitive-behavioral 
analysis system of psychotherapy as a maintenance treatment 
for chronic depression. Journal of Consulting and 
Clinical Psychology, 72, 681–688. 
Kocsis, J. H., Gelenberg, A. J., Rothbaum, B. O., Klein, D. 
N., Trivedi, M. H., Manber, R., et al. (2009). Cognitive 
behavioral analysis system of psychotherapy and brief supportive 
psychotherapy for augmentation of antidepressant 

nonresponse in chronic depression: the REVAMP Trial. 
Archives of General Psychiatry, 66(11), 1178–1188. 

Koder, D. A., Brodaty, H., & Anstey, K. J. (1996). Cognitive 
therapy for depression in elderly. International Journal of 
Geriatric Psychiatry, 11(2), 97–107. 

Kupfer, D. J., Frank, E., & Wamhoff, J. (1996). Mood disorders: 
Update on prevention of recurrence. In C. Mundt, M. 

M. Goldstein, K. Hahlweg, & P. Fiedler (Eds.), Interpersonal 
factors in the origin and course of affective disorders 
(pp. 289–302). London: Gaskell. 
Lam, D. H., Hayward, P., Watkins, E. R., Wright, K., & Sham, 

P. (2005). Relapse prevention in patients with bipolar disorder: 
Cognitive therapy outcome after 2 years. American 
Journal of Psychiatry, 162(2), 324–329. 
Lazarus, A. A., & Lazarus, C. N. (1991). Multimodal Life 
History Inventory (2nd ed.). Champaign, IL: Research 
Press. 

Leahy, R. L. (2010). Beat the blues before they beat you. New 
York: Hay House. 

Lee, C. W., Taylor, G., & Dunn, J. (1999). Factor structure of 
the Schema Questionnaire in a large clinical sample. Cognitive 
Therapy and Research, 23(4), 441–451. 

Levendusky, P. G., & Hufford, M. R. (1997). The application 
of cognitive-behavior therapy to the treatment of depression 
and related disorders in the elderly. Journal of Geriatric 
Psychiatry, 30(2), 227–238. 

Linehan, M. M. (1993a). Cognitive-behavioral treatment 
of borderline personality disorder. New York: Guilford 
Press. 

Linehan, M. M. (1993b). Skills training manual for treating 
borderline personality disorder. New York: Guilford 
Press. 

Lizardi, H., Klein, D. N., Ouimette, P. C., Riso, L. P., Anderson, 
R. L., & Donaldson, S. K. (1995). Reports of the 
childhood home environment in early onset dysthymia and 
episodic major depression. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 
104, 132–139. 

Luoma, J. B., Hayes, S. C., & Walser R. D. (2007). Learning 
ACT: An acceptance and commitment therapy skillstraining 
manual for therapists. Richmond, BC, Canada: 
Raincoast Books. 

Luty S. E., Carter, J. D., McKenzie, J. M., Rae, A. M., 
Frampton, C. M. A., Mulder, R. T. et al. (2007). Randomized 
controlled trial of interpersonal psychotherapy 
and cognitive-behavioural therapy for depression. British 
Journal of Psychiatry, 190, 496–502. 

Ma, S. H., & Teasdale, J. D. (2004). Mindfulness-based cognitive 
therapy for depression: Replication and exploration 
of differential relapse prevention effects. Journal of Consulting 
and Clinical Psychology, 72(1), 31–40. 

Manicavasagar, V., Perich, T., & Parker, G. (2012). Cognitive 
predictors of change in cognitive behavior therapy 
and mindfulness-based cognitive therapy for depression. 
Behavioural and Cognitive Psychotherapy, 40, 227–232. 

Mathew, K. L., & Whitford, H. S. (2010). The long-term ef



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

fects of mindfulness-based cognitive therapy as a relapse 
prevention treatment for major depressive disorder. Behavioural 
and Cognitive Psychotherapy, 38, 561–576. 

Mathys, M., & Mitchell, B. G. (2011). Targeting treatmentresistant 
depression. Journal of Pharmacological Practice, 
24(6), 520–533. 

Matthew, K. L., Whitford, H. S., Kenny, M. A., & Denson, 

L. A. (2010). The long-term effects of mindfulness-bassed 
cognitive therapy as a relapse prevention treatment for 
major depressive disorder. Behavioural and Cognitive 
Psychotherapy, 38, 561–576. 
McCullough, J. P., Jr. (2000). Treatment for chronic depression: 
Cognitive behavioral analysis system of psychotherapy 
(CBASP). New York: Guilford Press. 

McCullough, J. P., Jr. (2003). Treatment for chronic depression: 
Cognitive behavioral-analysis system of psychotherapy. 
Journal of Psychotherapy Integration, 13(3/4), 241–263. 

McGinn, L. K., & Young, J. E. (1996). Schema-focused 
therapy. In P. M. Salkovskis (Ed.), Frontiers of cognitive 
therapy (pp. 182–207). New York: Guilford Press. 

Meterissian, G. B., & Bradwejn, J. (1989). Comparative studies 
on the efficacy of psychotherapy, pharmacotherapy, 
and their combination in depression: Was adequate pharmacotherapy 
provided? Journal of Clinical Psychopharmacology, 
9, 334–339. 

Miller, I. W., Norman, W. H., Keitner, G. I., Bishop, S., & 
Dow, M. G. (1989). Cognitive-behavioral treatment of depressed 
inpatients. Behavior Therapy, 20, 25–47. 

Mohr, D. C. (1995). Negative outcome in psychotherapy: A 
critical review. Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 
2, 1–27. 

Murphy, G. E., Simmons, A. D., Wetzel, R. D., & Lustman, P. 

J. (1984). Cognitive therapy and pharmacotherapy, singly 
and together, in the treatment of depression. Archives of 
General Psychiatry, 41, 33–41. 
National Institute of Mental Health. (2006). The numbers 
count: Mental disorders in America (Publication No. 064584). 
Retrieved April 6, 2007, from www.nimh.nih.gov/ 
publicat/numbers. 

Newman, C. F., Leahy, R. L., Beck, A. T., Reilly-Harrington, 

N. A., & Gyulai, L. (2002). Bipolar disorder: A cognitive 
therapy approach. Washington, DC: American Psychological 
Association. 
Nierenberg, A. A., Keefe, B. R., Leslie, V. C., Alpert, J. E., 
Pava, J. A., Worthington, J. J., III, et al. (1999). Residual 
symptoms in depressed patients who respond acutely to 
fluoxetine. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 60(4), 221–225. 

Oei, T. P. S., & Free, M. L. (1995). Do cognitive behavior 
therapies validate cognitive models of mood disorders?: A 
review of the empirical evidence. International Journal of 
Psychology, 30(2), 145–180. 

Oei, T. P. S., & Shuttlewood, G. J. (1996). Specific and nonspecific 
factors in psychotherapy: A case of cognitive therapy 
for depression. Clinical Psychology Review, 16(2), 
83–103. 

O’Leary, K. D., & Beach, S. R. H. (1990). Marital therapy: A 
viable treatment for depression and marital discord. American 
Journal of Psychiatry, 147(2), 183–186. 

Olfson, M., Marcus, S. C., Druss, B., Elinson, L., Tanielian, 
T., & Pincus, H. A. (2002). National trends in the outpatient 
treatment of depression. Journal of the American 
Medical Association, 287, 203–209. 

Overholser, J. C. (1998). Cognitive-behavioral treatment of 
depression, part X: Reducing the risk of relapse. Journal 
of Contemporary Psychotherapy, 28(4), 381–396. 

Padesky, C. A., with Greenberger, D. (1995). A clinician’s 
guide to mind over mood. New York: Guilford Press. 

Paykel, E. S. (2007). Cognitive therapy in relapse prevention 
in depression. International Journal of Neuropsychopharmacology, 
10, 131–136. 

Paykel, E. S., Scott, J., Teasdale, J. D., Johnson, A. L., Garland, 
A., Moore, R., et al. (1999). Prevention of relapse in 
residual depression by cognitive therapy. Archives of General 
Psychiatry, 56, 829–835. 

Peeters, F., Huibers, M., Roelofs, J., van Breulkelen, G., Hollon, 
S. D., Markowitz, J. C., et al. (2013). The clinical 
effectiveness of evidence-based interventions for depression: 
A pragmatic trial in routine practice. Journal of Affective 
Disorders, 145(3), 349–355. 

Pepper, C. M., Klein, D. N., Anderson, R. L., Riso, L. P., 
Ouimette, P. C., & Lizardi, H. (1995). DSM-III-R axis II 
comorbidity in dysthymia and major depression. American 
Journal of Psychiatry, 152(2), 239–247. 

Persons, J. B., Burns, D. D., & Perloff, J. M. (1988). Predictors 
of dropout and outcome in cognitive therapy for depression 
in a private practice setting. Cognitive Therapy 
and Research, 12(6), 557–575. 

Piper, W. E., Ogrodniczuk, J. S., Joyce, A. S., McCallum, 
M., Rosie, J. S., O’Kelly, J. G., et al. (1999). Prediction of 
dropping out in time-limited, interpretive psychotherapy. 
Psychotherapy, 36, 114–122. 

Quilty, L. C., McBride, C., & Bagby, R. M. (2008). Evidence 
for the cognitive mediational model of cognitive behavioral 
therapy for depression. Psychological Medicine, 38(11), 
1531–1541. 

Randolph, J. J., & Dykman, B. M. (1998). Perceptions of 
parenting and depression-proneness in the offspring: Dysfunctional 
attitudes as a mediating mechanism. Cognitive 
Depressive Disorders, 21, 401–449. 

Rehm, L. P. (1990). Cognitive and behavioral theories. In B. 

B. Wolman & G. Stricker (Eds.), Depressive disorders: 
Facts, theories, and treatment methods (pp. 64–91). New 
York: Wiley. 
Reinecke, M. A., Ryan, N. E., & DuBois, D. L. (1998). 
Cognitive-behavioral therapy of depression and depressive 
symptoms during adolescence: A review and metaanalysis. 
Journal of the American Academy of Child and 
Adolescent Psychiatry, 37(1), 26–34. 

Renner, F., Lobbestael, J., Peeters, F., Arntz, A., & Huibers, 

M. (2012). Early maladaptive schemas in depressed pa

Cognitive Therapy for Depression 

tients: Stability and relation with depressive symptoms 
over the course of treatment. Journal of Affective Disorders, 
136, 581–590. 

Riso, L. P., du Toit, P. L., Blandino, J. A., Penna, S., Dacey, S., 
Duin, J. S., et al. (2003). Cognitive aspects of chronic depression. 
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 112(1), 72–80. 

Riso, L. P., Froman, S. E., Raouf, M., Gable, P., Maddux, R. 
E., Turini-Santorelli, N., et al. (2006). The long-term stability 
of early maladaptive schemas. Cognitive Therapy 
and Research, 30(4), 515–529. 

Roberts, J. E., & Hartlage, S. (1996). Cognitive rehabilitation 
interventions for depressed patients. In P. W. Corrigan & 

S. C. Yudofsky (Eds.), Cognitive rehabilitation for neuropsychiatric 
disorders (pp. 371–392). Washington, DC: 
American Psychiatric Press. 
Rush, A. J., Beck, A. T., Kovacs, M., & Hollon, S. (1977). 
Comparative efficacy of cognitive therapy and imipramine 
in the treatment of depressed outpatients. Cognitive Therapy 
and Research, 1, 17–37. 

Rush, A. J., Trivedi, M. H., Wisniewski, S. R., Nierenberg, 

A. A., Stewart, J. W., Warden, D., et al. (2006). Acute and 
longer-term outcomes in depressed outpatients requiring 
one of several treatment steps: A STAR*D report. American 
Journal of Psychiatry, 163, 1905–1917. 
Sacco, W. P., & Beck, A. T. (1995). Cognitive theory and therapy. 
In E. E. Beckham & W. R. Leber (Eds.), Handbook 
of depression (2nd ed., pp. 329–351). New York: Guilford 
Press. 

Sachs-Ericsson, N., Verona, E., Joiner, T., & Preacher, K. J. 
(2006). Parental abuse and mediating role of self-criticism 
in adult internalizing disorders. Journal of Affective Disorders, 
93(1–3), 71–78. 

Safran, J. D., Muran, J. C., Samstag, L. W., & Stevens, C. 
(2002). Repairing alliance ruptures. In J. C. Norcross 
(Ed.), Psychotherapy relationships that work: Therapists 
contributions and responsiveness to patients (pp. 235– 
254). New York: Oxford University Press. 

Safran, J. D., & Segal, Z. V. (1990). Interpersonal processes 
in cognitive therapy. New York: Basic Books. 

Safran, J. D., Segal, Z. V., Vallis, T. M., Shaw, B. F., & Samstag, 
L. W. (1993). Assessing patient suitability for shortterm 
cognitive therapy with an interpersonal focus. Cognitive 
Therapy and Research, 17(1), 23–38. 

Salkovskis, P. M. (Ed.). (1996). Frontiers of cognitive therapy: 
The state of the art and beyond. New York: Guilford 
Press. 

Sava, F. A., Yates, B. T., Lupu, V., Szentagotai, A., & David, 

D. (2009). Cost-effectiveness and cost-utility of cognitive 
therapy, rational emotive behavioral therapy, and fluoxetine 
(Prozac) in treating depression: A randomized clinical 
trial. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 65 (1), 36–52. 
Schmidt, N. B. (1994). The Schema Questionnaire and the 
Schema Avoidance Questionnaire. Behavior Therapist, 
17(4), 90–92. 

Schmidt, N. B., Joiner, T. E., Young, J. E., & Telch, M. J. 

(1995). The Schema Questionnaire: Investigation of psychometric 
properties and the hierarchical structure of a 
measure of maladaptive schemata. Cognitive Therapy and 
Research, 19(3), 295–321. 

Schramm, E., Zobel, I., Dykierek, P., Kech, S., Brakemeier, 
E., Kutz, A., et al. (2011). Cognitive behavioral analysis 
system of psychotherapy versus interpersonal psychotherapy 
for early-onset chronic depression: A randomized 
pilot study. Journal of Affective Disorders, 129, 
109–116. 

Scott, J. (1996a). Cognitive therapy of affective disorders: A 
review. Journal of Affective Disorders, 37, 1–11. 

Scott, J. (1996b). The role of cognitive behaviour therapy in 
bipolar disorders. Behavioural and Cognitive Psychotherapy, 
24(3), 195–208. 

Scott, J. (2000). New evidence in the treatment of chronic 
depression. New England Journal of Medicine, 342, 1518– 
1520. 

Scott, J., Palmer, S., Paykel, E., Teasdale, J., & Hayhurst, H. 
(2003). Use of cognitive therapy for relapse prevention in 
chronic depression. British Journal of Psychiatry, 182, 
221–227. 

Segal, Z. V., Williams, J. M. G., & Teasdale, J. D. (2002). 
Mindfulness-based cognitive therapy for depression: A 
new approach to preventing relapse. New York: Guilford 
Press. 

Shaw, B. F., & Segal, Z. V. (1999). Efficacy, indications, and 
mechanisms of action of cognitive therapy of depression. 
In D. S. Janowsky (Ed.), Psychotherapy indications and 
outcomes (pp. 173–196). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric 
Press. 

Shea, M. T., & Elkin, I. (1996). The NIMH Treatment of Depression 
Collaborative Research Program. In C. Mundt, 

M. J. Goldstein, K. Hahlweg, & P. Fiedler (Eds.), Interpersonal 
factors in the origin and course of affective disorders 
(pp. 316–328). London: Gaskell/Royal College of 
Psychiatrists. 
Shea, M. T., Elkin, I., Imber, S. D., Sotsky, S. M., Watkins, J. 
T., Collins, J. F., et al. (1992). Course of depressive symptoms 
over follow-up: Findings from the National Institute 
of Mental Health Treatment of Depression Collaborative 
Research Program. Archives of General Psychiatry, 
49(10), 782–787. 

Shea, M. T., Pilkonis, P. A., Beckham, E., Collins, J. F., Elkin, 
I., Sotsky, S. M., et al. (1990). Personality disorders and 
treatment outcome in the NIMH Treatment of Depression 
Collaborative Research Program. American Journal of 
Psychiatry, 147(6), 711–718. 

Simons, A. D., Murphy, G. D., Levine, J. L., & Wetzel, R. 

D. (1986). Cognitive therapy and pharmacotherapy for depression: 
Sustained improvement over 1 year. Archives of 
General Psychiatry, 43, 43–48. 
Spanier, C. A., Frank, E., McEachran, A. B., Grochocinski, 

V. J., & Kupfer, D. J. (1999). Maintenance interpersonal 
psychotherapy for recurrent depression: Biological and 

CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

clinical correlates and future directions. In D. S. Janowsky 
(Ed.), Psychotherapy indications and outcomes (pp. 249– 
273). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press. 

Spirito, A., Esposito-Smythers, C., Wolff, J., & Uhl, K. 
(2011). Cognitive-behavioral therapy for adolescent depression 
and suicidality. Child and Adolescent Psychiatric 
Clinics of North America, 20(2), 191–204. 

Stein, D. J., & Young, J. E. (1992). Schema approach to personality 
disorders. In Cognitive science and clinical disorders 
(pp. 271–288). San Diego, CA: Academic Press. 

Stirman, S. W., Miller, C. J., Toder, K., Calloway, A., Beck, 

A. J., Evans, A. C., et al. (in press). Perspectives on cognitive 
therapy training within community mental health settings: 
Implications for clinical satisfaction and skill development. 
Depression Research and Treatment. 
Strine, T. W., Mokdad, A. H., Balluz, L. S., Gonzalez, O., 
Crider, R., Berry, J. T., et al. (2008). Depression and anxiety 
in the United States: Findings from the 2006 Behavioral 
Risk Factor Surveillance System. Psychiatric Services, 
59(12), 1383–1309. 

Stuart, S., & Bowers, W. A. (1995). Cognitive therapy with 
inpatients: Review and meta-analysis. Journal of Cognitive 
Psychotherapy, 9(2), 85–92. 

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration 
(SAMHSA). (2008). Results from 2007 National Survey 
on Drug Use and Health: National Findings (Office of Applied 
Studies, NSDUH Series H-34, DHHS Publication 
No. SMA 08-4343). Rockville, MD: U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services. 

Sullivan, M. J. L., & Conway, M. (1991). Dysphoria and valence 
of attributions for others’ behavior. Cognitive Therapy 
and Research, 15(4), 273–282. 

Teasdale, J. D. (1997a). Assessing cognitive mediation of 
relapse prevention in recurrent mood disorders. Clinical 
Psychology and Psychotherapy, 4, 145–156. 

Teasdale, J. D. (1997b). The relationship between cognition 
and emotion: The mind-in-place in mood disorders. In D. 

M. Clark & C. G. Fairburn (Eds.), Science and practice 
of cognitive behavior therapy (pp. 67–93). Oxford, UK: 
Oxford University Press. 
Teasdale, J. D., Moore, R. G., Hayhurst, H., Pope, M., Williams, 
S., & Segal, Z. V. (2002). Metacognitive awareness 
and prevention of relapse in depression: Empirical 
evidence. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 
70(2), 275–287. 

Teasdale, J. D., Segal, Z. V., & Williams, J. M. G. (1995). 
How does cognitive therapy prevent depressive relapse 
and why should attentional control (mindfulness) training 
help? Behaviour Research and Therapy, 33, 25–39. 

Teasdale, J. D., Segal, Z. V., Williams, J. M. G., Ridgeway, 

V. A., Soulsby, J. M., & Lau, M. A. (2000). Prevention 
of relapse/recurrence in major depression by mindfulnessbased 
cognitive therapy. Journal of Consulting and Clinical 
Psychology, 68(4), 615–623. 
Thase, M. E. (1992). Long-term treatments of recurrent 
depressive disorders. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 
53(Suppl. 9), 32–44. 

Thase, M. E. (1999). How should efficacy be evaluated in randomized 
clinical trials of treatments for depression? Journal 
of Clinical Psychiatry, 60(Suppl. 4), 23–32. 

Thase, M. E. (2011). Antidepressant combinations: Widely 
used, but far from empirically validated. Canadian Journal 
of Psychiatry, 56(6), 317–323. 

Thase, M. E., Bowler, K., & Harden, T. (1991). Cognitive 
behavior therapy of endogenous depression: Part 2. Preliminary 
findings in 16 unmedicated inpatients. Behavior 
Therapy, 22, 469–477. 

Tolin, D. F. (2010). Is cognitive-behavioral therapy more effective 
than other therapies? A meta-analytic review. Clinical 
Psychology Review, 30(6), 710–720. 

Treatment for Adolescents with Depression Study (TADS) 
Team. (2004). Fluoxetine, cognitive-behavioral therapy, 
and their combination for adolescents with depression: 
Treatment for adolescents with depression study (TADS) 
randomized controlled trial. Journal of the American 
Medical Association, 292(7), 807–820. 

Treatment for Adolescents with Depression Study (TADS) 
Team. (2007). Long term effectiveness and safety outcomes. 
Archives of General Psychiatry, 64, 1132–1144. 

Trivedi, M. H., Fava, M., Wisniewski, S. R., Thase, M. E., 
Quitkin, F., Warden, D., et al. (2006). Medication augmentation 
after the failure of SSRIs for depression. New England 
Journal of Medicine, 354, 1243–1252. 

Truax, C. B., & Mitchell, K. M. (1971). Research on certain 
therapist interpersonal skills in relation to process and outcome. 
In A. E. Bergin & S. L. Garfield (Eds.), Handbook 
of psychotherapy and behavior change: An empirical 
analysis (pp. 299–344). New York: Wiley. 

van Aalderen, J. R., Donders, A. R. T., Giommi, F., Spinhoven, 
P., Barendregt, H. P., & Speckens, A. E. M. (2012). 
The efficacy of mindfulness-based cognitive therapy in 
recurrent depressed patients with and without a current 
depressive episode: A randomized controlled trial. Psychological 
Medicine, 42, 989–1001. 

Versiani, M. (1998). Pharmacotherapy of dysthymic and 
chronic depressive disorders: Overview with focus on moclobemide. 
Journal of Affective Disorders, 51(3), 323–332. 

Vittengl, J. R., Clark, L. A., Dunn, T. D., & Jarrett, R. B. 
(2007). Reducing relapse and recurrence in unipolar 
depression: A comparative meta-analysis of cognitivebehavioral 
therapy’s effects. Journal of Consulting and 
Clinical Psychology, 75(3), 475–488. 

Vittengl, J. R., Clark, L. A., & Jarrett, R. B. (2009). Continuation-
phase cognitive therapy’s effect on remission 
and recovery from depression. Journal of Consulting and 
Clinical Psychology, 77(2), 367–371. 

Vocisano, C., Klein, D., Arnow, B., Rivera, C., Blalock, J. A., 
Rothbaum, B., et al. (2004). Therapist variables that pre



Cognitive Therapy for Depression 

dict symptom change in psychotherapy with chronically 
depressed outpatients. Psychotherapy: Theory, Research, 
Practice and Training, 41(3), 255–265. 

Vos, T., Corry, J., Haby, M. M., Carter, R., & Andrews, 

G. (2005). Cost-effectiveness of cognitive-behavioural 
therapy and drug interventions for major depression. Australian 
and New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry, 39(8), 
683–692. 
Wang, C. E., Halvorsen, M., Eisemann, M., & Waterloo, K. 
(2010). Stability of dysfunctional attitudes and early maladaptive 
schemas: A 9-year follow-up study of clinically 
depressed subjects. Journal of Behavior Therapy and Experimental 
Psychiatry, 41(4), 389–396. 

Wang, J. (2004). A longitudinal population-based study of 
treated and untreated major depression. Medical Care, 
42(6), 543–550. 

Wang, J., Patten, S. D., William, J. V., Currie, S., Beck, C. 
A., Maxwell, C. J., et al. (2005). Help seeking behaviors 
of individuals with mood disorders. Canadian Journal of 
Psychiatry, 50(10), 652–659. 

Wells, A., Fisher, P., Myers, S., Wheatley, J., Patel, T., & 
Brewin, C. R. (2012). Metacognitive therapy in treatmentresistant 
depression: A platform trial. Behaviour Research 
and Therapy, 50(6), 367–373. 

Whisman, M. A. (1993). Mediators and moderators of change 
in cognitive therapy of depression. Psychological Bulletin, 
114, 248–265. 

Wiersma, J. E., van Schaik, D. J. F., van Oppen, P., Mc-
Cullough, J. P., Schoevers, R. A., Dekker, J. J., et al. (2008). 
Treatment of chronically depressed patients: A multisite 
randomized controlled trial testing the effectiveness of 
“cognitive behavioral analysis system of psychotherapy” 
(CBASP) for chronic depression versus usual secondary 
care. BMC Psychiatry, 8, 18. 

Wierzbicki, M., & Bartlett, T. S. (1987). The efficacy of group 
and individual cognitive therapy for mild depression. Cognitive 
Therapy and Research, 11(3), 337–342. 

Williams, J. M. G. (1997). Depression. In D. M. Clark & C. 

G. Fairburn (Eds.), Science and practice of cognitive behaviour 
therapy (pp. 259–283). Oxford, UK: Oxford University 
Press. 

Wolpe, J. (1993). Commentary: The cognitivist oversell and 
comments on symposium contributions. Journal of Behavior 
Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry, 24(2), 141–147. 

World Health Organization (WHO). (2004). The Global 
Burden on Disease 2004 update. Retrieved from www. 
who.int /healthinfo /global_ burden_ disease / GBD_ 
report_2004update_full.pdf. 

Wright, J. H. (1996). Inpatient cognitive therapy. In P. M. 
Salkovskis (Ed.), Frontiers of cognitive therapy (pp. 208– 
225). New York: Guilford Press. 

Wright, J. H., & McCray, L. W. (2011). Breaking free from 
depression: Pathways to wellness. New York: Guilford 
Press. 

Wright, J. H., Wright, A. S., Albano, A. M., Basco, M. R., 
Goldsmith, L. J., Raffield, T., et al. (2005). Computerassisted 
cognitive therapy for depression: Maintaining efficacy 
while reducing therapist time. American Journal of 
Psychiatry, 162, 1158–1164. 

Young, J. E. (1999). Cognitive therapy for personality disorders: 
A schema-focused approach (3rd ed.). Sarasota, 
FL: Professional Resource Exchange. (Original work published 
1990) 

Young, J. E. (2005). Young Schema Questionnaire (3rd ed.). 
New York: Cognitive Therapy Center of New York. 

Young, J. E., Arntz, A., Atkinson, T., Lobbestael, J., Weishaar, 
E., van Vreeswijk, M., et al. (2008). Schema Mode Questionnaire 
(Version 1.1). New York: Cognitive Therapy 
Center of New York. 

Young, J. E., & Klosko, J. S. (1994). Reinventing your life: 
How to break free of negative life patterns. New York: 
Plume. 

Young, J. E., Klosko, J. S., & Weishaar, M. E. (2003). Schema 
therapy: A practitioner’s guide. New York: Guilford 
Press. 

Zettle, R. (2007). ACT for depression: A clinician’s guide to 
using acceptance and commitment therapy in treating depression. 
Richmond, BC, Canada: Raincoat Books. 


CHaPter 

8 
interpersonal Psychotherapy 
for Depression 

kathryN l. BleiBerG 
JohN c. Markowitz 

Much evidence has emerged over the past decade supporting the clinical effectiveness of 
interpersonal psychotherapy (iPT) for a variety of problems, particularly depression. A 
substantial advantage of iPT is the relative ease with which clinicians can learn to administer 
this protocol with integrity. in this chapter, the process of iPT is illustrated in some 
detail in the context of the treatment of “sara,” who was suffering from a major depressive 
episode associated with grief following the death of her baby girl in utero at 27 weeks’ 
gestation, some 2 months earlier. The first author, kathryn l. Bleiberg, an international 
authority on training in iPT, was the therapist. Although iPT is relatively easy to comprehend, 
the twists and turns encountered in the administration of iPT (or any therapeutic 
approach) are particularly evident in this chapter. Here the therapist skillfully focuses on 
resolving grief, as well as on the patient’s social isolation and conflicts with her husband 
over emotional reactions to the loss. Also notable about iPT is the finding that the treatment 
is more successful when administered with fidelity to the goals of iPT and adherence 
to the protocol. The power of a therapist and patient working well together and 
staying on task provides some good evidence for the specific effects of an interpersonal 
focus to psychotherapy.—D. H. B. 

interpersonal psychotherapy (IPT), a time-limited, 
diagnosis-targeted, pragmatic, empirically supported 
treatment, was originally developed to treat outpatients 
with major depression. IPT focuses on current or recent 
life events, interpersonal difficulties, and symptoms. 
Through use of the medical model and by linking mood 
symptoms to recent life events, the IPT therapist helps 
the patient to feel understood. IPT aids recovery from 
depression by relieving depressive symptoms, by helping 
the patient to develop more effective strategies for 
dealing with current interpersonal problems related to 
the onset of symptoms, and by mobilizing social support 
(Bleiberg & Markowitz, 2007). IPT’s success as 

an individual treatment for major depression has led to 
its adaptation for subpopulations of patients with mood 
disorders, including depressed older patients (Reynolds 
et al., 2006, 2010; Sholomskas, Chevron, Prusoff, & 
Berry, 1983), depressed adolescents (Mufson, Moreau, 
& Weissman, 1993; Mufson, Weissman, Moreau, & 
Garfinkel, 1999; Mufson et al., 2004), and depressed 
HIV-positive patients (Markowitz, Klerman, Perry, 
Clougherty, & Mayers, 1992; Markowitz, Kocsis, et al., 
1998; Ransom et al., 2008), and patients with antepartum 
(Spinelli & Endicott, 2003) and postpartum depression 
(O’Hara, Stuart, Gorman, & Wenzel, 2000), 
dysthymic disorder (Markowitz, 1998), and bipolar dis


332 


Interpersonal Psychotherapy for Depression 

order (Frank, 2005). IPT has been adapted for anxiety 
disorders, including social phobia (Lipsitz, Fyer, Markowitz, 
& Cherry, 1999), posttraumatic stress disorder 
(Bleiberg & Markowitz, 2005; Markowitz, Milrod, 
Bleiberg, & Marshall, 2009), bulimia nervosa (Fairburn, 
Jones, Peveler, Hope, & O’Connor, 1993; Fairburn 
et al., 1995) and binge-eating disorder (Wilfley, 
2008; Wilson, Wilfley, Agras, & Bryson, 2010), and 
borderline personality disorder (Markowitz, Skodol, & 
Bleiberg, 2006). In addition to its adaptation to treat 
patients with different diagnoses, IPT has been increasingly 
practiced and studied among patients from different 
cultures (Markowitz & Weissman, 2012a). Furthermore, 
IPT’s demonstrated efficacy in the treatment 
of major depression has led to its incorporation into 
national treatment guidelines (American Psychiatric 
Association, 2010; Cuijpers et al., 2011). 

This chapter describes the principles, characteristics, 
and techniques of individual IPT for major depression 
and illustrates how a clinician implements IPT techniques 
with an actual patient. 

MaJor DePressioN 

Major depressive disorder (MDD), the most common 
depressive illness, affects millions of Americans each 
year. The Global Burden of Disease Study, initiated 
by the World Health Organization (Murray & Lopez, 
1996), estimated that depression is the fourth leading 
cause of disability and will become the second leading 
cause worldwide by the year 2020. Epidemiological 
studies of mood disorders have provided estimates of 
the prevalence and correlates of MDD. The National 
Comorbidity Survey Replication (NCS-R; Kessler et 
al., 2003) found a 16.2% lifetime and 6.6% annual prevalence 
of MDD in the United States, with the majority 
of cases of MDD associated with substantial symptom 
severity and impairment in functioning. National and 
international studies have consistently found higher 
prevalence of MDD in women than in men; women 
are twice as likely as men to experience an episode of 
MDD. The average age of onset of MDD is between 
ages 20 and 40 years (Blazer, 2000). 

The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental 
Disorders, fifth edition (DSM-5; American Psychiatric 
Association, 2013) defines MDD as a mood disorder 
characterized by one or more major depressive 
episodes. A major depressive episode entails a period 
of at least 2 weeks during which a person experiences 

depressed mood or loss of interest or pleasure in nearly 
all activities most of the day, nearly every day, accompanied 
by at least four additional symptoms of depression 
present nearly every day. Symptoms of depression 
include the following: 

•• 
Significant weight loss (not related to dieting), or 

weight gain or decrease or increase in appetite. 

•• 
Insomnia or hypersomnia. 

•• 
Psychomotor agitation or retardation severe 

enough to be observable by others. 

•• 
Fatigue or loss of energy. 

•• 
Feelings of worthlessness, or excessive or inappro


priate or excessive guilt. 

•• 
Diminished ability to think or concentrate, or in


decisiveness. 

•• 
Recurrent thoughts of death, recurrent suicidal 

ideation without a specific plan, or a suicide at


tempt or a specific plan to commit suicide. 

To meet full criteria for a major depressive episode, the 
patient’s symptoms must cause clinically significant 
distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other 
important areas of functioning. Depression is associated 
with social withdrawal and difficulty in social and 
occupational functioning. In some cases, a major depressive 
episode will be accompanied by symptoms of 
a manic episode, which is classified in DSM-5 using the 
specifier with mixed features. The symptoms may not 
be due to the direct physiological effects of a substance 
or a general medical condition. 

the DeveloPMeNt of iPt 

Klerman, Weissman, and colleagues developed IPT in 
the 1970s as a treatment arm for a pharmacotherapy study 
of depression (Markowitz & Weissman, 2012b). Being 
researchers, they developed a psychotherapy based on research 
data. Post–World War II research on psychosocial 
life events and the development of mental disorders had 
shown relationships between depression and complicated 
bereavement, role disputes (i.e., bad relationships), role 
transitions (e.g., losing or getting a new job, or any meaningful 
life change), and interpersonal deficits. Stressful 
life events can trigger depressive episodes in vulnerable 
individuals, and depressive episodes compromise interpersonal 
functioning, making it difficult to manage 
stressful life events, and often triggering further negative 
life events (Bleiberg & Markowitz, 2007). 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

IPT was also built on the interpersonal theory of 
Adolph Meyer (1957) and Harry Stack Sullivan (1953), 
and on the attachment theory of John Bowlby (1973). 
The interpersonalists broadened the scope of psychiatry 
by emphasizing social, cultural, and interpersonal 
factors. Sullivan stressed the role of interpersonal relationships 
in the development of mental illness and the 
use of interpersonal relationships to understand, assess, 
and treat mental illness. Sullivan also indicated that life 
events and relationships occurring after early childhood 
influenced psychopathology, in contradistinction 
to the then current focus on pre-Oedipal life events. 

Bowlby (1973) posited that the disruption of secure 
attachments can contribute to the onset of depression, 
and that psychiatric disorders result from difficulties in 
forming and maintaining secure attachments. Indeed, 
social supports protect against depression. In psychiatry, 
the idea that mental illness was influenced by 
current life events and not (simply) due to early childhood 
experiences was novel in an era divided between 
psychoanalytic and biological approaches (Klerman, 
Weissman, Rounsaville, & Chevron, 1984). 

PriNciPles of iPt: the iPt MoDel 
of DePressioN 

Two basic principles of IPT explain the patient’s depression 
and situation. These principles are simple enough 
to grasp, even for a very depressed patient with poor 
concentration. First, the IPT therapist defines depression 
as a medical illness and explains that the patient 
has a common illness that comprises a discrete and predictable 
set of symptoms, thus making the symptoms 
seem less overwhelming and more manageable. The 
IPT therapist assumes that the etiology of depression 
is complex and multidetermined: The etiology may 
comprise biology, life experiences, and family history, 
among other factors. The IPT therapist emphasizes that 

depression is a medical illness that is treatable and 
not the patient’s fault. Explaining that depression is 
treatable inspires in patients the hope that they can feel 
better. Hopelessness, a potentially deadly depressive 
symptom, distorts the generally good prognosis of the 
illness. Depressed patients often see their symptoms 
and consequent difficulties in functioning as reflections 
of a personal failure, character flaw, or weakness. 

Defining depression as a blameless illness helps to 
combat the depressed patient’s guilt and self-criticism. 
The therapist diagnoses depression using DSM-5 or 

International Classification of Diseases (ICD-10; 
World Health Organization, 1992) criteria and assesses 
symptoms using rating scales such as the Hamilton Depression 
Rating Scale (HDRS; Hamilton, 1960) or the 
Beck Depression Inventory–II (BDI-II; Beck, Steer, & 
Brown, 1996). IPT’s use of the medical model to define 
depression distinguishes it from other psychotherapies 
and makes it highly compatible with antidepressant 
medication in combination treatment. 

The second IPT principle is that the patient’s depression 
is connected to a current or recent life event. Stressful 
life events can precipitate depressive episodes in 
vulnerable individuals and, conversely, depression can 
make it difficult for individuals to manage stressful life 
events. IPT focuses on solving an interpersonal problem 
in the patient’s life, a problem area—complicated 
bereavement, a role dispute, a role transition, or interpersonal 
deficits—connected to the patient’s current 
depressive episode. By solving an interpersonal crisis, 
the patient can improve her1 life situation and simultaneously 
relieve depressive symptoms. 

characteristics of iPt 

Several characteristics define IPT, sometimes distinguishing 
it from other psychotherapies. 

•• 
IPT is time-limited and focused. Acute treatment 
at the start is set at 12 or 16 weekly sessions. Some studies 
have included continuation and maintenance phases, 
which involve biweekly and monthly sessions. IPT’s 
time limit provides hope for patients that their symptoms 
and life situation can rapidly improve; the time 
limit encourages patients to stay focused in treatment. 
It also pressures both patient and therapist to work hard 
and efficiently within the therapeutic window of opportunity. 
Therapist and patient agree to focus on one, or at 
most two, problem areas at the beginning of treatment. 

•• 
IPT is empirically grounded. Because IPT has 
shown repeated efficacy in research studies, therapists 
can offer and deliver the treatment with confidence and 
optimism, and patients can feel hopeful about the treatment 
they are receiving. 

•• 
IPT is diagnosis-targeted. IPT focuses on a specific 
diagnosis, its symptoms, and how symptoms interfere 
and interact with social functioning. IPT is not intended 
for all patients, but it has been tested in a series of randomized 
controlled trials to determine its efficacy. 


Interpersonal Psychotherapy for Depression 

•• 
IPT has a “here-and-now” focus. IPT focuses 
on the present and on improving the patient’s situation 
for the future—not on what happened in the patient’s 
past. The IPT therapist relates current symptoms and 
interpersonal difficulties to recent or current life events. 
Although past depressive episodes and relationships are 
reviewed and relationship patterns are identified, treatment 
focuses on current relationships—building social 
supports and resolving disputes—and social functioning. 


•• 
IPT focuses on interpersonal problems. The IPT 
therapist may recognize intrapsychic defenses but does 
not see the patient’s current difficulties as a function of 
internal conflict. Instead, the therapist focuses on interpersonal 
relationships and functioning. 

•• 
IPT focuses on the interrelationship between 
mood and current life events. The IPT therapist emphasizes 
that stressful life events can trigger episodes 
of major depression and, reciprocally, that depression 
compromises psychosocial functioning. This makes 
it difficult to manage life stressors, leading to further 
negative life events. 

•• 
IPT emphasizes eliciting affect. Depressed patients 
often have difficulty understanding, identifying, 
and articulating what they are feeling. Whereas 
patients with depression tend to report feeling “bad,” 
they often have difficulty identifying negative feelings 
more specifically, such as anger, hurt, shame, rejection, 
disappointment. Furthermore, depressed patients who 
do recognize such negative affects tend to feel ashamed 
of having such “bad” emotions. The IPT therapist helps 
the patient to better identify what she is feeling, validates 
emotions such as anger and disappointment as 
normal and useful interpersonal signals, and helps the 
patient to use such emotion as a guide (Markowitz & 
Milrod, 2011). Patients in IPT learn to manage their 
feelings better and to use them in deciding how to behave 
and what to say in interpersonal encounters. 

iPt coMPareD 
with other PsychotheraPies 

Although IPT has a distinct rationale and is distinguishable 
from other psychotherapies (Hill, O’Grady, 
& Elkin, 1992; Weissman, Markowitz, & Klerman, 
2000), it is an eclectic psychotherapy that uses techniques 
seen in other treatment approaches. IPT includes 
the so-called “common” factors of psycho


therapy (Frank, 1971). IPT shares the “here and now” 
diagnostic focus, time limit, and active approach with 
cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT). IPT and CBT both 
include role playing and skills building. However, IPT 
is much less structured and assigns no formal homework, 
although the IPT therapist does encourage activity 
between sessions to improve mood and as it relates 
to resolving the interpersonal problem area. Whereas 
the CBT therapist defines depression as a consequence 
of dysfunctional thought patterns and attributes the patient’s 
difficulties to them, the IPT therapist emphasizes 
that depression is a medical illness and relates difficulties 
to feeling depressed and to recent life events. IPT 
emphasizes eliciting affect rather than (“hot,” affectively 
charged) automatic thoughts. IPT addresses interpersonal 
issues in a manner similar to that in marital 
therapy. Much like a supportive therapist, IPT therapists 
provide support and encouragement (Bleiberg & 
Markowitz, 2007). 

IPT has been termed a “psychodynamic” psychotherapy 
on occasion, but it is not (Markowitz, Svartberg, 
& Swartz, 1998). IPT employs the medical model 
of depressive illness, whereas psychodynamic psychotherapy 
uses a conflict-based approach. The IPT therapist 
does not address unconscious processes, or explore 
or interpret the transference, but instead focuses on current 
relationships outside of the treatment room. Childhood 
experiences are recognized but not emphasized. 
The IPT therapist relates current symptoms and interpersonal 
problems to recent life events, not to childhood 
experiences. IPT acknowledges the influence of 
past experiences on present difficulties, but only to 
identify patterns of interpersonal behavior and to empathize 
with the patient’s struggle. Unlike psychodynamic 
treatment, the goal in IPT is to reduce symptoms 
and improve social functioning, not to change character 
or personality. Like the psychodynamic psychotherapist, 
however, the IPT therapist emphasizes facilitating 
affect in the treatment room and helping patients become 
aware of feelings they may not have been aware 
of previously (Markowitz & Milrod, 2011; Weissman 
et al., 2000). 

the iPt theraPist 

The IPT therapist conducts treatment in an office in 
an academic, hospital, or private practice setting. The 
therapist typically does not consult with the patient’s 
family or friends. 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

The IPT therapist takes a non-neutral, active stance, 
providing psychoeducation about depression, emphasizing 
the IPT rationale, teaching social skills, and 
instilling hope. A somewhat directive approach is essential 
for adhering to the time limit in IPT and keeping 
the treatment focused on the interpersonal problem 
area. Taking an active stance may be challenging for 
therapists with psychodynamic orientations who are 
used to taking a neutral stance and offering little guidance 
in the session. 

On the other hand, the IPT therapist does not want to 
reinforce the passivity and dependency that are characteristic 
of depression. A therapist who solves all problems 
may reinforce the patient’s sense of inadequacy. 
Hence, the IPT therapist encourages the patient to 
come up with ideas, explore options, and test them out 
between sessions. Hence, the patient deserves (and is 
given) credit for making the life changes that lead to 
improvement in treatment. 

The IPT therapist needs to be supportive, enthusiastic, 
and optimistic to instill hope that the depression 
will improve and changes will be forthcoming, and to 
encourage and inspire the patient to make changes. The 
structure of the IPT manual (Weissman et al., 2000; 
Weissman, Markowitz, & Klerman, 2007) and the 
empirical validation of IPT in randomized controlled 
studies help to bolster therapist confidence. The IPT 
therapist frequently congratulates the patient on her 
progress in treatment and efforts to make changes. 

Given the emphasis on helping the patient to identify 
and express feelings, the IPT therapist needs to feel 
comfortable encouraging expression of affect and tolerating 
intense negative affects. The therapist can show 
by example that feelings are indeed potent, but they are 
only feelings, and can be understood in an interpersonal 
context and will pass, if tolerated. 

the iPt PatieNt 

Research has demonstrated that a wide range of patients 
with major depression are good candidates for 
IPT. IPT has been validated with minor modifications 
as a treatment for adolescent, adult, peripartum, and 
geriatric depression. The patient should ideally report 
some recent life stressor and have some social contacts. 
Patients with depression who report no recent life 
events and lack basic social skills tend to do least well 
in IPT. IPT is not intended for patients with delusional 
depression, which requires antidepressant and antipsychotic 
pharmacotherapy or electroconvulsive therapy. 

Patients with comorbid moderate or severe personality 
disorder may be less likely to respond to short-term 
psychotherapy (Weissman et al., 2000). Accordingly, 
the recent adaptation of IPT for borderline personality 
disorder allows up to 32 weeks of treatment (Markowitz 
et al., 2006). 

the four iNterPersoNal 
ProBleM areas 

Treatment with IPT focuses on solving one of the following 
four interpersonal problem areas related to the 
onset or maintenance of the patient’s current depressive 
episode. The IPT therapist follows strategies specific to 
each problem area. 

Grief 

This problem area addresses a patient’s complicated 
bereavement following the death of a significant other. 
The therapist facilitates the mourning process, encourages 
catharsis, and ultimately helps the patient to form 
new relationships and find new activities to compensate 
for the loss. The therapist explores the relationship and 
the associated feelings the patient had with the loved 
one. Patients with complicated bereavement often have 
had a conflicted relationship with the deceased, reporting 
unresolved feelings about and anger toward the person, 
and feeling guilty or uncomfortable with such feelings. 
Patients may feel guilty about what they did or did 
not say to or do for the person who died. The therapist 
encourages exploration of these feelings and validates 
and normalizes negative feelings, allowing the patient 
to let go of the guilt she experiences. 

The release of negative affects in the therapy office 
can help to diminish the intensity of such feelings. The 
therapist also explores positive feelings the patient had 
for the person she lost and empathizes with the loss. Finally, 
the therapist helps the patient explore options for 
forming new relationships and finding new activities to 
help to substitute for the lost relationship and give the 
patient a new sense of direction. The loss may provide 
opportunities to meet people and engage in activities 
the patient might not otherwise have encountered. 

Role Disputes 

A “role dispute” is a conflict with a significant other: 
a spouse, friend, parent, relative, employer, coworker, 
or close friend. The therapist and patient explore the 


Interpersonal Psychotherapy for Depression 

relationship, the nature of the dispute, and options to 
resolve it. Patients with depression tend to put other 
people’s needs ahead of their own. They have difficulty 
asserting themselves, confronting others, and getting 
angry effectively, which makes it difficult for them to 
manage interpersonal conflicts. The therapist discusses 
these depressive tendencies with patients and explains: 
“It’s not your fault. You can learn how to assert yourself.” 


The therapist validates the patient’s feelings in the 
relationship: recognizing anger as a natural response 
to someone bothering her, for example. The next question 
is how to express such feelings. The therapist helps 
the patient to conceive ways to communicate thoughts 
and feelings more effectively and role-plays potential 
interactions with her. If, after exploring and attempting 
to implement options to resolve the dispute, the conflict 
has reached an impasse, the therapist helps the patient 
to consider ways either to live with the impasse or end 
the relationship. 

Role Transitions 

A “role transition” is a change in life status, such as 
beginning or ending a relationship, starting or losing a 
job, a geographic move, graduation or retirement, becoming 
a parent, or receiving the diagnosis of a medical 
illness. The therapist helps the patient to mourn the 
loss of the old role, to explore positive and negative 
aspects of the new role, and to determine what positive 
aspects of the old role, if any, she can retain. Ultimately, 
the therapist helps the patient adjust to and gain 
a sense of mastery over the new role. Even if a new role 
is wanted or positive, the role may be accompanied by 
unanticipated loss. For example, getting married may 
involve having to spend less time with one’s family of 
origin due to having to spend time with the spouse’s 
family. Moving to a new, larger house in a better neighborhood 
may disrupt relationships with friends in the 
old neighborhood. If a new role is undesired, a patient 
may discover unseen benefits in therapy. A patient who 
has lost a job may come to see the loss as an opportunity 
to pursue a better job. 

Interpersonal Deficits 

Interpersonal deficits, the least developed of the four 
problem areas, are the focus of IPT for major depression 
only when a patient reports no recent life events 
and, therefore, lacks any of the first three problem 
areas. Patients in this category tend to be socially iso


lated, and to have few social supports and a history of 
difficulty forming and sustaining relationships or finding 
relationships unfulfilling. The goal of treatment in 
this problem area is to reduce the patient’s isolation. Because 
the patient lacks current relationships, treatment 
focuses on patterns in past relationships and starting to 
form new ones. The therapist reviews past significant 
relationships, exploring positive and negative aspects 
and identifying recurrent problems. The therapist helps 
the patient to explore options for meeting people and 
participating in activities that she used to enjoy. 

Unlike treatment for the other problem areas, treatment 
for interpersonal deficits may focus on the relationship 
with the therapist. In the absence of other relationships, 
and with the understanding that the patient is 
likely to feel uncomfortable in the therapeutic situation, 
the therapist encourages the patient to discuss her feelings 
about the therapist and work on interpersonal problems 
that arise in their relationship. Ideally, the relationship 
with the therapist serves as model for the patient to 
form other relationships. Given that IPT usually focuses 
on a life event, it is not surprising that patients who lack 
such life events have been shown to respond least well 
to IPT. It is important to identify patients who have underlying 
dysthymic disorder because such patients often 
describe few recent life events. There is an IPT protocol 
adapted to the treatment of patients who are dysthymic 
(Markowitz, 1998; Weissman et al., 2000). 

the Process of iPt treatMeNt 

Acute IPT treatment for major depression comprises 
initial, middle, and termination phases. IPT techniques 
help the patient to pursue the goals of treatment for 
each interpersonal problem area. This section leads 
into a case example illustrating the implementation of 
these techniques. 

The Initial Phase (Sessions 1–3) 

Tasks of the initial sessions of IPT for major depression 
include eliciting the patient’s chief complaint; reviewing 
her symptoms and establishing a diagnosis; 
determining the interpersonal context for the current 
depressive episode; forming a therapeutic alliance; 
and setting the frame of the treatment, including the 
treatment goals and strategies. Although these tasks 
are common to other psychotherapeutic interventions, 
the techniques and process for accomplishing them are 
specific to IPT. 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

Diagnosing Major Depression 

To diagnosis MDD, the therapist reviews current symptoms 
of depression using either DSM-5 or ICD-10 criteria, 
inquiring about each symptom and about any past 
history of depression. The therapist may administer a 
symptom severity scale such as the HDRS (Hamilton, 
1960) or the BDI-II (Beck et al., 1996) and repeat the 
instrument every few weeks to monitor the patient’s 
progress. The therapist rules out other diagnoses, such 
as bipolar illness, depression due to general medical 
condition or substance, and other psychiatric disorders. 
If the patient meets criteria for MDD, the therapist tells 
her, describing explicitly each of the symptoms she reported: 


“You have an illness called major depression. The 
symptoms you describe having had for the past 
couple of months—feeling down most of the time, 
having difficulty enjoying things, feeling like you 
have to push yourself to get things done, difficulty 
sleeping, loss of appetite, trouble concentrating, and 
feeling very self-critical and down on yourself and 
pessimistic about your future—are all symptoms of 
depression. Depression is a treatable illness. It is not 
your fault that you feel this way and have had difficulty 
functioning, any more than it would be your 
fault if you had asthma or high blood pressure, or 
any other medical problem. And although you’re 
feeling hopeless, that’s just a depressive symptom. 
Your prognosis with treatment is quite good. You can 
feel better.” 

In the initial phase, and as needed throughout the 
treatment, the therapist provides psychoeducation 
about depression and how it affects social functioning. 
The therapist helps the patient to identify and understand 
her depressive symptoms and how better to manage 
them, and to distinguish between the illness and 
premorbid strengths and capabilities. The therapist determines 
the need for medication based on symptom 
severity, past response to medications, and patient preference. 


The “Sick Role” 

The IPT therapist gives the patient the “sick role” 
(Parsons, 1951), a temporary role intended to help the 
patient recognize that she suffers from an illness that 
comprises a distinct set of symptoms that compromise 

functioning. Assuming the sick role relieves the patient 
of self-blame and exempts her from responsibilities that 
the depression compromises until she recovers. The 
therapist educates the patient about how depression can 
impair social functioning and how to explain the illness 
to family and friends to gain support. The sick role 
also gives the patient the responsibility of working on 
improving her symptoms in treatment. 

The Interpersonal Inventory 

In IPT the psychiatric history includes the “interpersonal 
inventory,” a thorough review of the patient’s 
past and current social functioning, close relationships, 
relationship patterns, expectations of others within 
relationships, and the perceived expectations that others 
have of the patient. The interpersonal inventory 
should give the therapist a sense of how the patient 
interacts with other people. It should also illuminate 
how relationships may have contributed to the current 
depressive episode and, conversely, how depressive 
symptoms may be affecting current relationships. Furthermore, 
the interpersonal inventory assesses actual 
and potential social support. To glean this information, 
the IPT therapist asks detailed questions about the patient’s 
past and current relationships. An inquiry about 
current relationships might include the following questions: 


“Who is in your life currently? . . . Do you have a significant 
other? . . . Girlfriend/boyfriend? . . . What is 
your relationship like with him/her? . . . What do you 
like about him/her? . . . What don’t you like? . . . Do 
you and your spouse argue? . . . What do you argue 
about? . . . What happens when you argue—what do 
you do/say? . . . What do you expect of him/her? . . . 
What do you think he/she expects of you?” 

Identification of Interpersonal Problem Areas 

The primary goal of the interpersonal inventory is 
to determine which interpersonal issues are most related 
to the patient’s current depressive episode. The 
therapist should identify major interpersonal problem 
areas that can become the treatment focus. The therapist 
inquires about any changes in the patient’s life 
that occurred around the onset of current depressive 
symptoms: “What was going on in your life when you 
became depressed?” The therapist explores different 
areas in the patient’s life: home, work, relationships 


Interpersonal Psychotherapy for Depression 

with significant others, family members, and friends. 
The therapist should pick one problem area on which to 
focus, or at most two; too many treatment foci yield an 
unfocused treatment. The therapist relates the depression 
to a problem area and presents this to the patient 
in a formulation: 

“It seems from what you have been telling me that 
the main problem has been your difficulty in getting 
along with your husband. Although the causes 
of depression are complex and not fully known, we 
do know that conflicts with significant others can be 
related to depression. Furthermore, depression can 
make it difficult to handle conflicts with other people. 
I suggest that we meet for the next 12 weeks to 
figure out how you can better deal with the problems 
with your husband you’ve described. In IPT, we call 
that conflict a ‘role dispute.’ As you solve your role 
dispute, both your life and your depression should 
improve. Does this make sense to you?” 

Only with the patient’s explicit agreement to work on 
the chosen interpersonal problem area does the therapist 
proceed to the middle phase of treatment. The patient’s 
agreement on the focus allows the therapist to 
bring her back to this theme thereafter, maintaining a 
thematic flow for the treatment. 

Explanation of the Treatment Contract 
and the IPT Approach 

In addition to agreeing on a treatment focus in the initial 
sessions, the therapist and patient discuss and come to 
an understanding about other aspects of the treatment. 
The therapist discusses practical issues, including the 
time limit, the length and frequency of sessions, termination 
date, appointment time, fee, and so forth. The 
therapist explains that IPT is one of several empirically 
supported antidepressant treatments and describes the 
basic IPT principles. The therapist emphasizes the 
“here and now,” and the social and interpersonal focus 
of the treatment, explaining: 

“We’ll work together to try to understand how current 
stresses and relationships may be affecting your 
mood. We will work on helping you to better manage 
these stresses and the problems you may be having in 
relationships. We’ll explore what you want and need 
in your relationships and help you figure out how to 
get what you want and need. 

“I’ll be interested in hearing each week about 
what’s going on in your relationships with other 
people, how those interactions make you feel, and 
also how your feelings influence what happens with 
other people.” 

The therapist encourages the patient to bring up any 
discomforts she has about the sessions. 

“If anything bothers you, please bring it up. I do not 
intend to do anything to make you uncomfortable, 
but if you feel that way, please tell me, so that we can 
address the issue. It’s just the sort of interpersonal 
tension that we need to focus on in your outside life 
as well.” 

The Middle Phase (Sessions 4–9) 

Having made the treatment contract and chosen an interpersonal 
problem area as the focus of treatment, the 
therapist can proceed to the middle phase of sessions, 
in which the goal is to work on resolving the focal problem 
area. 

Each session begins with the question, “How have 
you been feeling since we last met?” This question 
elicits an interval history of mood, events, and interpersonal 
interactions that transpired between sessions. 
It also keeps the patient focused on current mood and 
situation. The patient is likely to respond by describing 
a mood (“I felt really down”) or an event (“My husband 
and I had a huge fight”). After further inquiry, the 
therapist links the patient’s mood to a recent event, or 
an event to her mood (“No wonder you felt depressed 
after the fight you had with your husband!”). 

Inquiring about emotionally laden interpersonal interactions, 
the therapist uses “communication analysis”—
the reconstruction and evaluation of affectively 
charged interactions—to help the patient understand 
how she felt in the situation and what she might have 
done to communicate more effectively. The therapist 
explores the patient’s wishes and options, helping her 
to decide what she wants and exploring the options for 
achieving it. 

“What did you want to happen in that situation? . . . 
What could you have done to get what you wanted 
in that situation? What other options do you have?” 

Depressed patients often have difficulty seeing that 
they have options, and their tendency to deem their 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

own needs to be less important than others’ contributes 
to difficulty in asserting themselves. The therapist explains 
this to the patient and offers empathy, blaming 
the depressive syndrome for the patient’s difficulties 
where appropriate. To help the patient choose which 
options to pursue, the therapist uses decision analysis. 
The case example presented later in this chapter elaborates 
these techniques. 

The therapist role-plays potential interactions with 
the patient to prepare her for interpersonal interactions 
in real life. Rather than supplying words for the patient 
during role play, the therapist instead encourages her 
to come up with her own words. This empowers the 
patient, fostering her independence from the therapist. 
The therapist points out that the patient is able to figure 
out what to say and do in interpersonal interactions, despite 
depression making her feel unable to do so. The 
therapist asks the patient how she felt during role play, 
whether the content and tone of voice felt comfortable, 
and how she imagines it will feel to say the words in 
reality. When a patient communicates effectively during 
role play—and, ultimately, in real life—the therapist 
reinforces the adaptive behavior with congratulations 
and encouragement. Real-life successes not only 
improve mood but also inspire patients to try to assert 
themselves in subsequent situations. 

Depressed patients withdraw socially and to lose 
interest in activities they previously found pleasurable. 
The therapist encourages the patient to resume social 
activity and to explore options for new activities and opportunities 
to form new relationships, if applicable. The 
therapist empathizes with difficulty the patient feels 
in pushing herself to engage with others, but stresses 
that, once engaged, she will likely feel better. Indeed, 
the IPT therapist asks the patient to take risks—both 
in asserting herself with others and in pushing herself 
to reengage in social activities. The therapist explicitly 
acknowledges that he/she is asking the patient to take 
risks, yet assures her that these risks will likely lead to 
improvement of her mood and life situation. The therapist 
will be there to discuss anything that goes right or 
wrong. 

The Termination Phase (Sessions 10–12) 

In the final sessions, the therapist reviews the patient’s 
progress in symptom improvement, as well as the extent 
to which the patient has resolved the focal problem 
area. By reviewing why the patient is better, through 
the actions she has taken to resolve the interpersonal 

focus, the therapist reinforces the patient’s growing 
self-esteem by pointing out that the patient’s actions 
have led to her gains. The therapist congratulates the 
patient on her progress and hard work, and expresses 
optimism that the patient can maintain that progress 
independent of the therapist. 

The therapist addresses nonresponse in patients 
whose moods and life situations do not improve, or 
only partially improve. The therapist should explain 
that it is the treatment that failed—not the patient. The 
therapist gives the patient hope by emphasizing that 
depression is treatable and many other effective treatments 
exist, and by encouraging her to explore alternative 
treatments. 

The therapist explores the patient’s feelings about the 
treatment and termination, acknowledging not only his/ 
her own sadness to be ending their relationship but also 
happiness about the patient’s improvement and confidence 
that she will be able to maintain the progress she 
made in treatment. Should symptoms recur, the patient 
has gained tools to manage symptoms of depression on 
her own. Furthermore, the patient can return to IPT for 
“booster” sessions as needed. 

Using the IPT medical model, the therapist provides 
psychoeducation about relapse and recurrence of major 
depression and prepares the patient about potential for 
relapse. Patients who have experienced one or more episodes 
of major depression unfortunately remain vulnerable 
to future episodes. The therapist explains this and 
advises that given the link between stressful life events 
and mood, the patient can anticipate that she may have 
difficulty with future, stressful life events. Fortunately, 
the patient can use the coping skills gained in treatment 
to ward off a worsening of symptoms. If the patient 
has improved in IPT but has either significant residual 
symptoms or a history of multiple episodes, therapist 
and patient may contract for continuation or maintenance 
IPT, which has also demonstrated efficacy in 
forestalling relapse (Frank et al., 2007). 

case stuDy 

The following case demonstrates how a clinician (K. L. 
B.) implemented IPT for major depression in a 12-week 
acute treatment and illustrates how one works with the 
problem area of grief. In IPT, grief (complicated bereavement) 
is considered as a focal problem area when 
the onset of depression is related to the death of a significant 
other and the patient is experiencing an abnor


###CUT###
Interpersonal Psychotherapy for Depression 

mal grief reaction (Weissman et al., 2000). Although 
cases that focus on the grief problem area usually address 
complicated bereavement related to the death of 
a person who has actually lived, the following case involves 
complicated bereavement related to a stillbirth 
(Bleiberg, 2012). Indeed, the IPT problem areas can 
apply to a wide range of cases. IPT treatment goals and 
techniques specific to working with the grief problem 
area are demonstrated. 

Background Information 

Sara, a 35-year-old, married, childless woman, was 
referred for treatment of major depression 2 months 
after the death of her baby girl in utero at 27 weeks’ 
gestation. Her doctor considered a bacterial infection 
the most likely cause of the stillbirth. Sara’s chief complaint 
was “I feel like I should be over it.” 

At 27 weeks, after not having felt the baby move for 
several hours, Sara called her doctor, who told her to 
come to the hospital. The doctor found no heartbeat 
and told Sara that he needed to deliver the fetus. Sara 
recalled feeling shocked, numb, and unable to cry at 
first. She was given medication to induce labor and an 
epidural, and delivered the baby vaginally. Despite efforts 
to revive her, the baby girl was pronounced dead 
shortly after delivery. Sara said that she wanted to 
hold her and was given the baby to hold, swaddled in 
a white-and-pink blanket. She recalled that she and her 
husband had cried uncontrollably while they took turns 
holding the baby, and for a long time after giving the 
baby back to the doctor. She remembered that the baby 
was “very cute” and looked like her husband. She was 
given pictures of the baby and footprints to take home. 
Sara and her husband decided not to have a funeral or 
memorial service for the baby. 

Sara reported that since the stillbirth 2 months earlier, 
she had been feeling sad and irritable most of the 
day, nearly every day, and unable to enjoy previous pleasures 
such as reading fiction, cooking, going to the movies, 
and exercise. She worked as a nurse on an inpatient 
medical floor in a New York City hospital, and prior to 
the stillbirth had very much enjoyed her work. She now 
felt unable to enjoy work because of her mood, and she 
feared having to talk about her loss with coworkers who 
knew she had been pregnant. She was crying frequently, 
socially withdrawn, had low energy and difficulty 
concentrating, experienced decreased appetite, and felt 
very bad about herself. She denied ever having thoughts 
of suicide or feeling that life was not worth living. 

Sara reported that despite trying not to think about 
the baby’s death, she nonetheless was frequently bothered 
by thoughts about the baby, often wondering what 
her life would have been like had she survived. Sara 
had returned to work 3 weeks after the stillbirth, hoping 
that work would distract her and help her “get over” 
her loss. She reported feeling very angry at and avoiding 
other pregnant women, including close friends and 
women with newborns, in addition to other reminders 
of her pregnancy. She felt angry at having had to go 
through pregnancy, labor, and delivery without gaining 
the pleasure of having a child. 

Sara was plagued by inappropriate guilt. She felt 
guilty because she feared that she had done something 
to cause her loss, despite the doctor telling her that she 
could have done nothing to prevent it. He explained that 
when bacterial infections cause fetal death, they often 
cause no symptoms in the mother and go undiagnosed 
until they cause serious complications. Nevertheless, 
Sara felt that she should have recognized the infection, 
and she felt guilty about having waited until age 35 to 
try to conceive. She felt like a failure for having had a 
stillbirth. Sara felt guilty that she had disappointed and 
upset her husband by losing the baby, and she did not 
want to burden him with her feelings about the loss. 

Sara had never sought treatment prior to her current 
evaluation. She described one prior episode of major 
depression in her late 20s, lasting 4–6 weeks, precipitated 
by a breakup with a boyfriend of several years, but 
reported feeling much worse since losing the baby. She 
reported that her mother had been treated for depression 
with antidepressant medication with good results. 

Sara was an attractive woman of average height and 
weight who looked her stated age. She was casually 
but neatly dressed in jeans and a large sweater. Sara’s 
movements were slightly slowed; her speech was fluent. 
Her mood was depressed and anxious, and her affect, 
congruent and tearful. She denied current or past 
suicidal ideation and any history of substance abuse or 
psychotic symptoms. She denied current or past medical 
conditions, including thyroid dysfunction. She reported 
no known prior pregnancies, pregnancy losses, 
or fertility issues prior to the stillbirth. In fact, she had 
conceived after just a couple of months of trying to get 
pregnant. 

Sara was good candidate for IPT: She met criteria 
for major depression and had experienced a recent life 
event proximate to the onset of her symptoms. Furthermore, 
IPT could address the interpersonal problems 
she was experiencing related to the onset of her 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

symptoms. Sara was also a potential candidate for CBT, 
pharmacotherapy, or (evidence-based antidepressant) 
psychotherapy combined with medication. She was uninterested 
in doing written homework and resistant to 
taking medication because she was hoping to conceive 
again in the near future. 

IPT Treatment with Sara 

Acute Phase (Sessions 1–3) 

Treatment with Sara followed the IPT format for acute 
treatment. In the first three sessions, the therapist obtained 
a thorough psychiatric history and set the treatment 
framework. In the first session, she obtained a 
chief complaint and a history of Sara’s present illness. 
Because treatment occurred prior to the release of 
DSM-5, the therapist used DSM-IV criteria to determine 
that Sara met criteria for major depressive disorder. 
She administered the HDRS to assess the severity 
of Sara’s symptoms. 

The therapist offered Sara empathy for her pregnancy 
loss, saying: “I am so sorry. You’ve suffered a 
terrible loss. No wonder you have been feeling so badly 
and having such a difficult time.” The therapist gave 
Sara her diagnosis of major depression, reviewed her 
specific symptoms, and gave her the “sick role,” and 
offered her hope: 

“The symptoms you’ve described having in the past 
couple of months—depressed mood, not being 
able to enjoy things and your loss of interest in 
things, feeling very badly about yourself and guilty, 
your difficulty eating and sleeping, and difficulty 
concentrating—are all symptoms of major depression. 
Major depression is an illness that is treatable. 
It is not your fault that you have been feeling this 
way. And you have a very good chance of recovering.” 


The therapist explained that Sara’s HDRS score of 
24 indicated moderately severe depression and that she 
would readminister the HDRS at regular intervals to 
monitor Sara’s progress. Given the severity of Sara’s 
symptoms, her willingness to participate in psychotherapy, 
and her reluctance to take medication in anticipation 
of trying to conceive again, the therapist did not 
think medication was needed. 

The therapist described IPT and the treatment rationale: 


tHeraPist: I am trained in interpersonal psychotherapy, 
which I think could be helpful to you. Interpersonal 
psychotherapy—often called IPT—is a timelimited 
treatment that focuses on how recent life 
events and stresses—such as losing a baby—affect 
your mood, and how mood symptoms make it difficult 
to current life events and stresses, particularly 
problems in relationships. Although we will take the 
first few sessions to review your history, our sessions 
will focus on the here and now, on your current difficulties 
and relationships, not on the past. Does this 
make sense to you? 

sara: Yes. 

tHeraPist: Often, people respond to treatment with 
IPT in 12 weekly sessions. I propose that we meet 
once a week for a 50-minute session for the next 12 
weeks. If it’s helpful, at the end of the 12 sessions, 
we can discuss whether it might be useful to have 
additional sessions to work on issues and maintain 
your progress. How does that sound to you? 

sara: It sounds good. I hope I can feel better in 12 
weeks. 

tHeraPist: You can feel better in 12 weeks. IPT has 
been shown in numerous research studies to effectively 
treat symptoms like the ones you have described. 


After the first session Sara felt somewhat more hopeful 
but stated that she did not like the idea that she had 
a diagnosis of major depression. Although she could 
understand that there was a relationship between her 
stillbirth and her mood, Sara still felt she should be 
feeling better after 2 months and did not want to think 
of herself as depressed, like her mother, and in need of 
help. Sara stated that she was always the “strong one” 
and was used to functioning at a very high level. The 
therapist was not surprised by Sara’s initial skepticism, 
as it can take time for patients to accept the medical 
model. Furthermore, patients with depression often 
feel uncomfortable about seeking help because they 
fear burdening others. Nevertheless, therapist and patient 
agreed to work together for 12 weeks, then decide 
whether further sessions were needed. 

In obtaining Sara’s psychiatric history, the therapist 
conducted an interpersonal inventory, carefully reviewing 
Sara’s past and current social functioning and 
close relationships. She started the inventory by asking 
about Sara’s family. 


Interpersonal Psychotherapy for Depression 

“Where did you grow up? . . . Who was in your family? 
. . . How would you describe your relationship 
with your mother? . . . With your brother?” 

Sara had grown up in Canada with her parents, now 
in their early 60s, and her younger brother, now age 
33, all of whom still lived near Toronto where she had 
been raised. Her father had worked a lot while Sara was 
growing up, and although she was fond of him, she did 
not feel so close to him. Sara felt closer to her mother 
and spoke with her weekly but was easily irritated by 
her. It bothered Sara that her mother was not assertive 
and was intermittently depressed. She spoke weekly 
with her brother, who lived with his wife and 2-yearold 
son. She described her relationship with her brother 
as fairly close. She reported speaking to her brother less 
often since the stillbirth because she felt jealous that he 
had a child. When they did speak, Sara avoided asking 
about her nephew. 

After exploring Sara’s relationships with family 
members, the therapist asked about other important 
people in her life and about her relationship with her 
husband. At age 33, Sara met her husband, Steve, who 
was 1 year her junior. She described Steve as warm and 
charming, and reported that he took great care of her. 
She felt she did not “deserve him” because he was “such 
a good guy.” She described her previous boyfriends as 
less emotionally available and “not very nice.” Both 
Sara and Steve had originally came from Canada but 
met in New York City, where mutual friends introduced 
them. Sara had moved to New York in her early 20s, 
whereas her husband had moved there 2 years before 
they met. 

Since the stillbirth, Sara felt distant from Steve and 
argued with him about “little things.” She reported 
feeling guilty that she had let him down by losing the 
baby and feared that he blamed her for the baby’s death. 
She did not want to burden him further by sharing her 
own distress about the loss. She also felt that Steve 
would not be able to understand her fears about trying 
to conceive again. 

Sara reported having a few close girlfriends who 
lived in the tristate area and, until the pregnancy 
loss, had spoken with them about once per week. She 
had several friends at work with whom she had chatted 
almost daily until the loss. She described herself 
as “independent,” “outgoing,” and “not one to lean on 
other people” prior to becoming depressed. Rather, her 
friends turned to her when they had problems. Sara said 

that before the depression, her friends would describe 
her as hardworking and energetic. She rarely argued 
with friends because she felt “uncomfortable” with 
conflict. She avoided confronting friends and coworkers 
when she disagreed or felt angry with them. 

The therapist asked Sara if there was anyone to whom 
she had turned for comfort after her loss because it is 
important to have someone in whom to confide after 
such a terrible loss or any stressful experience. Sara 
replied that she had been avoiding her friends and family 
since the loss. She had felt uncomfortable talking 
to friends, family, and coworkers about her pregnancy 
when she was pregnant because she did not like being 
the center of attention and felt guilty that she did not 
enjoy the first trimester of her pregnancy. She felt even 
more uncomfortable discussing her pregnancy loss. 
Her parents and in-laws came to see Sara and her husband 
after the loss, but she felt unable to talk with them 
about what had happened and how she was feeling. Her 
coworkers knew that she had been pregnant, and Sara 
felt obligated to say something to them about what had 
happened. The therapist noted that it sounded like Sara 
could trust no one with her feelings about the stillbirth. 
Sara did not want to reach out to family or friends, or 
let them know how bad she felt; she explained: “I don’t 
want to bother people with my problems. I don’t want 
to be weak.” 

The therapist reframed Sara’s difficulty in reaching 
out to others, using the medical model to explain how 
depression affects social functioning: 

tHeraPist: You are not weak—you are depressed— 
and that’s not your fault. People with depression 
tend to minimize their own needs and avoid seeking 
help from their friends, as you have, because they 
fear being a burden. However, it is not only appropriate 
to seek support from others but it also can be 
really helpful to get their support. In fact, support 
from others has been shown to help in recovery from 
depression. I appreciate your dilemma. Your depression 
makes you feel uncomfortable seeking support, 
yet support from others has been shown to reduce 
depression and protect people from becoming depressed. 
Does this make sense to you? 

sara: Yes, but I also don’t want to hear what they have 
to say. It just makes me more upset. They don’t understand 
what I have been through. 

tHeraPist: What kinds of things have people said to 
you? 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

Sara replied that it bothered her when people said 
things like “You’ll get pregnant again” or “I know 
someone who also lost a baby.” These statements made 
her feel angry. She felt that others could not understand 
what she had experienced. One close friend had recently 
given birth to her first child, and Sara had avoided 
calling and seeing her. It felt unfair that her friend had 
a baby when she did not. A coworker had been pregnant 
at the same time but had a relatively easy pregnancy. 
Sara felt that her coworker was not sympathetic to her 
physical discomfort during pregnancy. 

By the end of the first phase of treatment, the therapist 
had connected Sara’s major depressive episode to 
her interpersonal situation in a formulation centered 
on an IPT focal problem area. Sara’s chief complaint 
reflected that she was still grieving the loss of her 
baby and unable to resume her normal level of functioning. 
Her situation was a clear example of the grief 
problem area: Sara was suffering from complicated 
bereavement. While it is normal to grieve for months 
after losing a loved one, the severity of Sara’s depressive 
symptoms—especially the excessive guilt, low 
self-esteem, and social isolation—and her avoidance 
of thoughts, feelings, and reminders of the baby and 
the baby’s death, reflected an abnormal grief reaction. 
She had not sought emotional support after the stillbirth 
and had not really mourned the loss of her baby. 
In fact, people often develop complicated bereavement 
when they lack or have not used their social network to 
help them mourn the loss of their loved one. 

The therapist presented this formulation to Sara: 

tHeraPist: From what you are telling me, it’s clear 
that the loss of your baby triggered your current depression. 
You have suffered a terrible loss and you 
are having trouble grieving. No wonder you are having 
such a hard time. This is not your fault. Furthermore, 
your loss and your depression have affected 
your relationships with people in your life, like your 
husband, your friends and coworkers, and you’re 
having difficulty expressing your feelings to them. I 
suggest that we focus our sessions on handling your 
grief over this terrible event. Grief is one of the problem 
areas that IPT has been shown to treat. I suggest 
we work on helping you to mourn the loss and to 
improve your relationships that have been affected 
by your loss. How does this sound to you? 

sara: It sounds good. 

With Sara’s explicit agreement about the treatment 
focus, the therapist began the middle phase of treatment. 


Middle Phase (Sessions 4–9) 

During the middle phase, therapist and patient worked 
on resolving Sara’s interpersonal problem area. In IPT, 
the strategy for working with grief is to help the patient 
to tolerate and manage the affect of loss, and to gather 
social support to help the patient through mourning. In 
addition, the therapist helps the patient to use existing 
social supports, to reestablish interests and relationships, 
and to form new relationships and explore new 
activities to compensate for the loss (Weissman et al., 
2000, 2007). 

The therapist continued providing psychoeducation 
about complicated bereavement and how depression affects 
social functioning, and repeatedly linked Sara’s 
depression to the identified problem area. She began 
each session with the opening question, “How have 
things been since we last met?” This question elicited 
affect and a history of Sara’s mood and events between 
sessions, and kept Sara focused on her current mood 
and life events. 

To facilitate the mourning process, the therapist encouraged 
Sara to think about the loss. In fact, this process 
had begun during the initial phase, while the therapist 
took a history of the events related to the onset of 
Sara’s depression. The therapist asked Sara to describe 
the events prior, during, and after the baby’s death— 
often a source of patient guilt—and explored Sara’s 
feelings associated with these events. In helping a patient 
mourn the loss of a loved one, the IPT therapist 
asks the patient to describe her feelings about the death 
and about the person who died. The therapist explores 
what the patient and the deceased did together, what 
the patient liked and did not like about the person, and 
what the patient wished they had done together but did 
not have a chance to do. The therapist asks the patient 
to describe how the deceased died and how she learned 
about the death, and explores the patient’s related feelings. 
Because Sara’s baby died in utero, the therapist 
modified this inquiry somewhat by encouraging Sara to 
talk about her experience of being pregnant, about the 
baby, and what she imagined the baby would be like. 
The therapist asked Sara what she liked about carrying 
the baby, what she did not like, and what she had hoped 
to do with the baby. 


Interpersonal Psychotherapy for Depression 

Sara tearfully described having had mixed feelings 
about her pregnancy. She reported that she and 
Steve started trying to conceive 6 months after getting 
married and, to her surprise, she got pregnant after 2 
months. When she discovered she was pregnant, Sara 
felt really happy but scared about becoming a parent. 
She questioned whether she was “ready.” Sara reported 
that she made a great effort to practice good prenatal 
care: She ate healthy, pregnancy-safe foods, took prenatal 
vitamins, and started prenatal yoga classes. Practicing 
good prenatal care made her feel good, “as if I 
was already a mom taking care of my baby.” 

Sara quickly began to experience terrible fatigue and 
unrelenting nausea, which lasted for the first 12 weeks 
of the pregnancy. She described feeling as if she had 
been “taken over” by the pregnancy. She complained 
that she loved to cook but did not want to cook because 
she felt so sick. Despite the nausea, she ensured that she 
got the nutrients the baby needed. The fatigue and nausea 
were so debilitating that Sara could no longer meet 
the physical demands of her job as a nurse. As a result, 
she was unable to hide her pregnancy from her coworkers; 
she told her supervisor, who was happy to accommodate 
Sara by giving her more administrative responsibilities 
in lieu of patient care until she felt better. Sara 
resented having to give up clinical work with patients, 
which was the part of her job she enjoyed. She felt selfconscious 
about her symptoms and very guilty that her 
coworkers had to absorb her patient load, despite their 
being very supportive. It bothered her that others idealized 
pregnancy, whereas she found it so unpleasant. 
At the same time, she felt guilty and selfish that she 
had complained about the pregnancy: Sara felt that she 
should have just been grateful she was pregnant. 

The therapist empathized with Sara’s discomfort 
during her first trimester and validated her need to 
complain: 

tHeraPist: The first trimester of pregnancy can be really 
difficult and disruptive. Give yourself a break! It 
can be hard to appreciate being pregnant when you 
are feeling so terrible. It sounds like you did appreciate 
being pregnant—you made a great effort to take 
care of yourself. You watched your diet carefully and 
rearranged your work situation. 

sara: I don’t know . . . I guess that’s true. 

When the exhaustion and nausea subsided in her second 
trimester, Sara began to feel more optimistic and 

excited about having a child. Seeing sonograms made 
the baby seem “more real” and helped Sara feel connected 
to the baby. At Week 16, Sara learned that the 
baby was a girl. Excited, she immediately began considering 
names and envisioning what the baby would 
look like. Sara imagined her as a combination of herself 
and her husband, with blue eyes and blond, curly hair. 
She thought the baby would be a kind person, like her 
husband. She imagined walking the baby to the park in 
a stroller and playing with her. At Week 20, Sara began 
to feel the baby move, which she very much enjoyed. 
When the baby moved, Sara would stop whatever she 
was doing to watch and feel her abdomen. She described 
feeling the movements as “some of the happiest 
moments in my life.” Neither she nor her husband had 
thought of a name for the baby, but referred to her as 
“Sweetie” in utero. 

For weeks after the stillbirth, Sara struggled with 
physical reminders of the baby. After the delivery, she 
had leaky breasts for a few days and vaginal bleeding for 
several weeks. She reported that she still looked pregnant 
for weeks after delivering the baby, as her uterus 
slowly returned to its prepregnancy size. At the time of 
her initial evaluation, Sara reported that she still had to 
lose 5 pounds to return to her prepregnancy weight. Sara 
missed being pregnant and described feeling “empty” 
and “alone” without the baby inside her. She was eager 
and ready to be a parent, yet felt frightened about conceiving 
again because she feared losing another baby. 

A couple of weeks after the stillbirth, Sara’s doctor 
determined that an undetected bacterial infection 
caused the stillbirth. The doctor explained that there 
was nothing Sara or her husband could have done to 
prevent the loss, and that this kind of loss was very rare. 
Despite her doctor’s explanation, Sara blamed herself 
for her baby’s death and feared that her husband blamed 
her too, although he repeatedly denied this. The therapist 
explored Sara’s guilt further: 

tHeraPist: What could you have done to prevent your 

baby’s death? 
sara: (tearfully) I don’t know. . . . I should have been 

able to do something. 

The therapist offered Sara empathy and support, and 
related her guilt to depression: 

tHeraPist: It would be great if there were something 
you could have done to prevent this tragedy, but there 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

is generally nothing parents can do to prevent a pregnancy 
loss. It sounds like you did everything you 
could—you took very good care of yourself. You are 
struggling with inappropriate and excessive guilt— 
a symptom of depression. You are blaming yourself 
for something you didn’t do. Perhaps when you find 
yourself feeling guilty, you can try to label this as a 
symptom of depression. 

sara: Yes. I guess I can try. 

Talking about the pregnancy, the baby, and the baby’s 
death, and exploring related feelings enabled Sara to 
develop a more balanced and realistic perception of her 
relationship with the baby and her role in the baby’s 
death. She realized that she had not taken her pregnancy 
for granted. In fact, she had done everything she 
could to manage a difficult first trimester and take care 
of her baby. In addition, her experience with the pregnancy 
and the baby made Sara realize that, despite her 
initial anxiety, she was ready and excited to become 
a parent. By the end of the first month of treatment, 
Sara’s mood was somewhat improved and her HDRS 
score had fallen to 18. She was less self-critical and 
more hopeful. 

An important part of treating grief is facilitating 
the expression of affect related to the loss of the loved 
one. The therapist explored Sara’s feelings as she spoke 
about the baby and her loss, giving Sara time to articulate 
what she was feeling and to cry. Although IPT 
therapists generally take an active stance, when facilitating 
the expression of painful feelings, it is important 
to allow for silences. By listening silently, the therapist 
showed that she could tolerate Sara’s painful feelings, 
and that catharsis was an important part of mourning 
her loss. Sara was able to express not only feelings she 
had been avoiding but also feelings of which she had 
previously been unaware. 

Sara had avoided looking at the pictures and footprints 
of the baby from the hospital, which had been 
stored in a box under her bed. She and the therapist 
explored what it would be like for her to look at these 
items. Sara feared it would be scary, and that she would 
feel really bad. The therapist gently encouraged Sara 
to take a risk and look because it might make her feel 
better to experience the feelings she had been avoiding: 

“Your feelings are not going to hurt you. You might 
actually feel better if you allow yourself to let out 
some of the feelings you have been trying to keep 

inside. I know I am asking you to take a risk, but you 
might be pleasantly surprised.” 

Between sessions, Sara looked at the pictures and the 
footprints. The therapist asked what it was like for her. 

sara: I cried a lot. She was so cute. It wasn’t as hard 
as I thought it would be. It felt like a release. I was 
surprised that I felt a little better afterwards. 

tHeraPist: I am so glad you took a risk and looked. It 
sounds like it made you feel better. 

In fact, every few weeks before the end of treatment, 
Sara looked at the pictures and the footprints. She explained 
that the pictures were sort of comforting because 
they made her feel a connection to her baby. 

In addition to encouraging catharsis, the therapist 
encouraged Sara to work on her interpersonal interactions, 
to reconnect with the people in her life, and to 
consider opportunities to form new relationships and 
start new activities to compensate for the loss. The 
therapist explained that people with depression tend 
to isolate themselves and stop engaging in previously 
pleasurable activities, both of which can perpetuate depression. 
Sara reported not wanting to talk to people 
because she feared that she would have to talk about 
the loss, or that things people said would make her feel 
worse. In fact, as Sara and the therapist discussed, she 
could guide the conversation in a way that made her 
feel comfortable. They explored and role-played options 
for maintaining control of such conversations. 
Furthermore, Sara could tell people what would be 
helpful to her. The therapist explained: 

“People with depression often have difficulty asserting 
their needs. If you communicate your needs to 
others—like your husband, friends, coworkers, and 
your family—you might improve those relationships 
and your mood. The people in your life may 
not know what you need. If you tell them, you might 
not only get support from them, but you might enjoy 
their company again and feel better.” 

Using communication analysis, the therapist asked 
Sara to recount arguments and unpleasant interactions 
with others: what she was feeling during the interaction, 
what she said or did, and what the other person 
said or did. They explored what Sara wished other people 
would say or do, what options she had for asking 


Interpersonal Psychotherapy for Depression 

them to do these things, and they role-played Sara asking 
for what she wanted. Sara reported that she hated 
running into people who knew she had been pregnant 
but did not know about the stillbirth. In fact, she avoided 
going places because she feared having to answer 
questions about the stillbirth. Sara and the therapist 
explored these interactions and how Sara could handle 
them more effectively: 

tHeraPist: What kinds of things have people asked, or 
what are you afraid they will ask? 

sara: People have asked “How’s your baby?” or 
“Weren’t you pregnant?” 

tHeraPist: How does that make you feel? 

sara: Awful! 

tHeraPist: How do you handle it? 

sara: I don’t know. . . . Sometimes I say “It didn’t work 
out” or “My baby died.” 

tHeraPist: That sounds good. How does it feel for you 
to say that? 

sara: It feels OK, but then they want to know what 
happened and say stupid things like “At least you 
know you can get pregnant” or “You can have another 
one.” 

tHeraPist: What would you like them to say or do? 

sara: I would like them to just say “I’m sorry,” and not 
ask any questions. I don’t want to talk about what 
happened. 

tHeraPist: How could you convey that? 

sara: I guess I could say, “I’m sorry, but I’d rather not 
talk about it.” 

tHeraPist: How does that sound? How did it feel to 
say that? 
sara: It felt OK. Don’t you think that is rude to say 
that? 

tHeraPist: No. You said it politely and it’s appropriate 
for you to assert your needs. It is an uncomfortable 
situation for both you and the person who asked the 
question. If you are polite and direct with people, 
they are likely to understand. But why not try it and 
see? 

Sara reported that she had avoided returning calls 
from old friends. She explained that she felt uncomfortable 
seeing her friends who had babies because it would 

remind her of the baby she had lost. Sara also did not 
want to have to talk about the loss. She did not want to 
tell them how she felt because she feared hurting their 
feelings. Sara and the therapist role-played Sara telling 
her friends about her discomfort and explaining that 
she did not want to offend them. Role play helped Sara 
feel prepared and less anxious about going to work, 
walking around her neighborhood, and talking to old 
friends. As a result, she gradually starting going out 
more and began returning phone calls. She returned to 
the yoga studio where she had taken prenatal yoga and 
started taking regular yoga classes, which helped her 
mood and provided an opportunity to be among other 
people. By midtreatment Sara’s HDRS had fallen to 13, 
consistent with mild depression. 

Since the stillbirth, Sara had been bickering with 
her husband Steve “over stupid things” and felt “distant 
from him.” The therapist asked her to describe a 
recent incident. Sara said that Steve came home from 
work and told her that his friend’s wife had just had 
a baby. She felt it was insensitive for him to tell her 
about other people’s positive pregnancy experiences. It 
bothered her that Steve did not seem as uncomfortable 
as she was with this information, and that he no longer 
seemed as upset as she about the loss. The interaction 
made her feel “alone.” She had responded to him by 
saying, “That’s nice,” then leaving the room and ruminating 
for the rest of the evening about his insensitivity. 

Sara reported that they often had similar interactions. 
The therapist once again related Sara’s difficulty 
in asserting herself with her husband to depression, and 
noted that keeping her feelings inside might actually be 
making Sara feel worse. They explored interpersonal 
options for handling this situation in a way that might 
make Sara feel better. The therapist helped Sara to explore 
what her husband’s intentions might have been in 
the situation she described. She wondered whether he 
was trying to make her feel better because his friend’s 
wife had experienced several miscarriages. They roleplayed 
Sara telling her husband how she felt. Subsequently, 
when Sara was able to express her feelings to 
him, she learned that Steve was, in fact, telling her these 
stories to give her hope. Furthermore, her husband revealed 
that he was still upset about the loss of their baby 
but did not want to upset her by sharing his feelings. 
Sara was relieved that she and Steve were “on the same 
page” and felt good that she was able to feel close to 
him again. They subsequently were able to share more 
of their mixed feelings about the pregnancy experience. 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

Termination Phase (Sessions 10–12) 

During the final sessions, the therapist and Sara reviewed 
the progress Sara had made. She reported her 
mood was much improved. Her HDRS was now a 5, 
consistent with euthymia and remission. Sara’s affect 
was brighter, and she was less preoccupied with the loss 
of her baby: “I still get upset when I think about my 
baby, but I don’t get as upset. It doesn’t ruin my entire 
day. I am actually able to enjoy things again.” Furthermore, 
Sara no longer blamed herself for her baby’s 
death. She felt good about her ability to communicate 
her feelings more effectively with her husband, friends, 
and others, and to enjoy socializing and other activities 
again. 

The therapist congratulated Sara on her hard work 
and achievements, and told her how happy she was that 
Sara felt so much better. They discussed the potential 
for relapse and how Sara could maintain her progress. 
Given Sara’s history of depression, the therapist 
explained that Sara was, unfortunately, vulnerable to 
future episodes; however, Sara could anticipate that 
she would be vulnerable in the setting of stressful life 
events—role disputes, role transitions, deaths—and use 
the coping skills she had learned during their work together. 
Sara anticipated trying to conceive again, and, 
she hoped, getting pregnant again—both role transitions. 
The therapist explored with Sara ways that she 
could take care of herself during this potentially stressful 
time. They discussed Sara’s reaching out to others 
for support, communicating with her husband about 
how she was feeling, and forgiving herself if she found 
herself having a hard time. 

In the final session, Sara told the therapist that she 
had reread her diary entries from the days before beginning 
treatment and could not believe how far she had 
come, that her pregnancy loss had forced her to seek 
treatment for depression that she now realized had been 
a lifelong problem; in retrospect, she had suffered numerous 
episodes of mild to moderate depression. Sara 
admitted that she initially had felt very resistant to the 
medical model. Defining depression as a medical illness 
ultimately relieved Sara of her shame and guilt 
about her difficulty in functioning. Furthermore, being 
able to see depression as a set of discrete symptoms 
made it seem more manageable. Sara reported that she 
was getting along better with her mother; now that she 
understood depression, she felt more sympathy for her 
mother’s struggle with depression. She was grateful 
for the opportunity to learn coping skills that she felt 

confident about maintaining. In addition, Sara said that 
she would not hesitate to seek treatment in the future 
should she find herself becoming depressed again. 

The therapist’s frequent encouragement, the time 
limit, and the brief duration of IPT helped keep Sara 
motivated. Sara said that she appreciated the opportunity 
to talk about her feelings about her pregnancy, her 
baby, and her baby’s death, and that she felt the therapist 
understood and supported her. She recognized that 
her feelings, while powerful, made sense in context and 
had subsided with discussion. Sara confessed that she 
appreciated the therapist’s “pushing” her to reconnect 
with others. She had not thought she could handle socializing 
with others but was pleasantly surprised. 

Although each patient is unique, Sara’s therapy resembled 
other IPT treatments for major depression and 
is a good example of working with the problem area 
of grief. The exploration and normalization of affect, 
communication analysis, exploration of options, use of 
role play, encouragement to take social risks, and other 
techniques employed in Sara’s treatment are characteristic 
of working with interpersonal difficulties related 
to any of the four IPT problem areas. 

coMMoN ProBleMs that arise 
DuriNG treatMeNt 

The problems that typically arise during IPT treatment 
for major depression are (1) those inherent to working 
with depressed patients and (2) those related to the therapeutic 
frame. Although these problems are not unique 
to IPT, how the therapist views and treats these issues 
distinguishes IPT from other psychotherapies. In keeping 
with important IPT themes, the therapist attributes 
problems to depression, and to the patient’s difficulties 
handling interpersonal interactions and communicating 
effectively outside of the treatment. The therapist 
continues to maintain an optimistic, supportive, and 
nonjudgmental stance and avoids transference interpretations. 


For example, patients with major depression superimposed 
on dysthymic disorder (“double depression”) 
and their therapists are often discouraged by the chronicity 
of their depression. In these cases, the therapist 
should remain hopeful and optimistic. Some depressed 
patients feel that their depression is incurable despite 
reassurances from the therapist. In these cases, the 
IPT therapist employs the medical model, labeling the 
hopelessness as a symptom of depression, and empha



Interpersonal Psychotherapy for Depression 

sizes that patients need not feel hopeless since depression 
is treatable. Depressed patients often view seeking 
treatment as a personal failure. The IPT therapist 
frames seeking treatment as the appropriate and smart 
way to treat a medical illness, and a positive step toward 
gaining mastery over their problems (Weissman 
et al., 2000, 2007). 

The most serious problem to arise in any treatment 
for depression is when a patient expresses suicidal ideation. 
As in any treatment, the therapist determines 
whether hospitalization is necessary, based on the seriousness 
of the intent and the availability of the patient’s 
social supports. The therapist is as available as possible 
to the patient and schedules extra sessions as needed. 
The therapist assesses the circumstances in which the 
suicidal ideation developed, what the patient hoped to 
accomplish by ending her life, and reviews how the patient 
imagines others would react to her suicide. The 
therapist helps the patient explore alternative ways of 
expressing what she intended to communicate by committing 
suicide. The therapist provides psychoeducation 
about suicide, explaining that it is the most deadly 
symptom of depression, and that therapist and patient 
have to work together to keep the patient alive long 
enough to get through successful treatment—at which 
point the patient will again want to live. Augmenting 
the therapy with medication treatment should be considered 
for severely suicidal patients. The therapist 
remains optimistic that the patient’s depression will 
improve, and that she will no longer feel that life is not 
worth living (Weissman et al., 2000, 2007). 

Problems may arise in the relationship with the 
therapist. For example, a patient who has poor social 
supports may come to view the therapeutic relationship 
as a substitute for relationships outside of the therapy. 
Because IPT focuses on relationships outside of the 
treatment, the therapist gently refocuses the patient to 
outside relationships. Whereas the therapist notes that 
the patient’s ability to connect within the treatment relationship 
reflects her ability to form intimate relationships, 
he/she clarifies that they are not friends or family 
and emphasizes the importance of the patient’s life outside 
of the treatment. The therapist helps the patient explore 
options for connecting with others in ways similar 
to the way she connected with the therapist (Weissman 
et al., 2000, 2007). 

Missed and late sessions are also considered to be 
symptomatic of depression. The therapist calls attention 
to and empathizes with the fact that the patient has 
missed or is late to a session, and notes that difficulty 

getting to sessions may reflect functioning that is characteristic 
of depression. It is likely that the patient is 
late to appointments outside of the therapy. The therapist 
can remind the patient of the time limit of IPT to 
motivate her to come to sessions. In the event that the 
patient misses or comes late to sessions because she 
is uncomfortable with the material being discussed in 
session, or because she has some other negative feeling 
about the treatment or the therapist, the therapist 
empathizes with the patient’s feelings and helps her to 
explore ways to express these feelings directly. 

When a patient is silent to the extent that it seems 
she refrains from sharing thoughts and feelings, or 
when she changes or avoids subjects, or has problems 
with self-disclosure, the therapist notes this behavior 
and explores the patient’s feelings related to the behavior. 
These behaviors are particularly problematic in a 
time-limited, focused treatment such as IPT because 
they make it difficult to work on the chosen problem 
area. The patient may feel uncomfortable and ashamed 
to share her thoughts and feelings with the therapist. 
The therapist assures the patient that there is little that 
can surprise him/her, and that she does not have to talk 
about everything. 

PreDictors of resPoNse 

Although there is strong evidence that IPT is an efficacious 
treatment for major depression and other 
disorders, there are fewer data on factors that predict 
response to IPT. Data from comparative treatment 
studies involving IPT suggest some clinical predictors 
of response. In the multisite National Institute of 
Mental Health Treatment of Depression Collaborative 
Research Program (NIMH TDCRP; Elkin et al., 1989), 
250 outpatients with major depression were randomly 
assigned to 16 weeks of imipramine (IMI), IPT, CBT, 
or placebo. The TDCRP dataset has been examined for 
predictors of response by several researchers. Sotsky 
and colleagues (1991) found that TDCRP subjects with 
low-baseline-level social dysfunction responded well to 
IPT, whereas those with interpersonal deficits responded 
less well. These findings support the discussion earlier 
in this chapter that IPT works least well for patients 
with few or no social contacts, who report no recent life 
events, and whose treatment, therefore, focuses on the 
IPT problem area of interpersonal deficits. High initial 
symptom severity and impaired functioning predicted 
superior response to IPT and to IMI compared to CBT 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

(Sotsky et al., 1991; Weissman et al., 2000). In another 
analysis, TDCRP subjects with symptoms of atypical 
depression, such as mood reactivity and reversed neurovegetative 
symptoms, responded better to IPT and 
CBT than to IMI or to placebo (Stewart, Garfinkel, 
Nunes, Donovan, & Klein, 1998). 

Barber and Muenz (1996) found that among patients 
who completed treatment in the TDCRP study, IPT had 
greater efficacy than CBT for patients with obsessive– 
compulsive personality disorder, whereas CBT was 
better for patients with avoidant personality disorder, 
as measured by the HDRS. However, another study 
examining the relationship between personality traits 
and outcome in the same dataset found no significant 
differences among personality traits (Blatt, Quinlan, 
Pilkonis, & Shea, 1995; Weissman et al., 2000). 

In another study, Thase and colleagues (1997) found 
that among 91 patients with depression, patients who 
had abnormal electroencephalographic (EEG) sleep 
profiles had significantly poorer response to IPT than 
did patients with normal profiles. In this study, unlike 
the Sotsky and colleagues (1991) study, symptom 
severity did not significantly predict response to IPT 
(Weissman et al., 2000). Additional potential predictors 
of response appear in the earlier section in this 
chapter describing the IPT patient Sara. 

coNclusioN 

IPT is a time-limited, diagnosis-targeted treatment 
with demonstrated efficacy for patients with major depression 
and other mood disorders. It has been adapted 
for the treatment of anxiety disorders, eating disorders, 
and, most recently, personality disorders. Although 
there is substantial evidence of IPT’s efficacy for the 
treatment major depression and other mood and psychiatric 
disorders, further evidence of predictors of response 
to IPT is warranted. This chapter has focused 
on the original IPT protocol: IPT as an individual treatment 
for major depression. 

IPT employs the medical model and focuses on current 
or recent life events, interpersonal difficulties, 
and symptoms. IPT emphasizes the interrelationship 
between mood and life events: Negative or stressful 
life events affect mood and, conversely, mood symptoms 
affect how people manage negative or stressful 
life events. Treatment with IPT focuses on one of four 
interpersonal problem areas—grief, role disputes, role 
transitions, and interpersonal deficits. The therapist 

helps patients recover from depression by relieving depressive 
symptoms and by helping them to resolve the 
chosen interpersonal problem area. The IPT therapist 
takes an active, optimistic, and supportive stance. 

The case of Sara demonstrates the techniques used 
and the process of treatment with IPT. IPT is an eclectic 
treatment with proven efficacy that uses techniques 
employed by other psychotherapies. The combination 
of IPT’s main principles, techniques, strategies, and 
therapist and patient characteristics distinguishes it 
from other antidepressant treatments. 

For further information about IPT and its adaptations, 
readers may consult the Comprehensive Guide 
to Interpersonal Psychotherapy by Weissman and colleagues 
(2000), the Clinician’s Quick Guide to Interpersonal 
Psychotherapy (2007), and the Casebook of 
Interpersonal Psychotherapy (Markowitz & Weissman, 
2012a). 

note 

1. For stylistic simplicity, patients are referred to in the feminine. 
Indeed, most depressed patients are women. 
referenCes 

American Psychiatric Association. (2000). Diagnostic and 
statistical manual of mental disorders (4th ed., text rev.). 
Washington, DC: Author. 

American Psychiatric Association. (2010). Practice guideline 
for the treatment of patients with major depressive 
disorder, third edition. American Journal of Psychiatry, 
167(Suppl.), S1–152. 

American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and 
Statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.). Arlington, 
VA: Author. 

Barber, J. P., & Muenz, L. R. (1996). The role of avoidance 
and obsessiveness in matching patients to cognitive and 
interpersonal psychotherapy: Empirical findings from the 
Treatment for Depression Collaborative Research Program. 
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 64, 
951–958. 

Beck, A. T., Steer, R. A., & Brown, G. K. (1996). Beck Depression 
Inventory manual (2nd ed.). San Antonio, TX: 
Psychological Corporation. 

Blatt, S. J., Quinlan, D. M., Pilkonis, P. A., & Shea, M. T. 
(1995). Impact of perfectionism and need for approval on 
the brief treatment of depression: The National Institute 
of Mental Health Collaborative Research Program revisited. 
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 63, 
125–132. 


Interpersonal Psychotherapy for Depression 

Blazer, D. G., II. (2000). Mood disorders epidemiology. In B. J. 
Sadock & V. A. Sadock (Eds.), Kaplan and Sadock’s comprehensive 
textbook of psychiatry (7th ed., Vol. 1, pp. 1298– 
1308). Philadelphia: Lippincott/Williams & Wilkins. 

Bleiberg, K. L. (2012). Interpersonal psychotherapy for peripartum 
depression. In J. C. Markowitz & M. M. Weissman 
(Eds.), Casebook of interpersonal therapy (pp. 224–242). 
New York: Oxford University Press. 

Bleiberg, K. L., & Markowitz, J. C. (2005). Interpersonal 
psychotherapy for posttraumatic stress disorder. American 
Journal of Psychiatry, 162, 181–183. 

Bleiberg, K. L., & Markowitz, J. C. (2007). Interpersonal 
psychotherapy and depression. In C. Freeman & M. Power 
(Eds.), Handbook of evidence-based psychotherapies: A 
guide for research and practice (pp. 41–60). Oxford, UK: 
Oxford University Press. 

Bowlby, J. (1973). Attachment and loss. New York: Basic 
Books. 

Cuijpers, P., Geraedts, A. S., van Oppen, P., Andersson, G., 
Markowitz, J. C., & van Straten, A. (2011). Interpersonal 
psychotherapy of depression: A meta-analysis. American 
Journal of Psychiatry, 168, 581–592. 

Elkin, I., Shea, M. T., Watkins, J. T., Imber, S. D., Sotsky, S. 
M., Collins, J. F., et al. (1989). National Institute of Mental 
Health Treatment of Depression Collaborative Research 
Program: General effectiveness of treatments. Archives of 
General of Psychiatry, 46, 971–982. 

Fairburn, C. G., Jones, R., Peveler, R. C., Hope, R. A., & 
O’Connor, M. (1993). Psychotherapy and bulimia nervosa: 
Longer-term effects of interpersonal psychotherapy, behavior 
therapy, and cognitive behavior therapy. Archives 
of General Psychiatry, 50, 419–428. 

Fairburn, C. G., Norman, P. A., Welch, S. L., O’Connor, M. 
E., Doll, H. A., & Peveler, R. C. (1995). A prospective 
study of outcome in bulimia nervosa and the long-term effects 
of three psychological treatments. Archives of General 
Psychiatry, 52, 304–312. 

Frank, E. (2005). Treating bipolar disorder: A clinician’s 
guide to interpersonal and social rhythm therapy. New 
York: Guilford Press. 

Frank, E., Kupfer, D. J., Buysse, D. J., Swartz, H. A., Pilkonis, 
P. A., Houck, P. R., et al. (2007). Randomized trial 
of weekly, twice-monthly, and monthly interpersonal psychotherapy 
as maintenance treatment for women with recurrent 
depression. American Journal of Psychiatry, 164, 
761–767. 

Frank, J. (1971). Therapeutic factors in psychotherapy. American 
Journal of Psychotherapy, 25, 350–361. 

Hamilton, M. (1960). A rating scale for depression. Journal 
of Neurology, Neurosurgery, and Psychiatry, 2, 56–62. 

Hill, C. E., O’Grady, K. E., & Elkin, I. (1992). Applying the 
Collaborative Study Psychotherapy Rating Scale to rate 
therapist adherence in cognitive-behavior therapy, interpersonal 
therapy, and clinical management. Journal of 
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 60, 73–79. 

Kessler, R. C., Berglund, P., Demler, O., Koretz, D., Merikangas, 
K. R., Rush, A. J., et al. (2003). The epidemiology 
of major depressive disorder: Results of the National 
Comorbidity Survey Replication (NCS-R). Journal of the 
American Medical Association, 289, 3095–3105. 

Klerman, G. L., Weissman, M. M., Rounsaville, B. J., & 
Chevron, E. S. (1984). Interpersonal psychotherapy of depression. 
New York: Basic Books. 

Lipsitz, J. D., Fyer, A. J., Markowitz, J. C., & Cherry, S. 
(1999). An open trial of interpersonal psychotherapy 
for social phobia. American Journal of Psychiatry, 156, 
1814–1816. 

Markowitz, J. C. (1998). Interpersonal psychotherapy for 
dysthymic disorder. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric 
Press. 

Markowitz, J. C., Klerman, G. L., Perry, S. W., Clougherty, 

K. F., & Mayers, A. (1992). Interpersonal therapy of depressed 
HIV-seropositive patients. Hospital and Community 
Psychiatry, 43, 885–890. 
Markowitz, J. C., Kocsis, J. H., Fishman, B., Spielman, L. 
A., Jacobsberg, L. B., Frances, A. J., et al. (1998). Treatment 
of HIV-positive patients with depressive symptoms. 
Archives of General Psychiatry, 55, 452–457. 

Markowitz, J. C., & Milrod, B. (2011). The importance of responding 
to negative affect in psychotherapies. American 
Journal of Psychiatry, 168, 124–128. 

Markowitz, J. C., Milrod, B., Bleiberg, K. L., & Marshall, 

R. D. (2009). Interpersonal factors in understanding and 
treating posttraumatic stress disorder. Journal of Psychiatric 
Practice, 15, 133–140. 
Markowitz, J. C., Skodol, A. E., & Bleiberg, K. (2006). Interpersonal 
psychotherapy for borderline personality disorder: 
Possible mechanisms of change. Journal of Clinical 
Psychology, 62, 431–444. 

Markowitz, J. C., Svartberg, M., & Swartz, H. A. (1998). Is 
IPT time-limited psychodynamic psychotherapy? Journal 
of Psychotherapy Practice and Research, 7, 185–195. 

Markowitz, J. C., & Weissman, M. M. (Eds.). (2012a). Casebook 
of interpersonal psychotherapy. New York: Oxford 
University Press. 

Markowitz, J. C., & Weissman, M. M. (2012b). IPT: Past, 
present, and future. Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy, 
19, 99–105. 

Meyer, A. (1957). Psychobiology: A science of man. Springfield, 
IL: Thomas. 

Mufson, L., Dorta, K. P., Wickramaratne, P., Nomura, Y., 
Olfson, M., & Weissman, M. M. (2004). A randomized 
effectiveness trial of interpersonal psychotherapy for depressed 
adolescents. Archives of General Psychiatry, 61, 
577–584. 

Mufson, L., Moreau, D., & Weissman, M. M. (1993). Interpersonal 
psychotherapy for depressed adolescents. New 
York: Guilford Press. 

Mufson, L., Weissman, M. M., Moreau, D., & Garfinkel, R. 
(1999). Efficacy of interpersonal psychotherapy for de



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

pressed adolescents. Archives of General Psychiatry, 56, 
573–579. 

Murray, C. L., & Lopez, A. D. (1996). The global burden 
of disease (Vol. 1). Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press. 

O’Hara, M. W., Stuart, S., Gorman, L. L., & Wenzel, A. 
(2000). Efficacy of interpersonal psychotherapy for postpartum 
depression. Archives of General Psychiatry, 57, 
1039–1045. 

Parsons, T. (1951). Illness and the role of the physician: A 
sociological perspective. American Journal of Orthopsychiatry, 
21, 452–460. 

Ransom, D., Heckman, T. G., Anderson, T., Garske, J., Holroyd, 
K., & Basta, T. (2008). Telephone-delivered interpersonal 
psychotherapy for HIV-infected rural persons 
with depression: A pilot trial. Psychiatric Services, 50, 
871–877. 

Reynolds, C. F., III, Dew, M. A., Martire, L. M., Miller, M. 
D., Cyranowski, J. M., Lenze, E., et al. (2010). Treating 
depression to remission in older adults: A controlled 
evaluation of combined escitalopram with interpersonal 
psychotherapy versus escitalopram with depression care 
management. International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 
25, 1134–1141. 

Reynolds, C. F., III, Dew, M. A., Pollock, B. G., Mulsant, B. 
H., Frank, E., Miller, M. D., et al. (2006). Maintenance 
treatment of major depression in old age. New England 
Journal of Medicine, 354, 1130–1138. 

Sholomskas, A. J., Chevron, E. S., Prusoff, B. A., & Berry, 

C. (1983). Short-term interpersonal therapy (IPT) with the 
depressed elderly: Case reports and discussion. American 
Journal of Psychotherapy, 36, 552–566. 
Sotsky, S. M., Glass, D. R., Shea, M. T., Pilkonis, P. A., Collins, 
J. F., Elkin, I., et al. (1991). Patient predictors of response 
to psychotherapy and pharmacotherapy: Findings 

in the NIMH Treatment Of Depression Collaborative Research 
Program. American Journal of Psychiatry, 148, 
997–1008. 

Spinelli, M., & Endicott, J. (2003). Controlled clinical trial 
of interpersonal psychotherapy versus parenting education 
program for depressed pregnant women. American Journal 
of Psychiatry, 160, 555–562. 

Stewart, J. W., Garfinkel, R., Nunes, E. V., Donovan, S., & 
Klein, D. F. (1998). Atypical features and treatment response 
in the National Institute of Mental Health Treatment 
of Depression Collaborative Research Program. Journal of 
Clinical Psychopharmacology, 18(6), 429–434. 

Sullivan, H. S. (1953). The interpersonal theory of psychiatry. 
New York: Norton. 

Thase, M. E., Buysse, D. J., Frank, E., Cherry, C. R., Cornes, 

C. L., Mallinger, A. G., et al. (1997). Which depressed patients 
will respond to interpersonal psychotherapy?: The 
role of abnormal EEG profiles. American Journal of Psychiatry, 
154, 502–509. 
Weissman, M. M., Markowitz, J. C., & Klerman, G. L. 
(2000). Comprehensive guide to interpersonal psychotherapy. 
New York: Basic Books. 

Weissman, M. M., Markowitz, J. C., & Klerman, G. L. 
(2007). Clinician’s quick guide to interpersonal psychotherapy. 
New York: Oxford University Press. 

Wilfley, D. E. (2008). Interpersonal psychotherapy for binge 
eating disorder (BED) therapist’s manual. Unpublished 
manuscript. 

Wilson, G. T., Wilfely, D. E., Agras, W. S., & Bryson, S. W. 
(2010). Psychological treatments of binge eating disorder. 
Archives of General Psychiatry, 67, 94–101. 

World Health Organization. (1992). The ICD-10 classification 
of mental and behavioral disorders: Clinical descriptions 
and diagnostic guidelines. Geneva, Switzerland: 
Author. 


CHaPter 

9 
Behavioral Activation for Depression 

soNa DiMiDJiaN 
christoPher r. Martell 
ruth herMaN‑DuNN 
saMuel huBley 

The behavioral activation (BA) approach to treating depression has received very strong 
empirical support in the past few years, with results as good or better than cognitive 
therapy and antidepressant medications, even for the most severe cases of depression. 
seemingly counterintuitive at first blush, this treatment does not focus on the notion of 
“just do it” but takes a comprehensive look at contingent relationships in the patient’s life 
across the full range of behavior, cognition, and affect that may be maintaining the depression. 
As such, this very idiographic approach does not prescribe a set number of sessions 
to accomplish certain goals but is very adaptable to the individual with depression. 
in the detailed and very human description of the treatment of “Mark,” readers will also 
note a very up‑to‑date focus on the role of rumination in depression (or worry in anxiety) 
as a fundamentally avoidant technique. The illustration of creative therapeutic strategies 
for activating patients, and the very adaptable and flexible nature of BA will be of interest 
to all therapists treating depression, since it may be one of the easiest to learn and most 
disseminable of evidence‑based psychological treatments for depression.—D. H. B. 

Behavioral activation (BA) is a structured, brief psychosocial 
approach that aims to alleviate depression 
and prevent future relapse by focusing directly on behavior 
change. BA is based on the premise that problems 
in vulnerable individuals’ lives, and their behavioral 
responses to such problems, reduce their ability 
to experience positive reward from their environment. 
The treatment aims to increase activation systematically 
in ways that help clients to experience greater contact 
with sources of reward in their lives and to solve 
life problems. The treatment procedures focus directly 
on activation, and on processes that inhibit activation, 
such as escape and avoidance behaviors and ruminative 
thinking, to increase experiences that are pleasurable 
or productive and improve life context. We believe that 

BA is an important new treatment for depression for 
two main reasons. First, its efficacy is supported by recent 
empirical research; second, it is based on simple 
and easily grasped underlying principles and utilizes a 
small set of straightforward procedures. 

Behavioral MoDels of DePressioN 

Basic Concepts 

The central premise in virtually all behavioral models 
is the assumption that depression is associated with particular 
behavior–environment relationships that evolve 
over time in a person’s life. “Behavior” is a very broad 

353 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

construct in these models and includes everything from 
taking a walk to grieving over the loss of a loved one. 
Behaviors can be fairly circumscribed (e.g., lying on 
the couch watching television after dinner) or they can 
be part of a more general repertoire (e.g., avoidance of 
asserting one’s own needs and desires in conflictual interactions). 


“Environment” is also a broad construct that can 
best be thought of as the settings in which behaviors 
currently occur, as well as those in which behaviors 
have evolved over time. The temporal nature of environments 
is crucial for understanding behavioral approaches 
to depression. Often, behavior that appears 
to serve no function in a person’s current environment 
has served a very important function in the past. Thus, 
when practitioners wonder why a depressed person is 
engaging in a particular set of behaviors, such as remaining 
in an unsatisfying job, it is often necessary to 
consider how particular repertoires (e.g., avoiding potential 
losses) have evolved over time. 

Finally, all behavioral models of depression emphasize 
the importance of contingent relationships between 
behaviors and the environments in which they occur. 
Contingent relationships are “if–then” relationships between 
human activities and their (often interpersonal) 
environmental consequences. For example, practitioners 
working within a behavioral framework are probably 
less interested in the fact that a depressed client 
stays in bed each morning worrying, for example, about 
the future of a troubled marriage, than they are about 
the consequences of this behavior. What happens as a 
result? Does the client become more or less depressed? 
By staying in bed, does the client avoid something aversive, 
such as confronting a spouse about an issue in the 
marriage, or going to work and facing a pile of uncompleted 
tasks? Understanding contingent relationships 
is a central feature of behavioral models of depression 
and a requisite skill of BA therapists. 

Behavioral Roots of BA 

These general behavioral concepts were developed 
and refined into specific conceptual frameworks and 
treatments for depression by both Ferster (1973, 1981) 
and Lewinsohn and colleagues (Lewinsohn, 1974; Lewinsohn, 
Antonuccio, Steinmetz-Breckenridge, & Teri, 
1984; Lewinsohn, Biglan, & Zeiss, 1976). Ferster’s primary 
assumption was that depression is the result of a 
learning history in which the actions of the individual 
do not result in positive reward from the environment, 

or in which the actions are reinforced because they 
allow the individual to escape from an aversive condition. 
Over time, behavior that would typically produce 
positive consequences ceases to do so. For example, for 
a variety of different reasons, a person’s efforts to form 
close relationships with others might gradually fade 
away because they are not followed by positive reinforcement 
(e.g., reciprocal efforts from others). 

Ferster (1973, 1981) reasoned that this decrease in 
response-contingent positive reinforcement produces 
two additional consequences that facilitate depression. 
First, when people’s efforts do not result in reward, they 
often become more focused on responding to their own 
internal state than to potential sources of positive reinforcement 
in the external environment. This is the classic 
“turning inward” that is often seen in depression, 
and that makes sense from a behavioral perspective; 
when individuals learn that their own behavior is an 
unreliable predictor of positive consequences in their 
environment, they naturally spend less time attending 
to contingencies in that environment. 

The second consequence of decreased rates of positive 
reinforcement that Ferster (1973, 1981) observed 
was a narrowing of individuals’ repertoire of adaptive 
behaviors. This makes logical sense as well because 
fewer and fewer behaviors are being maintained by 
positive reinforcement. Individuals may adopt extremely 
passive repertoires (e.g., “doing nothing”) because 
their active attempts to become engaged in life are not 
rewarded. 

Finally, Ferster (1973, 1981) observed that increases 
in aversive consequences following behavior typically 
lead depressed individuals to become preoccupied with 
escape and avoidance. In effect, more energy is expended 
attempting to avoid or escape from anticipated aversive 
consequences than attempting to contact potential 
positive reinforcers in the environment. 

Lewinsohn’s (1974) early behavioral model of depression 
was very compatible with many of the ideas 
proposed by Ferster’s (1973) behavioral analysis of depression. 
Lewinsohn and colleagues similarly emphasized 
the importance of response-contingent reinforcement 
and conceptualized that its rate was influenced 
by three factors: the number of potentially reinforcing 
events for an individual; the availability of reinforcement 
in the environment; and the instrumental behavior 
of the individual required to elicit the reinforcement. 
Lewinsohn also identified social avoidance as a 
core part of his model. Importantly, Lewinsohn, Sullivan, 
and Grosscup (1980) developed the first stand



Behavioral Activation for Depression 

alone behaviorally oriented treatment for depression. 
Later, Lewinsohn, Hoberman, Teri, and Hautzinger 
(1985) proposed an integrated model that was intended 
to explain the interactive and complex nature of depression, 
including dispositional factors such as cognition, 
with environmental factors. This model did not overemphasize 
or give precedence to either cognitive factors 
or environmental factors in the etiology and maintenance 
of depression; rather it attempted to account 
for the complexity of depression. Research initiated 
in Lewinsohn’s laboratory has continued through the 
work of former students and colleagues across diverse 
settings and populations (Dimidjian, Barrera, Martell, 
Muñoz, & Lewinsohn, 2011). 

Beck, Rush, Shaw, and Emery (1979) also pioneered 
early work on BA. Incorporating BA strategies as a 
core component of cognitive therapy (CT) for depression, 
Beck and colleagues formalized and widely disseminated 
some of the principal BA strategies utilized 
within a larger framework emphasizing the importance 
of cognition in etiology and treatment of depression. 

Contemporary BA 

The work of Ferster, Lewinsohn, and Beck strongly 
influenced the development of contemporary BA in 
important ways. They were a direct influence on Jacobson 
and colleagues’ initial research and clinical development 
of BA (Jacobson, Martell, & Dimidjian, 2001; 
Martell, Addis, & Jacobson, 2001; Martell, Dimidjian, 
& Herman-Dunn, 2010). Their work similarly formed 
the context of other investigators, such as the team of 
Lejuez, Hopko, LePage, Hopko, and McNeil (2001; 
Lejuez, Hopko, Acierno, Daughters, & Pagoto, 2011), 
who articulated a BA approach that is convergent in 
both theory and clinical emphasis on targeting behavior 
change. This approach, BA treatment for depression, 
has been supported in multiple studies by their 
group (e.g., Hopko, Lejuez, LePage, Hopko, & McNeil, 
2003). 

With respect to a conceptual model of depression, 
the current conceptualization draws heavily on the 
work of Ferster (1973, 1981) and Lewinsohn (1974) 
in emphasizing the central importance of context and 
activity in understanding depression. While acknowledging 
that genetic, biological, and other distal factors 
may be causally related to depression, the current behavioral 
conceptualization focuses on the aspects of a 
person’s life context that may have triggered depression, 
and particular ways of responding to this context 

that may be maintaining depression. Specifically, the 
model assumes that one reason people get depressed 
is because changes in the context of their lives provide 
low levels of positive reinforcement and high levels of 
aversive control. Lives that are “less rewarding” can 
lead to feelings of sadness and depressed mood. And 
when people get depressed, they often pull away from 
the world in important ways, and the basic routines 
of their lives become easily disrupted. Both of these 
processes can increase depressed mood and make it 
difficult to solve problems effectively in one’s life. In 
fact, these processes are conceptualized as “secondary 
problem behaviors,” because they frequently prevent 
people from (1) connecting with aspects of their lives 
that may provide some improvement in mood and (2) 
solving problems that may help to decrease stress and 
improve life context. 

The BA approach to therapy addresses both of the 
factors that may be contributing to depression: those 
aspects of one’s life that need to be changed to reduce 
depression and the ways withdrawal from the world 
may be maintaining or increasing depression. BA accomplishes 
these aims through “guided activation,” 
which is the use of a series of behavior change strategies 
that the therapist and client develop together on the 
basis of a careful examination of what activities will 
be reinforcing for a given client and help to disrupt the 
relationships that are maintaining the depression. The 
point of BA is not to engage in increased activation at 
random or activities that are “generally” thought to be 
pleasing or to improve mood (e.g., seeing a movie); in 
contrast, activation strategies are highly individualized 
and “custom tailored.” The role of the BA therapist is to 
act as a “coach” while the client implements the activation 
strategies, providing expert help in setting achievable 
goals, breaking difficult tasks down into manageable 
units, troubleshooting problems that arise, and 
maintaining motivation during the process of change. 

eMPirical coNtext 

The first study to revitalize interest in a purely behavioral 
approach to treating depression was conducted 
by Jacobson and colleagues (1996), who proposed a 
simple but provocative question: Could the behavioral 
component of CT account for the efficacy that CT has 
demonstrated in previous clinical trials? Adults with 
major depression were randomly assigned to one of 
three treatment conditions, including BA only, BA plus 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

interventions designed to modify automatic thoughts, 
and the full CT package. Results suggested that BA was 
comparable to the full CT package in both acute efficacy 
(Jacobson et al., 1996) and prevention of relapse over 
a 2-year follow-up period (Gortner, Gollan, Dobson, & 
Jacobson, 1998). 

On the basis of these findings, BA was developed 
into a more fully articulated behavioral intervention 
that included the behavioral aspects of CT and incorporated 
the early behavioral work of Ferster (1973, 
1981) and Lewinsohn (1974), as described earlier. 
This expanded BA model has been articulated in published 
reports (Jacobson et al., 2001; Martell et al., 
2001, 2010) and in a patient-oriented self-help manual 
(Addis & Martell, 2004). BA was further tested in a 
large, randomized, placebo-controlled clinical trial that 
compared its acute and long-term efficacy to both CT 
and antidepressant medication (ADM). Two hundred 
forty-one patients were randomly assigned to BA, CT, 
ADM, or pill-placebo, and severity was used as a stratification 
variable during randomization. The findings 
suggested that BA is a particularly promising treatment 
for depression (Dimidjian et al., 2006). Among 
more severely depressed patients, its performance was 
comparable to the current standard of care, ADM, and 
demonstrated better retention. Both BA and ADM 
were superior to CT among more severely depressed 
patients. Moreover, follow-up results indicate that BA 
appears to have promising enduring effects (Dobson et 
al., 2008). Finally, BA may demonstrate an important 
cost-effectiveness advantage compared to continuing 
patients on medication. 

These results were consistent with a range of other 
studies suggesting that activation interventions are particularly 
important components of cognitive-behavioral 
treatments. In a classic study, Zeiss, Lewinsohn, and 
Muñoz (1979) reported comparable outcomes for depressed 
patients who received treatment focused on 
interpersonal skills, pleasant activities, or cognitive 
change. In addition, in a study with depressed older 
adults, Scogin, Jamison, and Gochneaur (1989) found 
no differences in outcome between a cognitive bibliotherapy 
treatment and a behavioral bibliotherapy treatment 
among mildly and moderately depressed older 
adults. The importance of behavioral strategies has 
also been reported in other studies across multiple diagnostic 
categories (e.g., Borkovec, Newman, Pincus, 
& Lytle, 2002; Foa, Rothbaum, & Furr, 2003; Gloaguen, 
Cottraux, Cucherat, & Blackburn, 1998). Other 
process-oriented research has similarly emphasized the 

importance of BA components of CT (Bennett-Levy et 
al., 2004) and has suggested the possibility of negative 
outcomes when therapists work on changing clients’ 
thoughts about interpersonal relationships as opposed 
to changing actual interpersonal relationships (Hayes, 
Castonguay, & Goldfried, 1996). 

In addition, Ferster’s early focus on avoidance has 
also been underscored by contemporary behavior 
therapists. Specifically, Linehan (1993) incorporated 
the use of “opposite action” for sadness as a means to 
target depression in dialectical behavior therapy. And 
Hayes and colleagues (1996) have emphasized the role 
of experiential avoidance in the development of a wide 
range of psychopathologies and in the conceptualization 
of acceptance and commitment therapy (ACT; 
Hayes, Strosahl, & Wilson, 1999). A study on an early 
precursor to ACT found significant treatment benefits 
for depressed clients in comparison to standard CT 
(Zettle & Rains, 1989). 

Some preliminary studies also suggest that patient 
activation is an important element of the change process. 
In a substance use treatment study in which one 
condition was augmented with BA interventions, pre- to 
posttreatment increases in environmental reward were 
associated with reductions in depressive and anxiety 
symptoms for such patients, but not for those receiving 
substance use treatment only (Daughters et al., 2008). 
In a study of cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) for 
depression, increases from baseline in activation predicted 
posttreatment depression improvement (Christopher, 
Jacob, Neuhaus, Neary, & Fiola, 2009). 

Recent enthusiasm for BA is fueled in large part by 
the broad dissemination potential of a straightforward, 
parsimonious intervention such as BA. The application 
of BA in novel settings and with diverse populations 
is a focus of much recent research (see below for detailed 
discussion of settings and client variables). Technology 
is playing an increasingly important role in the 
expansion of BA. Teletherapy over the phone and with 
videoconferencing technology has been shown to be effective 
for adolescent and late-life depression (Lazzari, 
Egan, & Rees, 2011; Quijano et al., 2007) as well as 
computerized adaptations of BA delivered via the Internet 
(Spates, Kalata, Ozeki, Stanton, & Peters, 2012; 
Spek et al., 2007, 2008; Van Voorhees et al., 2009; 
Warmerdam, Van Straten, Twisk, Riper, & Cuijpers, 
2008). Finally, novel training methods are also being 
enhanced with technology. Based on pilot data from a 
preliminary computerized BA training program (Hubley, 
Woodcock, Dimeff, & Dimidjian, in press), our 


Behavioral Activation for Depression 

group is currently testing a fully developed computerassisted 
therapy program to train therapists in BA. 

In summary, research on BA provides a strong foundation 
for clinical application with depressed patients 
and for extension to novel populations (Dimidjian et 
al., 2011). These conclusions are consistent with other 
meta-analyses that incorporate clinical trial data from 
over 30 studies (Cuijpers, van Straten, & Warmerdam, 
2007; Ekers, Richards, & Gilbody, 2007; Mazzucchelli, 
Kane, & Rees, 2009) and with influential treatment 
guidelines (e.g., National Institute of Health and Clinical 
Excellence, 2009). 

assessiNG DiaGNostic, cliNical, 
aND fuNctioNal DoMaiNs 

The application of BA is based on a comprehensive diagnostic, 
clinical, and functional assessment. Some of 
these assessment activities are completed as a precursor 
to the initiation of therapy, and others are ongoing 
throughout the course of therapy. 

In our treatment outcome research, we have used a 
number of structured diagnostic interview instruments 
to assess Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental 
Disorders (DSM) diagnoses, including the Structured 
Clinical Interview for DSM-IV Axis I Disorders 
(SCID-I; First, Spitzer, Gibbon, & Williams, 1997), 
and the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV 
Axis II Personality Disorders (SCID-II; First, Spitzer, 
Gibbons, Williams, & Benjamin, 1996). In addition, 
we have used measures of depressive severity, including 
the clinician-administered Hamilton Depression 
Rating Scale (HDRS; Hamilton, 1960), the client 
self-reported Beck Depression Inventory–II (BDI-II; 
Beck, Steer, & Brown, 1996), and the nine-item Patient 
Health Questionnaire Depression Scale (PHQ-9; 
Kroenke, Spitzer, & Williams, 2001). 

In routine clinical practice, we recommend conducting 
a baseline diagnostic interview (although it can 
be administered using a less structured format than 
a research-based interview), and the ongoing use of 
a measure to assess depressive severity is important. 
Typically, the most easily administered measure is a 
self-report measure (e.g., BDI-II; Beck et al., 1996). 
Also, a number of self-report instruments may serve as 
useful assessment measures of patient activity level and 
of the reward available in a client’s environment. The 
Behavioral Activation for Depression Scale (BADS; 
Kanter, Mulick, Busch, Berlin, & Martell, 2007; Kant


er, Rusch, Busch, & Sedivy, 2009), a 29-item measure 
of client activation, has been used in several studies 
(e.g., Weinstock, Munroe, & Miller, 2011) to measure 
changes in levels of activation and avoidance over the 
course of BA. The BADS has been validated in European 
Spanish (Barraca, Pérez-Álvarez, & Lozano 
Bleda, 2011), Persian (Mohammadi & Amiri, 2010), 
and Dutch (Raes, Hoes, Van Gucht, & Kanter, 2010). A 
recently developed nine-item short form of the BADS 
demonstrated improved psychometric properties compared 
to the original, and good internal consistency 
and predictive validity in the validation study (Manos, 
Kanter, & Luo, 2011). 

In addition, self-report questionnaires have been 
developed to measure the construct of responsecontingent 
positive reinforcement, including the 
Environmental Reward Observation Scale (EROS; 
Armento & Hopko, 2007) and the Reward Probability 
Index (RPI; Carvalho et al., 2010). Both of these 
measures are brief, and initial psychometric studies 
indicate promising psychometric properties. Clinicians 
who want a nomothetic measure of pleasurable activities 
to augment the idiographic behavioral assessment 
(described in more detail below) can use the Pleasant 
Events Schedule (Lewinsohn & Graf, 1973). These 
measures may prove to be useful clinical tools that can 
be administered periodically throughout the course of 
treatment to assess change in activity and reward. For a 
full discussion of measures available and issues related 
to measuring the BA model, see Manos, Kanter, and 
Busch (2010). 

Because functional capacity is such a key component 
of BA treatment, it is important to gather detailed information 
about the impact of the client’s depression on 
functional status across multiple life domains, including 
work, family, social activity, and so forth. These 
domains can be assessed using clinical interview or 
standard assessment instruments (e.g., the Social Adjustment 
Scale [Weissman & Bothwell, 1976] and the 
Medical Outcomes Study 36-Item Short Form Health 
Survey [Ware & Sherbourne, 1992]). 

course of treatMeNt 

BA is a theory-driven as opposed to a protocol-driven 
treatment and, as such, is highly idiographic in its application. 
Treatment does not follow a required sessionby-
session format; however, it does follow a general 
course over time. This general course comprises the 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

following activities, which are described in greater detail 
below: 

•• 
Orienting to treatment 

•• 
Developing treatment goals 

•• 
Individualizing activation and engagement targets 

•• 
Repeatedly applying and troubleshooting activa


tion and engagement strategies 

•• 
Reviewing and consolidating treatment gains 

Orienting to Treatment 

BA begins with orienting the client to the treatment, a 
process that is typically the focus of the first two sessions. 
The primary tasks to accomplish during this 
initial phase of treatment include discussing the BA 
model of depression and primary treatment strategies, 
and providing information about the structure of treatment, 
and the roles and responsibilities of the client and 
therapist. 

The presentation of the treatment model includes 
describing the behavioral approach to depression and 
the process of change during treatment, discussing the 
specific ways the model fits with the client’s experiences, 
and encouraging and responding to questions and 
concerns about the model. The model is presented both 

verbally during the first session and in a brief, written 
description that is given to the client at the end of the 
first session. In addition, many clients find the illustration 
provided in Figure 9.1 to be a helpful adjunct when 
orienting to the model. A detailed transcript illustrating 
the presentation of the treatment rationale is included in 
the case study below, and the key points to address are 
summarized in Table 9.1. 

During the second session, therapist and client again 
discuss the treatment model and the client’s reactions, 
including questions that may have arisen following the 
first session. It is essential that the therapist obtain “buy 
in” from the client with the basic elements of the treatment 
model. Therapy works best if the client accepts 
and buys into the rationale for treatment and the case 
conceptualization (Addis & Carpenter, 2000). The 
therapist is advised to guard against moving too quickly 
if the client does not express agreement with the key 
tenets of the model. Thus, during the initial sessions, 
it is essential that the therapist encourage the client to 
ask questions and elicit the client’s potential doubts and 
concerns. 

For instance, some clients may find it difficult to accept 
the idea that changing behavior directly is an effective 
way to work with depression. Often, clients are 
strongly committed to a biological explanation for their 


What is the context? How do you feel? What do you do (or not do)? 


Have any problems started, continued, or worsened? 

figUre 9.1. The behavioral activation treatment model. 


Behavioral Activation for Depression 

table 9.1. 10 key Points to address 
when Presenting the treatment Model 

1. Behavioral activation is based on the idea that the 
events in your life and how you respond to such events 
influence how you feel. 
2. BA assumes that one reason people get depressed is that 
their lives are providing too few rewards and too many 
problems. Sometimes it is possible to identify easily 
stressors or problems; other times there are no clearly 
identifiable stressors but there is still not adequate 
reward from the environment. 
3. When one’s life context is difficult, it is common to 
experience feeling sad, down, discouraged, anxious, 
fatigued, drained, and so forth. 
4. When feeling these ways, it is also common to do (or 
not do) particular actions. People often pull away from 
the world around them and find that basic routines in 
their lives become disrupted. 
5. Pulling away from the world when feeling down is 
natural and understandable. The problem is that it also 
can initiate downward spirals with how you feel (e.g., 
the less you do, the worse you feel, and the worse you 
feel, the less you do). 
6. Acting (or not acting) in such ways also can maintain 
depression by making it hard to solve life problems 
effectively; this initiates another downward spiral in 
which what you do or don’t do makes the context of life 
harder or keeps you from improving it. 
7. In this treatment, we will work together to focus on 
specific things you can do to help shift these downward 
spirals and help you become more active and engaged in 
your life. 
8. BA is not just about “doing more.” If feeling better were 
that easy, you would have already done it. We can work 
together to identify the activities that would be most 
helpful and the small and manageable steps you can 
take to get started. You can think of me as a your coach 
or a consultant in the process of change. 
9. Each session will involve developing practical and 
do-able steps to engage in activities that improve mood 
and to solve specific life problems. Between sessions, 
you will work on homework assignments that we 
develop together; these assignments are an essential part 
of therapy and will focus on re-connecting or building 
parts of your life that increase feelings of pleasure or 
accomplishment and bring you closer to important life 
goals. 
10. Activating and engaging in specific ways can help 
you experience more reward and effectively solve life 
problems. When you are active, engaged, and solving 
problems effectively, it is likely that you will be moving 
toward important life goals and feeling better. 
depression. It is not advisable for therapists to debate 
this position; instead, therapists can explain that there 
are many sources of vulnerability to depression, and 
that one of the effective ways to change depression is 
by changing what one does. At times, clients also may 
think that the emphasis on behavioral change means that 
all they need to do is exercise more, go to a few more 
movies, or take a few more walks, and their depression 
will remit. If clients understand BA in this way, then it 
is not surprising when they feel that the treatment invalidates 
their degree of distress and the difficulty they 
face in overcoming depression. We often find it helpful 
to talk to clients about two points. First, behavior can 
have a powerful effect on our moods, and people are 
often unaware of this link, particularly when they are 
depressed. For example, subtly shifting the way someone 
approaches interactions with family members may 
not rid that person of depression, but it can reduce the 
severity of depressed mood, thereby setting the stage 
for other changes that collectively help to reverse the 
depression. The second point is that behavior change is 
not easy; if it were, we would all behave exactly as we 
think we should all the time (and we know this is not 
the case!). Changing behavior requires knowing what 
to change, and this can take some serious and sustained 
“detective work” in therapy. The therapist can again 
emphasize his/her role as a coach in helping the client 
to figure out what to change and how to do it. 

In addition to presenting and discussing the treatment 
model, it is also important to discuss thoroughly 
the structure of treatment and the roles of therapist and 
client. It is necessary to emphasize three key elements: 
between-session practice, collaboration, and the structure 
of sessions. 

1. It is important early in treatment to highlight the 
active nature of BA and establish the importance of 
between-session practice. The therapist sets the tone of 
therapy and expectations by highlighting that BA is a 
very action-oriented and problem-focused treatment in 
which the majority of the “work” of therapy goes on 
between sessions, as the client implements plans that 
therapist and client devise in session. Subsequent sessions 
examine what the client has learned, highlight 
relevant consequences of activities, and identify barriers 
and troubleshoot to maximize the likelihood of success 
on future attempts. The assignment of homework 
begins in the very first session, when the therapist asks 
the client to read the brief pamphlet that reviews the 
key ideas of the BA approach (see Martell et al., 2001). 

CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

2. It also is important to emphasize that BA is a collaborative 
approach to therapy, in which therapist and 
client work together in the service of the client’s goals. 
3. It is also helpful to orient clients to the structured 
nature of each treatment session. Although the specific 
foci of each session vary across clients and across time, 
each session nonetheless follows a similar general outline. 
Specifically, as in cognitive therapy for depression 
(Beck et al., 1979), each session begins with therapist 
and client setting an agenda in a collaborative fashion. 
The aim of the agenda is to organize the time effectively 
and to ensure that sessions address the client’s most 
important topics and have maximal likelihood of helping 
the client reach key goals. Because the goal of treatment 
is activation, the more control given to the client 
in setting the agenda, the better. In addition, given the 
integral role of homework in BA, the majority of each 
session is devoted to reviewing homework from the 
previous session and assigning homework for the next 
session. The ending of each session includes asking the 
client to reiterate a “take-home message” from the session, 
verifying that the client has a clear understanding 
of the assigned homework, and reviewing the time for 
the next scheduled session and methods to reach the 
therapist, if needed, in the interim. 
In attending to each of these specific tasks, the therapist 
establishes his/her credibility as an expert who can 
help the client and conveys a sense of hope. By establishing 
at the outset of treatment a strong foundation of 
collaboration, client and therapist can begin working 
together toward the client’s goals. 

Developing Treatment Goals 

The ultimate goal of BA is to help clients modify their 
behavior to increase contact with sources of positive 
reinforcement in their lives. Typically, this process 
involves first addressing basic avoidance patterns and 
areas of routine disruption and, second, addressing 
short- and long-term goals. A good deal of the therapist’s 
time in BA is spent helping clients to increase 
awareness of their escape and avoidance repertoires 
and to practice active coping responses. Often, part of 
this process also involves changing basic routines (e.g., 
sleeping, eating, and social contact). Thus, short-term 
goals are set to specify concrete accomplishments that 
can help clients shift their life situations in a less depressing 
direction. Often, therapists are uncertain about 

how to sequence treatment targets; generally, we focus 
initially on behavior change that has the greatest likelihood 
of success, which may be based on ease of accomplishment 
or level of importance to client values and 
priorities. Common examples might include getting the 
house cleaned, spending time with friends and family, 
making headway on a large pile of paperwork on which 
the client has procrastinated, exercising more frequently, 
and so on. Often, behaviors necessary for progress 
on short-term goals can be scheduled and structured in 
such a way that they substitute for maladaptive avoidant 
or withdrawal responses. A therapist works with a 
client to make progress on short-term goals regardless 
of how the client is feeling. In other words, one of the 
therapist’s primary goals is to help the client change the 
pattern of having his/her behavior governed by mood. 
Rather, the objective is to make progress on goals regardless 
of how one feels at a particular point in time, 
under the assumption that progress on life goals is itself 
antidepressive. This is a crucial point because clients 
often judge the success of a particular behavior change 
based on how it makes them feel in the moment. Thus, 
it is important for therapists to remain mindful of the 
consequence of different behaviors specifically with 
respect to whether they help clients move toward or 
achieve treatment goals. 

Once the short-term goals relating to avoidance, 
withdrawal, and routine disruption have been addressed, 
clients are assisted in addressing larger life 
circumstances that may be related to depression. Larger 
life goals are those shifts that take time to accomplish 
but have the potential to alter a person’s life situation in 
substantial ways. Common examples include finding a 
new job, getting out of a distressing relationship, starting 
a new relationship, or moving to a new city or town. 
BA can be helpful in teaching and encouraging clients 
to continue to make progress toward these goals even 
though their actual realization may take some time 
to accomplish. Essentially, in BA, clients learn basic 
change strategies that can be used to accomplish shortterm 
and larger life goals. 

Individualizing Activation 
and Engagement Targets 

No two people are the same, and no person is exactly the 
same from situation to situation. In the context of treating 
depression, this means that the particular activation 
strategies that work for one person may not work for 
another, and they may work for the same person some



Behavioral Activation for Depression 

times, but not always. Whether activity–environment 
transactions shift someone’s mood in a positive or negative 
direction is an empirical question, and one that 
requires careful attention and assessment to answer. 
Much of the skill of doing competent BA relies on just 
this kind of careful examination. In BA, this process is 
referred to as “functional analysis,” which is the key to 
individualizing activation targets and the heart of BA. 
Functional analysis involves identifying for each client 
the variables that maintain the depression and are 
most amenable to change. This understanding forms 
the basis of the case conceptualization and guides the 
idiographic application of specific activation strategies. 
In general, the therapist must engage the client in a detailed 
examination of the following: 

•• 
What is maintaining the depression? 
•• 
What is getting in the way of engaging in and enjoying 
life? 
•• 
What behaviors are good candidates for maximizing 
change? 

This process sounds simple, yet in practice, it can be 
complicated given that we all frequently lack awareness 
of the contingencies that control our behavior. 
Given this reality, early in treatment, we talk explicitly 
about the goal (and the challenge!) of identifying these 
relationships. 

Two key steps are involved in identifying the contingencies 
that control behavior. First, therapist and client 
must clearly and specifically define the behavior of 
interest; this includes defining the frequency, duration, 
intensity, and setting of the behavior. The behaviors of 
greatest interest are those most closely tied to changes 
in mood. For clients who are familiar with antidepressant 
treatment, we often explain that we want to identify 
the ingredients of a behavioral antidepressant that 
works for them. In order to do so, we need to define 
specifically the activities that maintain depression (e.g., 
“down activities”) and those that improve mood and 
functioning (e.g., “up activities”). For instance, for one 
client, difficulty completing basic household tasks was 
maintaining and exacerbating his experience of depression. 
It was important to specify the problems of (1) 
filling and closing bags of household trash, then leaving 
them in the pantry room rather than taking them 
to the dumpster behind the house for the past 6 weeks, 
and (2) receiving bills in the mail and placing them unopened 
in a file drawer for the past 4 months. Treatment 
with this client began with a series of graded tasks to 

accomplish the goal of taking out the trash. This was 
identified specifically as a potential “up” activity (even 
though it was, admittedly, not a pleasurable one) and 
selected as an initial focus because therapist and client 
decided it was more easily accomplished than addressing 
the bills, which the client experienced as more 
overwhelming. 

Second, therapist and client can begin to identify the 
antecedents and consequences of the behavior, with 
the goal of specifying variables that elicit or reinforce 
depression. In terms of the BA model, this is parallel 
to identifying the links between context and mood, 
between action and mood, and the downward spirals 
that can maintain depression over time. Understanding 
basic behavioral principles can often be of great 
value in identifying these contingent relationships. 
What does this mean in practical terms? For depressed 
clients, a number of contingent relationships are often 
observed. As we discussed earlier, negative reinforcement 
contingencies are often pervasive. “Negative reinforcement” 
means that the likelihood of a behavior 
occurring is increased by the removal of something 
from the environment, typically an aversive condition. 
Negative reinforcement contingencies can be a 
very adaptive part of human behavior. For instance, 
putting on a warm coat to avoid getting cold, stopping 
at stop signs to avoid getting in accidents, and being 
extra nice to a parent after crashing the car to avoid 
being punished are all examples of ways that negative 
reinforcement can serve one well. Unfortunately, 
however, when an individual becomes depressed, his/ 
her behavioral repertoires can become dominated by 
escape and avoidance behaviors that temporarily allow 
a person to escape from painful feelings or difficult 
interpersonal situations. In this way, many avoidant 
and escape behaviors may be understood as secondary 
coping responses—efforts to cope with the experience 
of depression that, unfortunately, make it worse. 
For example, a person might attempt to escape from 
feelings of hopelessness and fatigue by taking a long 
nap in the middle of the afternoon. This might, as a 
consequence, temporarily remove the person from an 
aversive context, but it can also prevent him/her from 
taking the steps necessary to shift into a less depressive 
context overall (exercising, applying for jobs, 
cleaning the house, etc.). Substance abuse, excessive 
sleeping, watching too much television, and general 
inactivity are all common examples of secondary coping 
responses that can be maintained by negative reinforcement. 
These types of negative reinforcement 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

contingencies are often central in preventing people 
from coming into contact with potentially reinforcing 
environments that contribute to leading a more adaptive 
and engaged life. Careful assessment is required to 
identify whether and how specific negative reinforcement 
contingencies are active in a client’s life. Positive 
reinforcement contingencies may also be problematic 
for clients. In these cases, the likelihood of a behavior 
is increased because it is contingently associated with 
positive consequences. For instance, going to bed early 
may be positively reinforced by family members offering 
empathy and support. Some behaviors, such as 
overeating and substance abuse, can also provide immediate 
positive reinforcement but detract from longterm 
goals, thereby maintaining the depression. 

How do we conduct functional analyses in BA? 
There exist two primary supports for the BA therapist 
doing functional analyses: the BA model and activity 
monitoring. First, the BA model used to orient clients 
at the outset of treatment can be used throughout treatment 
to guide assessment of specific events that arise in 
a client’s life to help identify key links between activity 
and mood. For example, if a client begins to talk in 
session about feeling troubled by a difficult interaction 
with her son, the therapist can suggest that they use the 
model to understand the components of the interaction. 
Together, they can discuss and write down specifically 
what happened (e.g., “My son said that he was failing 
math”), how the client felt (e.g., “I felt sad about how 
hard our lives always seem to be and afraid that he 
would not graduate”), and what the client did (e.g., “I 
left dinner, went to my room, and thought about how 
I’m failing as a parent”). These components can then 
be linked to identify the downward spiral that maintains 
negative mood (e.g., isolating and ruminating increases 
anxiety and sadness) and the downward spiral 
that prohibits effective problem solving (e.g., “I didn’t 
talk directly with him, and he got angry, went out with 
his friends, and didn’t come home until the middle of 
the night”). This process of assessment helps to identify 
targets of activation for that difficult event (e.g., 
generate and practice alternatives to leaving the interaction 
and ruminating; identify and implement steps to 
solving the problem of her son’s poor performance in 
math). Repeated application of the model in sessions 
and for use as homework between sessions also will 
help therapist and client identify patterns of maladaptive 
actions over time and place. Finally, repeated use 
of the model in such ways teaches the client a method 
to guide his/her actions long after therapy has ended. 

Second, activity monitoring in the context of daily 
life is the heart of the assessment process in BA. 
Through detailed and ongoing activity monitoring that 
the client completes between sessions, therapist and client 
can work together to develop an understanding of 
the questions listed earlier. Given the role of activity 
monitoring, it is important early in treatment for the 
therapist to set the stage to explain clearly how to do it, 
defining both what to monitor and when to do it. Also, 
therapists must carefully and skillfully review monitoring 
tasks to reinforce the client’s efforts to begin developing 
activation and engagement assignments. 

Therapists may elect to use a number of different 
formats for activity monitoring, the most basic form of 
which includes recording both an activity and a mood 
rating for each hour of the client’s waking day. Therapists 
also may elect to have clients monitor mastery 
(sense of accomplishment) or pleasure (enjoyment) associated 
with specific activities. Generally, we advise 
clients to record enough information about activities 
that we can begin to identify links between what they 
were doing and how they were feeling, but not so much 
information that the task is overly burdensome. It also 
is helpful to identify at what intervals during the day 
the client will write down the observations (e.g., morning, 
lunch, dinner, before bed). If recording for each 
hour is too taxing for a client, time sampling procedures 
may also be used. In such a procedure, client and 
therapist agree on a specified number of hours when 
activities will be monitored during the week between 
sessions. Time sampling procedures need to include a 
variety of situations in which the client functions during 
the week. In general, therapists will want to encourage 
clients to complete entries at regular intervals 
throughout the day and are advised to work with clients 
to develop plans for recording that take advantage of 
natural cues and rhythms in their lives to facilitate such 
regular recording. 

Therapists can provide clients with a simple weekly 
Activity Record for monitoring assignments (e.g., see 
Figure 9.2). However, as is often emphasized in BA, 
the function of the behavior is more important than 
its form; thus, clients may eschew monitoring on an 
Activity Record but be comfortable using personal 
calendars, smartphones, or other idiosyncratic recording 
methods. Adapting the monitoring assignment to a 
form that is compatible with the client’s normal daily 
routine is highly encouraged. For instance, clients who 
spend a lot of time in their car may keep their records 
above the visor; others may find it helpful to keep it 


Behavioral Activation for Depression 

Instructions: Record your activity for each hour of the day, and record a mood rating associated with each activity. Use 
the scale below with the anchors that you and your therapist develop to guide your mood rating. Aim to make entries 
on your Activity Record at least every 3–4 hours each day. 
Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday Saturday Sunday 
5–6 
6–7 
7–8 
8–9 
9–10 
10–11 
11–12 
12–1 
1–2 
2–3 
3–4 
4–5 
5–6 
6–7 
7–8 
8–9 
9–10 
10–11 
11–12 
12–1 
1–2 
2–3 
3–4 
4–5 

Mood Ratings: 0: Description, with examples of associated activities: 

5: Description, with examples of associated activities: 
10: Description, with examples of associated activities: 
figUre 9.2. Activity Record (hourly). 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

taped to the refrigerator or bathroom mirror; still others 
find it useful to carry it with them in a pocket, purse, 
backpack, or briefcase. 

When a client has completed an activity monitoring 
assignment, it is essential for the therapist to review it 
in detail. Failing to review activity monitoring records 
may mean missed opportunities to reinforce the client’s 
behavior and to develop the case conceptualization. 
Much of competent BA lies in skillfully reviewing a 
completed Activity Record. What does the competent 
therapist attend to when reviewing the records? In general, 
the therapist will want to keep the case conceptualization 
questions listed earlier in the forefront of his/ 
her mind when reviewing a completed activity log. The 
therapist reviews the Activity Record to understand 
the client’s activities, routines, and life context, and to 
begin to identify patterns that may be maintaining or 
exacerbating depressed mood. 

Specific questions that therapists can use to guide 
their review of activity schedules are listed below: 

•• 
What would the client be doing if he/she were not 

depressed (working, managing family responsi


bilities, exercising, socializing, engaging in leisure 

activities, eating, sleeping, etc.)? 

•• 
Is the client engaging in a wide variety of activi


ties, or have his/her activities become narrow? 

•• 
What is the relationship between specific activities 

and mood? 

•• 
What is the relationship between specific life con


texts/problems and mood? 

•• 
In what ways are avoidance and withdrawal main


taining or exacerbating depression? What does the 

client avoid or from what is he/she pulling away? 

In what specific ways? 

•• 
Are there routine disruptions? 

•• 
Where has contact with reinforcers been lost? 

•• 
Are there deficits in coping skills and strategies? 

To answer these questions, it is essential to focus on 
the parts of the client’s activity and context that change 
and the parts that are consistent over time. It is not uncommon 
for depressed clients to report that their mood 
is always low, no matter what they are doing or where 
they are doing it. They may describe that they simply 
feel “blah” all the time or that, perhaps, their mood 
changes, but such changes are minor or irrelevant. A 
central premise of BA, however, is that variability is 
everywhere, though sometimes it is difficult to detect. 

Moreover, the variability is not random. Instead, variations 
in behavior and its settings have a direct effect on 
a person’s mood and, as such, provide critical information 
about central contingencies. When clients report 
that they feel depressed “all the time,” it is either because 
they are inaccurately reporting on their mood retrospectively, 
their behavioral repertoires are extremely 
narrow (e.g., lying in bed all day long), or they have 
not learned to discriminate between subtle differences 
in mood. This last point is a critical one. One of the 
key tasks for therapists is to help clients understand 
that their moods are intimately linked to what they are 
doing, where they are doing it, and the resulting consequences. 
Treating depression requires making a series 
of strategic changes in each of these domains, all of 
which are based on understanding the basic contingent 
relationships. 

Repeatedly Applying and Troubleshooting 
Activation and Engagement Strategies 

Given the idiographic nature of BA, the course of treatment 
may look quite different across a range of clients. 
Despite this diversity, we discuss below a few straightforward 
behavioral methods that are frequently used. 

Activity Scheduling and Self-Monitoring 

The major work of therapy in BA occurs between treatment 
sessions. It is uncommon for clients to leave a 
session without some specific activities with which to 
experiment during the week. Thus, activity scheduling 
and monitoring of outcome are standard methods used 
throughout treatment. At the end of each session, the 
client should clearly understand the specific activity assignment 
and have a clear strategy for implementing it 
during the week (including a plan for overcoming likely 
obstacles to implementation). 

Specifically scheduling the activity is a useful tool 
for having the client commit to times when he/she will 
do the homework. When the assignment is listed in 
writing on a particular day of the week, at a particular 
hour, the client has the benefit of an external aid to motivate 
behavior change (i.e., working from the “outsidein” 
as opposed to the “inside-out”). Activity scheduling 
is also used frequently for clients with significant 
routine disruptions. Schedules can be an aid in the effort 
to develop and follow regular routines for eating, 
working, sleeping, exercising, and maintaining social 


Behavioral Activation for Depression 

contact. Depending on the activity, the client may not 
specifically schedule the time but may instead record 
its completion on a daily log. 

A key part of scheduling activities frequently involves 
careful attention to contingency management. 
As social psychologists have long known, “The correlations 
between intention and behavior are modest . . . 
the weak intention–behavior relation is largely due 
to people having good intentions but failing to act on 
them” (Gollwitzer, 1999, p. 493). Given this reality, it 
is essential for BA therapists to consider ways they can 
help clients structure their environment so as to maximize 
success with treatment assignments and goals. 

One helpful method of contingency management is 
the use of public commitment to enhance the likelihood 
of completing assignments (Locke & Latham, 2002). 
Often, we explore whether friends, coworkers, or family 
members are available to be included in activation 
plans. For instance, one of our clients learned in treatment 
that when his depression was more severe, it was 
essential for him to tell his wife each morning the primary 
tasks he intended to complete that day. For him, 
“keeping his word” was an effective reinforcer that 
helped to increase his activation. 

In addition, we work with clients to structure their 
environments in other ways that will enhance activation. 
Thus, for a client who works on an exercise plan 
during the week, putting on her exercise clothes before 
she leaves work at the end of the day is an essential part 
of the plan. 

Finally, clients may also experiment with the use of 
arbitrary reinforcers for specific behavior change tasks. 
Although the emphasis of BA is heavily on increasing 
contact with natural reinforcers in one’s environment, 
the selective use of arbitrary reinforcers can at times be 
helpful. The client we noted earlier planned a special 
dinner with his wife at the end of a week of adherence 
with activation tasks; the client who was working on 
the exercise program bought a new shirt for exercising 
after she started her new program. 

Occasionally, therapists may suggest the use of aversive 
contingencies to help promote behavior change; 
for instance, one client found it useful to agree to call 
his therapist if he was going to stay in bed and miss 
work for the day. We have described to other clients 
the method of writing donation checks to their least favored 
charities, which are then cashed if they do not 
complete scheduled activities (Watson & Tharp, 2002). 
Often, simply the suggestion of an aversive contingency 

is sufficient to motivate change. For instance, the client 
who agreed to call his therapist did, in fact, call early 
one Monday morning; when he was halfway through 
leaving a message, he stated, “This is ridiculous. Forget 
it, I am going to work.” 

When clients do activity scheduling, it is also essential 
to build in a monitoring component such that they 
record the context and consequences of activation. This 
provides both information about the specific activation 
assignment, and regular and ongoing practice in 
noticing contingent relationships between activity and 
mood. It is essential for the therapist to discuss what the 
client learned from the activation and self-monitoring 
tasks in each session. In addition, the therapist needs to 
provide regular feedback about progress and to highlight 
areas of improvement or troubleshoot problems 
that may have arisen. 

It is essential for the therapist not to shy away from 
asking about homework that is incomplete or not done. 
Attending to these domains is exactly the job of the BA 
therapist. Repeated and persistent focus on a small set 
of activation tasks often occupies a great deal of the 
course of treatment. Asking about what prevented the 
completion of homework gives therapist and client essential 
information about important barriers and possible 
examples of avoidance patterns. The purpose of 
such discussions is not to punish or shame the client, so 
it is important to approach homework review with a direct 
and nonjudgmental attitude. At the same time, discussing 
incomplete or partially completed homework 
may be experienced as aversive by the client, which 
may help to facilitate his/her doing the homework next 
time (i.e., through being negatively reinforced by escaping 
from the therapist’s uncomfortable questioning). 
If this occurs naturally, it is not a problem and 
can in fact enhance treatment progress. However, the 
therapist should never use shame or criticism, however 
subtly, to enhance homework completion. 

Graded Task Assignment 

Graded task assignment, which is a core part of CT 
for depression (Beck et al., 1979), is also a hallmark of 
BA and a key part of most activity scheduling efforts. 
Thus, it is important for therapists to help clients break 
down behaviors into specific, achievable units to facilitate 
successful behavior change. Knowing how to break 
down tasks and grade them appropriately in a stepwise 
progression from simple to complex requires thera



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

pists to use a broad array of basic self-management and 
problem-solving skills. Toward this end, it is also important 
for therapists to help clients learn the method of 
grading tasks during therapy, so that they can apply this 
skill to new contexts and tasks after therapy has ended. 
In explaining the tool of graded task assignment, it is 
often important to remind clients that the goal is not to 
accomplish all parts of the activity; rather, the goals are 
to get started on important tasks, increase activation, 
and disrupt avoidance. Therapists can also explain to 
clients that breaking tasks down helps to ensure success 
with subtasks, and such success experiences can in turn 
reinforce and motivate work on successive components 
of the larger task. 

It is very important to break down tasks in such a 
way that early success is guaranteed. If clients experience 
difficulty with tasks, therapists may want to revisit 
explicitly whether the task was broken down and graded 
sufficiently. Clients also can be asked to envision 
the steps involved in a given task before attempting it 
outside of therapy, and to anticipate any obstacles that 
might arise. If this process suggests that certain components 
may be difficult to master, therapist and client 
can grade that task into smaller and more achievable 
components. 

Avoidance Modification and Problem Solving 

This is perhaps one of the most rich and varied aspects 
of BA. As noted earlier, clients may be addressing 
avoidance of concrete tasks at work or home, avoidance 
of painful emotions such as grief or fear, avoidance of 
interpersonal conflict, and so forth. The specific methods 
used to address these areas are tied to the specific 
nature of the avoidance. For instance, a client who 
avoids the experience of grief over a lost relationship 
may be assisted in spending time each day reviewing 
photos of the former partner, reminiscing about times 
they shared, and so forth. A client who avoids tasks at 
work may be assisted in breaking down tasks, making 
specific to-do lists, asking others for help, and so forth. 
A client who avoids interpersonal conflict may be assisted 
in practicing assertive communication in role 
plays in sessions, experimenting with discussions with 
friends, bringing a family member to a therapy session, 
and so forth. That said, within this broad domain, a 
number of basic strategies may be helpful in planning 
treatment. 

First, it is essential when addressing avoidance to 
start from a collaborative stance with the client. It is 

important to understand and to communicate an understanding 
of the discomfort that a client may experience 
in a particular situation, which is then followed by 
some action on the part of the client to end the aversive 
experience. Therapists can emphasize the ways that 
avoidance may serve an adaptive function in the short 
term but be problematic in the long term. Given that 
many avoidant behaviors may be under the control of 
immediate contingencies, it is often helpful to highlight 
repeatedly the long-term consequences of particular 
behaviors. Returning to the BA model to highlight such 
patterns is often helpful. 

Second, basic problem-solving methods are frequently 
used to address avoidance. Although we rarely 
teach problem-solving steps in a structured and formal 
manner, addressing avoidance typically involves figuring 
out how to approach and solve problems. Thus, it is 
essential for therapists to maintain a problem-solving 
mind-set with respect to avoidance and to work with 
clients to generate a range of options for possible alternative 
coping behaviors. Problem-solving strategies 
include defining and assessing the problem, generating 
alternative solutions, managing environmental contingencies, 
and troubleshooting the solution when needed. 
It should be noted that all of the other basic strategies 
are also frequently used in the service of avoidance 
modification and problem solving (activity scheduling 
and monitoring, graded task assignment, etc.). 

Third, to help maintain a consistent focus on avoidance, 
clients may be assisted by several mnemonic 
devices. These devices help to organize a method of 
examining, “What is the function of a behavior; what 
are its consequences?” We have used the acronym AC-
TION to identify the general approach that we ask clients 
to take (Martell et al., 2001): 

•• 
Assess—Is this behavior approach or avoidance? 

Will it be likely to make me feel better or worse? 

•• 
Choose—Either choose to continue this behavior, 

even if it makes me feel worse, or try a new be


havior. 

•• 
Try—Try the behavior chosen. 

•• 
Integrate—Any new behavior needs to be given 

a fair chance, so integrate a new behavior into a 

routine before assessing whether it has been help


ful or not. 

•• 
Observe the Results—Pay close attention and 

monitor the effects of the new behavior. 

•• 
Never Give Up—Remember that making changes 

can often require repeated efforts and attempts. 


Behavioral Activation for Depression 

When clients demonstrate behavioral patterns characterized 
by avoidance behaviors, therapists may use 
the acronym of being in a TRAP (Martell et al., 2001): 

•• 
Trigger—usually something in the environment 

(e.g., criticized by employer) 

•• 
Response—usually an emotional reaction (e.g., 

feels shame and sadness) 

•• 
Avoidance Pattern—The avoidance behavior(s) 

used to cope with the emotional response (e.g., 

leaves work early, complains to partner about dis


pleasure with job) 

Therapists then ask the client to get out of the TRAP 
and back on TRAC; that is, under the same trigger and 
response conditions, they are asked to experiment with 
“alternative coping” behaviors. 

Engagement Strategies 

Research has well documented the frequency and negative 
consequences of ruminative behavior among people 
with depression (Nolen-Hoeksema, 2000). The BA 
approach considers ruminating as a behavior that frequently 
prevents people from engaging fully with their 
activities and environments. BA therapists are on alert 
for client reports of ruminating and are also careful to 
assess whether ruminating is a problem when clients 
return to sessions reporting that an activation assignment 
“didn’t work.” If, for example, a client reports that 
she experienced little mood improvement while playing 
with her son in the park, the therapist will want to examine 
whether she was only partially engaged with the 
task of playing because her mind was focused on why 
her former partner did not want to continue their relationship, 
what that meant about her value as a woman, 
and so forth. 

In addressing rumination in BA, we are less interested 
in the particular content of ruminative thoughts 
than in the context and consequences of rumination. 
For instance, in working with a client who frequently 
ruminated about a job that he regretted having declined, 
the BA therapist asked him to examine the following 
types of questions: What were you doing while 
you were thinking about the other job? How engaged 
were you with the activity of the moment and with 
your surroundings? What happened during and after 
your thinking about the other job? In examining these 
questions, therapist and client identified that the client 
was more likely to ruminate when he was working on 

aversive tasks in his current job, about which he felt 
significant anxiety; thus, ruminating was negatively reinforced 
by distracting the client from anxiety and decreasing 
his focus on the aversive tasks. BA therapists 
may ask clients who ruminate frequently to experiment 
with “attention to experience” practice, in which they 
deliberately focus their attention on their current activity 
and surroundings. For instance, they may be asked 
to bring their full awareness to physical sensations (colors, 
sounds, smells, tastes, physical movements, etc.). 
These strategies are akin to mindfulness practices 
(Segal, Williams, & Teasdale, 2002) and are also very 
consistent with the dialectical behavior strategy of “opposite 
action all the way” (Linehan, 1993). 

Reviewing and Consolidating Treatment Gains 

As therapist and client agree that there has been sufficient 
improvement and termination seems indicated, 
remaining sessions should focus on relapse prevention, 
which largely involves reviewing and consolidating 
gains the client has made. Toward the end of therapy, 
it is often wise to focus on anticipating situations in 
the client’s life that may trigger depressive feelings and 
behaviors, and to generate plans for coping with such 
situations. Upcoming life events that can be anticipated 
as challenges for the client (e.g., the death of a parent, 
a career change) should be discussed in detail, and the 
client can draft a self-help plan to activate in the face 
of the stressor. In addition, it is also very important to 
review the basic BA model and the methods used in 
therapy to ensure that the client is leaving with a solid 
understanding of how to apply these as tools in the future. 
For instance, therapists will want to review how 
to identify links between what one does and how one 
feels, how to set specific and concrete goals, how to use 
graded task assignment, and how to identify and target 
primary avoidance patterns (noticing that one is ruminating 
more at work, noticing that one is starting to fail 
to return phone calls of friends, etc.). 

The Therapy Setting 

Initial research on BA primarily focused on the context 
of outpatient individual psychotherapy settings; 
however, recent studies are examining application 
across a broad array of settings and delivery modes. 
For example, several groups have found creative ways 
to transport BA to settings outside of specialty mental 
health clinics. Preliminary trials have documented the 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

promise of treating adult primary care patients with depression 
using BA (Gros & Haren, 2011; Uebleacker, 
Weisberg, Haggarty, & Miller, 2009), and Ekers and 
colleagues have provided confirmation showing that 
nonspecialists can learn and effectively deliver BA in 
primary care settings (Ekers, Dawson, & Bailey, 2013; 
Ekers, Richards, McMillian, Bland, & Gilbdoy, 2011). 
Similarly, Hopko and colleagues (2011) recently conducted 
a successful randomized controlled trial (RCT) 
of BA for depressed cancer patients in oncology clinics. 
Dimidjian and colleagues are also currently testing BA 
in a multisite RCT for antenatal depression with a flexible 
delivery format, and obstetric nurses and behavioral 
health providers as study clinicians. Group therapy appears 
to be a viable format for delivering BA to larger 
numbers of clients (Houghton, Curran, & Saxon, 2008; 
Porter, Spates, & Smitham, 2004). There is also growing 
interest in integrating BA into university settings 
(e.g., Cullen, Spates, Pagoto, & Doran, 2006; Gawrysiak, 
Nicholas, & Hopko, 2009; Reynolds, MacPherson, 
Tull, Baruch, & Lejuez, 2011). 

Treatment duration has ranged from 12- to 24-session 
formats. Limitations of client resources, insurance 
reimbursement, and other factors may necessitate particular 
treatment durations. In our studies and clinical 
work, we often schedule brief phone contacts between 
sessions to reinforce the interpersonal connection to 
the therapist and the importance of completing the 
between-session assignments, and to provide an opportunity 
to address questions or problems with the 
between-session assignments. 

Although BA is most often delivered as an individual 
treatment modality, significant others in clients’ lives 
are often included in sessions across the course of treatment. 
Decisions about whether to include significant 
others in treatment follow from the functional analysis; 
thus, they are determined on an idiographic basis. Conjoint 
sessions can be helpful in assessing patterns that 
may be maintaining the client’s depression, providing 
information and education to the family member about 
the treatment rationale and approach, and providing opportunities 
for the client and family member to practice 
new interpersonal behaviors with the therapist’s direct 
and immediate feedback. 

Therapist Qualities 

In our experience, a number of structural and stylistics 
qualities are important for BA therapists to bring 
to their clinical work. Briefly, the structured nature of 

BA is maintained through the use of agendas to guide 
session foci; therapists engage clients in the process 
of collaborative agenda setting at the outset of each 
session. Typically, the agenda includes some review 
of progress through administration of a depression inventory 
(e.g., BDI-II or HRSD), review of homework, 
discussion of target problems, assignment of new 
homework, and a session summary. In addition, the 
structure is guided by a steadfast focus on nurturing 
activation. From a stylistic standpoint, essential qualities 
of the BA therapist include an emphasis on collaboration 
or learning together as a team. In so doing, 
the therapist is mindful of pacing to support active collaboration 
and of soliciting information to ensure that 
the client understands information presented in session 
(e.g., specific targets or interventions, the overall BA 
model, or other “take-home” points from the session). 
All of the BA strategies also require the basic skill of 
being a good problem solver. Therapists approach most 
matters that arise in treatment simply as problems to 
be solved. Thus, therapists must be naturally curious 
about factors that maintain problems and be skilled at 
generating a range of more functional alternative behaviors. 
Toward this end, it is important to be comfortable 
with a direct, matter-of-fact, and nonjudgmental 
manner of communication, particularly in the face of 
challenges such as not doing assigned activation plans 
or not attending scheduled sessions. Therapists must 
also balance a genuine sense of empathy and understanding 
for the suffering and struggles of their clients 
with an optimistic and dogged commitment to the possibility 
of change. BA therapists validate the struggles 
clients experience and seek out occasions to encourage 
progress, even if seemingly minimal. Finally, understanding 
basic behavioral concepts and principles can 
help therapists conceptualize cases according to a behavioral 
model of depression and present a coherent 
framework to clients. 

The acronym ENLIVEN (Dimidjian, 2011) captures 
the structural and stylistic strategies necessary for the 
competent BA therapist in an easily remembered mnemonic: 


•• 
Establishes and follows agenda 

•• 
Nurtures activation 

•• 
Learns together with client 

•• 
Is nonjudgmental 

•• 
Validates 

•• 
Encourages 

•• 
Naturally expresses warmth 


Behavioral Activation for Depression 

In our treatment outcome research, we have used 
ongoing clinical supervision and therapist consultation 
teams to assist therapists in adhering to and refining 
these important therapist qualities. Therapists typically 
meet together weekly for 1–2 hours. The teams help 
therapists increase skills with basic treatment strategies 
(conceptualizing treatment plans, doing functional 
analysis, effectively grading tasks, etc.). In the context 
of a focus on specific cases and strategies, the team 
also provides essential reinforcement for the therapist 
qualities of empathy, nonjudgment, problem solving, 
curiosity and persistence, and optimism about change. 
Although we have not tested this hypothesis empirically, 
we strongly suspect that it would be difficult for 
many therapists to maintain these qualities particularly 
in their work with clients struggling with severe, complicated, 
or chronic depression without the support of 
an effective consultation team. 

Client Variables 

Our treatment outcome research suggests that depressed 
adults can experience acute and enduring clinical benefit 
from a course of BA. Our clinical impressions are 
that engagement with the basic treatment rationale and 
willingness to complete homework assignments are 
both important predictors of outcome in BA. Moreover, 
it is important to note that we used a number of client 
characteristics as exclusionary criteria in our treatment 
research. For instance, if a client were acutely suicidal, 
such that his/her risk could not be managed on an 
outpatient basis, then we would refer him/her for more 
acute and intensive treatment. In addition, if a client 
had a comorbid diagnostic disorder that was more severe 
and prominent (more interfering and the primary 
focus of the client), and necessitated another evidencebased 
treatment (e.g., obsessive–compulsive disorder), 
then we would also refer him/her to a more specifically 
appropriate treatment. We also carefully evaluated any 
potential medical problems that may have contributed 
to depression and referred clients for appropriate concurrent 
medical treatment, if necessary. 

Recent clinical research also highlights the potential 
of BA as a treatment option for patients across the 
lifespan, including adolescents (McCauley, Schloredt, 
Gudmundsen, Martell, & Dimidjian, 2011; Ritschel, 
Ramirez, Jones, & Craighead, 2011; Ruggiero, Morris, 
Hopko, & Lejuez, 2007; Van Voorhees et al., 2009). 
This work is in line with earlier work by Lewinsohn 
and colleagues (1984) in the development of the Cop


ing with Depression Course for adolescents. This treatment 
program includes activity scheduling, relaxation 
training, assertiveness and social skills training, and 
cognitive restructuring. Admittedly, the inclusion of 
cognitive restructuring in the Coping with Depression 
Course places this program in the broader area of CBT 
rather than specific BA, but the emphasis is on scheduling 
pleasant events. Evidence also supports the use 
of BA with older adults (Acierno et al., 2012; Meeks, 
Looney, van Haitsma, & Teri, 2008; Meeks, Teri, van 
Haitsma, & Looney, 2006; Snarski et al., 2011; Sood, 
Cisek, Zimmerman, Zaleski, & Fillmore, 2003; Teri, 
Logsdon, Uomoto, & McCurry, 1997), ethnically diverse 
patients (Kanter, Hurtado, Rusch, Busch, & 
Santiago-Rivera, 2008; Kanter, Santiago-Rivera, 
Rusch, Busch, & West, 2010), patients with anxiety 
and borderline symptoms (Hopko, Lejuez, & Hopko, 
2004; Hopko, Sanchez, Hopko, Dvir, & Lejuez, 2003), 
patients with posttraumatic stress disorder (Jakupcak et 
al., 2006; Mulick & Naugle, 2004; Wagner, Zatzick, 
Ghesquiere, & Jurkovich, 2007), substance users with 
elevated depressive symptoms (Daughters et al., 2008; 
MacPherson et al., 2010), patients with schizophrenia 
(Mairs, Lovell, Campbell, & Keeley, 2011), inpatients 
(Curran, Lawson, Houghton, & Gournay, 2007; Hopko, 
Lejuez, et al., 2003), patients with cancer (Armento & 
Hopko, 2009; Hopko, Bell, Armento, Hunt, & Lejuez, 
2005; Hopko et al., 2011) and other medical comorbidities 
such as obesity (Pagoto, Bodenlos, Schneider, 
Olendzki, & Spates, 2008) and diabetes (Schneider et 
al., 2011). Although many of these studies are preliminary, 
reporting data from small open-trial designs, the 
breadth of this work suggests that BA may be adapted 
as a treatment framework for a wide variety of clients 
struggling with depression and comorbid problems. 

case stuDy 

Background Information 

The following section presents the treatment of Mark, 
a 43-year-old man with a long history of depression. 
Mark was in treatment for 19 sessions across 4 months. 
The description here is presented to illustrate the implementation 
of core BA principles and strategies. Earlier 
sessions are described in greater detail to provide the 
reader with “how-to” information regarding the primary 
principles and strategies. Later sessions emphasize a 
thematic focus for which the same types of principles 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

and strategies are applied. It is important to emphasize 
at the outset that this case description is not intended 
to communicate a prescriptive course of treatment, and 
readers are advised against following the sequence of 
strategies in a lockstep fashion. BA is a highly idiographic 
treatment, in which the choice of specific activation 
strategies is driven by functional analysis; given 
this, the reader is encouraged to attend to the ways the 
therapist conceptualizes Mark’s difficulties and implements 
treatment strategies over the course of therapy. 
It is our hope that this detailed illustration will inspire 
readers to apply the basic principles and core strategies 
in a flexible and idiographic manner. 

Mark sought treatment at the urging of his primary 
care physician. His recent episode of depression had 
lasted without remission for 3 years. Mark also had a 
history of alcohol abuse. His early alcohol abuse had 
caused significant problems in Mark’s first marriage, 
which ended in divorce when he was in his early 20s; 
however, problems with alcohol were not a cause of current 
concern. He had been in therapy previously, during 
his separation and divorce 4 years earlier. However, 
Mark described it as unstructured and unfocused, and 
reported that he stopped going after a few sessions. He 
lived alone, although he had joint custody of his twin 
adolescent daughters; Mark and his ex-wife alternated 
parenting every other week. 

Mark reported that he had had periods of depression 
for “as long as I can remember.” In particular, he recalled 
his first episode of depression at age 12, shortly 
after his father abruptly left and severed all contact 
with Mark and his family. Mark reported that he had 
believed his parents were happily married and, at that 
time, blamed himself for his father’s departure. Mark 
reported that his mother and older siblings never discussed 
his father. In describing his mood during adolescence 
and adulthood, he reported, “I have periods 
when I’m able to function OK. I go to work and all that, 
but I’m never really happy.” Mark’s primary depressive 
symptoms included depressed mood, loss of pleasure 
in nearly all activities, excessive guilt, fatigue, difficulty 
concentrating, and occasional passive thoughts of 
death. 

Mark had had a social network that revolved primarily 
around his former marriage, but he had withdrawn 
from that network since his separation and divorce. 
Currently, he spent most of his time alone, with the 
exception of caring for his daughters. Mark was college 
educated and worked as an accountant for a local 
manufacturing company. He also wrote children’s sto


ries and, prior to his most recent episode of depression, 
was working on a number of stories as a member of a 
local writer’s group. 

Case Conceptualization and Overview 
of Treatment 

Mark’s depression was conceptualized as occurring in 
the context of his divorce and the changes that ensued 
following that process; in addition, vulnerabilities related 
to his family history also formed a context for his 
current experience. Mark experienced intense grief and 
anxiety following his divorce to which he responded 
with patterns of interpersonal avoidance, which in turn 
were negatively reinforced by reductions in the grief 
and anxiety. Mark had trouble fully engaging in his 
significant relationships and instead avoided intimacy 
in various ways in both overt ways (e.g., refusing social 
contacts) and subtle (e.g., ruminating about mistakes 
he made in the past, failing to express commitment 
to the relationship and what he thought or felt about 
various topics on a regular basis). Over the course of 
treatment, the therapist and Mark hypothesized that 
avoiding close interpersonal connections in his adult 
life kept Mark detached enough that he would not 
feel subsequent losses as acutely as those he felt as a 
child. However, these patterns of avoidance also maintained 
Mark’s depression by limiting his experience of 
reward in many of his current contexts. Treatment focused 
initially on increasing activation and addressing 
many secondary problems and routine disruptions that 
had become established. Treatment sought to reverse 
the downward spirals of depression by scheduling and 
structuring activities. Although Mark increased his activation 
relatively quickly, his mood did not improve 
significantly. This led to a primary focus on Mark’s rumination 
and the ways it functioned to avoid intimacy 
in his relationships, and experimentation with new behaviors 
designed to move Mark closer to his goal of 
having a close intimate relationship and feeling better. 

Session 1 

Session 1 focused on reviewing the results from the 
assessment process, presenting the treatment model, 
encouraging questions and feedback, and tailoring the 
model to Mark’s specific experiences. The review of 
the assessment process is typically brief; in this part 
of the session, the aim of the therapist is to ensure that 
he/she has a solid understanding of the client’s present



Behavioral Activation for Depression 

ing problems, relevant history, and previous experience 
with treatment, if any. The therapist also reviews the 
basic diagnostic formulation to ensure that the assessment 
outcome matches the client’s subjective experience 
of his/her current problems. Discussion of the 
treatment typically forms the bulk of the early sessions. 
The following transcript provides an example of the 
therapist presenting the treatment model and responding 
to frequently asked questions about the etiology 
of depression. Specifically, the therapist puts forth the 
idea that depression is treated behaviorally, regardless 
of etiology. 

tHeraPist: Let me tell you a little about the basic 
model that guides BA. The first idea is that there are 
often things that happen in people’s lives that make it 
hard for them to connect with the kinds of experiences 
that would normally help them feel good. These 
shifts can be clear and easy-to-detect changes like 
major losses or disruptions in life. And they can also 
be smaller things, like the kind of things that just 
bug you a little but they keep happening, or you have 
a bunch of them happen all around the same period 
of time. The most important part is the idea that the 
effect of these events is that it’s harder to connect 
with the kinds of experiences that could give you a 
sense of pleasure or accomplishment in your life, and 
that could help you feel better. Does that sound like 
it fits for you? 

mark: I would say that is true for me. Definitely getting 
divorced was a big one. I think that did set things 
off, but even now, there isn’t much that helps me feel 
better. Even things that I think should help me feel 
better don’t do much. I just don’t have the energy at 
this point. 

tHeraPist: Yes, exactly. It’s very normal to feel a 
whole range of things in the context of such events. 
Often sadness or grief is central, but so are feelings 
of fatigue and a sense of not having energy or interest 
in anything. All of these are parts of the experience 
of depression. 

mark: That describes it. 

tHeraPist: I’m going to draw that out here on this 
form. In the first circle, we can list some of the events 
we’ve already talked about, like the divorce, sharing 
custody of your girls, and your move. Those reactions 
of fatigue and low energy that follow are very 
normal, and we’ll write them in here in the second 
circle. What we find often happens is that people can 

respond to these changes by pulling away from their 
lives even more. This pulling away can happen sometimes 
in obvious ways, like staying in bed or calling 
in sick to work, or canceling social engagements, and 
sometimes in more subtle ways, like being focused 
more on your thinking than on the activities you are 
engaged in. Does that make sense for you? 

mark: Yes, absolutely. I do all of those things. 

tHeraPist: It makes total sense that you would pull 
away when you are feeling so down. The problem 
with pulling away like this is that it tends to keep 
people stuck in feeling depressed, and the pulling 
away can become a problem in its own right. So that 
is the arrow that links what you do and how you feel 
in a kind of downward spiral. The more you pull 
away or the more you are caught in your thoughts, 

the worse you actually feel, the less energy you have. 

mark: Yes. That sums it up. 

tHeraPist: And, actually, for many people, there is 
also a second downward spiral. So the more the first 
downward spiral is set in motion, it actually can lead 
to new problems, like your boss gets frustrated with 
you or your friends stop calling, or it can keep you 
from solving some of the problems that triggered the 
depression in the beginning. So the ultimate goal of 
our work together is to figure out new actions you 
can take here (pointing to the third circle on the diagram) 
that can help to reverse this downward spiral. 
We will want to learn together what sorts of activities 
may have a positive effect on your mood, and 
then help you activate and engage in those specific 
ways. And we will figure out how to solve the problems 
that are creating stress or dissatisfaction in your 
life. How do you see this fitting with your experience? 
Do you have questions about what I’ve said? 
Parts that fit or don’t fit? 

mark: I understand what you are saying, and I think 
some of it fits, but I guess I don’t understand why I 
get so depressed. I mean, other people have stressful 
things in their lives and they seem to function. Other 
people get divorced or have crappy jobs, and they 
move on. I mean, come on, I’ve been divorced for 
4 years now. I think depression runs in my family. 
My older brother has been depressed forever, and I 
sometimes wonder if my dad was depressed when he 
took off. Sometimes, I can’t really identify anything 
that has happened in my life. I mean, I am never really 
happy and then, it’s just like a switch goes in my 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

brain and I’m back in that dark hole again. How does 
that fit with what you are saying? 

tHeraPist: That is an excellent question. What I mean 
as I talk about depression is that some people are 
more vulnerable than others. And, there are many 
ways that you may be vulnerable to depression— 
through genetics, biology, or experiences in your 
history. In fact, we can add some of these things you 
are talking about now to the first circle as part of the 
context for you. (Writes in family history.) What this 
treatment emphasizes is that it’s possible to change 
depression by making changes in what you do. 

mark: That makes sense to me. One part of what you 
said definitely fits for me—the part about pulling 
away more. I definitely do that. Sometimes I don’t 
talk to another person or get out of bed all weekend. 
I know it makes it all worse. But I still do it. I don’t 
seem to be able to do anything else when I feel that 
way. 

As the therapist replies to these very common questions, 
she seeks to normalize avoidant responses to depression. 
It is essential for the client to experience the 
therapist as someone who understands and has sincere 
empathy for his/her struggle. The therapist must communicate 
that the client’s behaviors make sense, even 
though they may not serve the client well in the long 
term. In this way, the client is more likely to experience 
the therapist as an ally in the change process as opposed 
to someone who oversimplifies or “doesn’t get” the 
challenges of making changes. Additionally, the therapist 
also emphasizes to Mark the importance of guided 
activity, highlighting her own role as an expert and the 
importance of careful assessment. She emphasizes the 
difference between assignments based on a superficial 
understanding of depression and those that are guided 
by functional analysis, a key aspect of the treatment, to 
which the therapist will return many times. 

tHeraPist: Those are great observations and are really 
on target with what I have noticed for a lot of people 
as well. What many people experience is that when 
they start to activate and engage, they can actually 
feel worse initially! The troubling fact about pulling 
away or avoiding is that it does provide some shortterm 
relief. But in the long term, that downward spiral 
can keep you trapped in depression. 

mark: That makes a ton of sense to me. I just don’t 
want to do anything. Making a meal makes me tired. 

I feel irritated by the sound of silverware scratching 
on plates. It’s kind of crazy, but I just want to crawl 
in a hole, to turn out a light in my head and make 
it all go away. Then, I end up feeling worse when I 
do stay in bed. I used to drink, too. I knew it would 
make it worse, and I don’t do it much anymore, but it 
helped in the moment, even though I knew it didn’t 
really help. I guess I felt better temporarily and that 
was enough. 

tHeraPist: Yes, exactly. Avoidance is a perfectly natural 
response. What unfortunately happens, though, 
is that you are not in touch with all those things that 
can give you pleasure and a sense of accomplishment, 
and you are not engaged in solving the problems 
that create stress in your life. 

mark: That’s the first and second downward spirals 
you were talking about, right? I get it but it just all 
feels so overwhelming. Just the thought of it . . . 

tHeraPist: Yes, I know. That is where I come in. It’s 
important to emphasize that this treatment is not just 
about me saying you should “do more” in general. 
Sometimes I tell people that it’s not the Nike approach 
to therapy, where I tell you each week to “just 
do it.” You have probably received feedback like that 
from other people in your life, and you may even say 
something similar to yourself. 

mark: Yeah, guilty as charged. 

tHeraPist: My assumption is that if this were easy 
to figure out, you would already have done it. It’s 
a simple treatment but that doesn’t mean it’s easy. 
The reason that you are here is that it’s not easy, and 
that is where my expertise comes in. A major part 
of this treatment is the idea of guided activation. 
This means that you and I will be working together 
to identify specific ways in which you can experiment 
with activation. My expertise lies in figuring 
out, first, where the places are that would be the most 
helpful in increasing your activation and engagement, 
and second, what small and manageable steps 
you can take to get started. You can think of me as a 
coach or consultant to you in the process of change. 
We will work together, as a team, in small steps, all 
along the way. How does that sound? 

mark: The idea of it sounds good. I guess it’s worth 
trying. 

tHeraPist: I’d like to ask you to read a short pamphlet 
about this treatment, between now and the next time 
that we meet. It will provide you with more infor



Behavioral Activation for Depression 

mation. When we meet next time, we can talk more 
about how we will put the ideas into practice. 

With this initial session, the therapist has begun to 
teach Mark about the treatment model and is getting 
him actively involved in and on board with the rationale. 
The therapist has oriented Mark to their respective 
roles in treatment and has given him this first 
homework assignment (reading the treatment rationale 
pamphlet). These critical tasks of the first session set 
the stage for additional discussion in Session 2. 

Session 2 

In Session 2, the therapist carefully follows up on a 
number of the key orienting tasks, which includes ensuring 
that Mark is on board with the basic treatment 
model and explaining the structure of the therapy. The 
therapist attends to these topics in opening the session: 

tHeraPist: It’s great to see you today, Mark. 

mark: Thanks. It’s good to be back here. 

tHeraPist: That’s great. You know, when I was thinking 
about our session last time, I realized that there 
were a couple of points I wanted to emphasize more. 
One of the important ones is that this is a very collaborative 
approach to therapy, and one that is also 
fairly structured. So each time we meet, we will start 
out by setting an agenda for the session, and we will 
do this collaboratively. In fact, over time, you will set 
the agenda more and more, though I may have more 
to say about it in the beginning. The idea is that I’m 
the expert on how to get over depression, and you are 
the expert on yourself and your life, and what things 
help or don’t help. 

mark: That sounds reasonable to me. 

tHeraPist: Great. So in terms of the agenda for today, 
I have a couple of things. I’d like to talk more about 
the treatment approach and your reaction, and more 
about how we put some of the ideas into practice. 
Do you have items you want to be sure we address 
today? 

mark: No, that sounds good. I did read the pamphlet, 
and it really hit home. It was like they wrote it about 
me, basically. I thought, “Thank goodness somebody 
has figured this out.” 

tHeraPist: That’s great. I think one of the core ideas 
of the model is things happen that tend to trigger de


pressed mood, and then people tend to do things, or 
not do things, that make the depression worse. For 
you, my understanding is that the main trigger was 
your divorce and that occurred in the context of your 
history of important losses, too, in your family growing 
up. 

mark: Yeah, both are true. I’ve really pulled back on 
a lot, like not exercising and not doing things with 
other people or even with my girls. We used to cook 
these great dinners together and now it’s like an effort 
to get organized to order pizza. It’s kind of like 
that everywhere—at work, too. I’m just managing 
the minimum and, honestly, a lot of times I’m not 
even doing that. 

tHeraPist: I know. It can be very hard to keep doing 
the sort of things that will keep you feeling well. And 
that is where this therapy comes in. From our session 
last time and from your reading, what is your 
understanding of what we are going to be doing in 
here, and how I am going to be helpful? If you were 
to tell a friend of yours what we were going to do in 
this therapy, what would you say? 

mark: I guess I would say that we are going to pinpoint 
the activities that give me some pleasure or 
help me feel like I’m handling things well. Then, we 
will figure out how to help me get into the position of 
being more involved in some of those things. 

tHeraPist: Yes, that is a big part of it. Sometimes in 
people’s lives something that is completely beyond 
their control triggers depression, and then what I call 
secondary problem behaviors get triggered or made 
worse. These are the behaviors that involve pulling 
away or avoiding, as you were saying, like stopping 
fun activities with your girls or withdrawing at work. 
And in those cases we work on the secondary problem 
behaviors, and that is the core of the therapy. 
Other times, we also need to address larger problems 
in your life that may be related to what makes you 
vulnerable to depression. In those cases, therapy 
can involve both directly addressing the secondary 
problem behaviors and working directly on the problems, 
after we have kind of cleared the path for doing 
some problem solving by getting you activated and 
engaged. 

mark: That sounds like it’s probably the case for me 
because I know I had a lot of problems relating to 
Diane that were part of our divorce, and those are 
not any better. 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

tHeraPist: Yes, we will talk more as we go along 
about what set off the depression for you. In a global 
sense, we know now that it was the divorce. But, as 
we start following your mood and activities day to 
day, we will see the ways that your mood has ups and 
downs. We will work together and look at that carefully, 
asking what set that off, how you responded to 
your mood hitting that point, and whether it would 
help if you tried something different. 

The therapist has now stated twice that generally a 
contextual event triggers depression, while earlier acknowledging 
that several things can contribute to vulnerability. 
This is a subtle but important point because 
clients sometimes believe their depression came “out of 
the blue” or that it is simply “biological” and not modifiable 
by behavioral means. By emphasizing an environmental 
antecedent (e.g., a loss of positive reinforcement), 
the therapist sets up the idea that rather than 
depression being completely beyond patients’ control, 
their depressive response makes sense, and more importantly, 
it is possible to make behavioral changes to 
regain or establish new reinforcers in their lives. Moreover, 
the therapist has continued to emphasize the importance 
of carefully monitoring and assessing the relationships 
among mood, activity, and context as a key 
part of designing effective behavior change plans. The 
therapist then builds on this foundation as she moves 
into the other main focus of Session 2—the initiation 
of activity monitoring. Here, the therapist explains to 
Mark why activity monitoring is important, begins to 
teach him how to complete an Activity Record (see 
Figure 9.3), and links it directly to some of his recent 
experiences. 

tHeraPist: One of the main tools that we use in this 
therapy is called an Activity Record. This is one example. 
(Hands Mark the record.) As you can see, it 
has blocks for each hour of the day. I’d like you to use 
this to start recording your activity and your mood. 
It’s basically a way to keep track of how you are 
spending your time during the day and how you are 
feeling. We want to learn what you are doing on an 
hour-by-hour and day-to-day basis. What things in 
your life help you feel better, and what things make 
you feel worse? You and I will review these very 
carefully together, focusing on how you are spending 
your time and how you feel. Sometimes the Activity 
Record tells us right away where changes need to be 

made, and other times we have to look at it over a 
couple of weeks. 

mark: OK. 

tHeraPist: Is there anything you have been doing 
since you started to feel more depressed that is different 
from what you normally do? 

mark: Yes, exercising less, watching more TV, and 
just the amount of time I spend thinking about all 
this. It’s just crazy. 

tHeraPist: It’s not crazy at all, but I agree that it’s 
not helping you very much. And it’s very difficult, 
which is why you are here. We can start to figure this 
out together. It’s great that you are already aware of 
those patterns, and those are good examples of looking 
concretely at what you are doing. This therapy is 
about increasing your awareness of how your mood 
is affected subtly from activity to activity and increasing 
those that tend to be more rewarding. It’s 
like we are on a detective mission for the “up” and 
“down” activities in your life, those that are linked 
with feeling improved mood and those are that not. 

mark: Makes sense. So, should I write all this down? 
Do you really want me to do this every hour? 

tHeraPist: Here’s the guideline that I use: I want 
people to record their activity frequently enough that 
they are not relying heavily on memory. The problem 
with memory when you are depressed is that your 
awareness can be dulled or biased by the depression. 
So you don’t have to do it every hour. We have to 
be realistic about the rest of your life! But you may 
want to experiment with doing it every 3–4 hours. 
Sometimes, people like to do it at breakfast, lunch, 
dinner, and before bed. 

mark: That might work for me. 

tHeraPist: Let’s go over what to write down. You put 
your activity down for each hour block and then for 
each hour block you also assign a mood rating from 
0 to 10. Let’s look at today as an example. What were 
you doing in the hours before you came here? 

mark: I was at work. 

tHeraPist: Okay, great. What were you doing at work? 

mark: I was teaching a new employee how to use our 
computer system. It was really frustrating because 
she wasn’t picking it up and I didn’t have much patience. 


tHeraPist: That’s great information to record. Why 


Instructions: Record your activity for each hour of the day, and record a mood rating associated with each activity. Use 
the scale below with the anchors that you and your therapist develop to guide your mood rating. Aim to make entries 
on your Activity Record at least every 3–4 hours each day. 
Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday Saturday Sunday 
5–6 
6–7 Awake 
thinking in 
bed (9) 7–8 
8–9 At work (7) 
9–10 Getting 
ready for 
work (8) 
10–11 At work (7) 
11–12 
12–1 
1–2 
2–3 
3–4 Working/
teaching 
employee 
(5) 
Home (7) 
4–5 
5–6 
6–7 Therapy (5) MakingDinner (6) 
7–8 TV (9) TV (9) 
8–9 
9–10 
10–11 
11–12 
12–1 
1–2 
2–3 
3–4 
4–5 

Mood Ratings: 0: Description, with examples of associated activities: writing; playing with my kids 

5: Description, with examples of associated activities: doing a work task that is only 
moderately interesting but I’m focused and concentrating 
10: Description, with examples of associated activities: thinking about how I’ve screwed 
everything up 
figUre 9.3. Sample completed Activity Record (hourly) (assigned on Monday and reviewed on Thursday). 

375 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

don’t you write down “working–teaching new employee.” 
Now, I also want you to record your mood 
on a 0- to 10-point scale, so let’s see if we can get 
some anchors here. What would be 0 mood for you? 
We can track this in whatever way will be most useful 
for you, so we could consider that 0 might be feeling 
really good, with no depression or feeling down 
at all. If so, we would then consider 10 to be when 
you feel your absolute worst, the worst you could 
possibly feel. It might be helpful to think of some 
activities that are a 5 or in between, when you’re not 
feeling your best but you’re not feeling particularly 
bad either. Which activities might be associated with 
each? 

The therapist and Mark then worked together to identify 
activities that were associated with the low, middle, 
and high ends of the scale. Some clients prefer to use the 
low end of the scale to indicate feeling negative mood, 
whereas others (like Mark) prefer to anchor the low end 
as indicating feeling positive mood (“really good” for 
Mark). Allowing such flexibility can be helpful as long 
as therapist and client are clear about the anchors that 
will be used when the client completes the monitoring 
at home. It should also be noted that therapists may ask 
clients to rate other dimensions, such as the degree to 
which activities were associated with mastery and pleasure 
(Beck et al., 1979) or a sense of being nourished 
or depleted (Segal et al., 2002). These may be rated 
instead of or in addition to mood. Often we begin by 
asking clients to record mood ratings given that this 
is an easier starting place for many clients because it 
requires less discrimination of subjective experience; 
moreover, the mood rating provides essential information 
about potential antidepressant activities. For some 
clients, it is helpful to build on this by teaching them 
how to distinguish between mastery and pleasure, and 
the ways in which both can be helpful in regulating 
mood. In the case of rating mood or mastery–pleasure, 
it is important to review carefully the method and scale 
we want clients to use. For other clients, the dimensions 
of nourishing and depleting are helpful to identify activities 
that are antidepressant. 

tHeraPist: Given this scale, what was your mood rating 
for the 2 hours of “working” today? 

mark: Probably a 5. 

tHeraPist: That’s exactly it. Now, sometimes what 
happens is that people don’t fill it out because they 

think, “I wasn’t doing anything.” It’s important to 
realize that even if you are not doing an activity, we 
want to know that, too. 

mark: What do you mean? 

tHeraPist: Well, when people think “activities,” 
they often think of things like “going to the store,” 
“watching a movie,” “picking up my child from 
school.” But, we are conceptualizing activity more 
broadly. It might be driving by Diana’s house or having 
a significant phone conversation with someone, 
or even lying in bed, spending time thinking about 
Diana. 

mark: That would be true on a lot of days. 

tHeraPist: Yes, and you can write that down. Those 
are some of the most important things. In some 
ways, the more detail, the better. We want to start 
noticing subtle changes. We want to build on those 
times that you feel just a little better, and we want to 
figure out what the problem is when you feel worse. 

mark: I think I got it. 

tHeraPist: Great! People usually come away from this 
thinking that it sounds really simplistic. And it does. 
It sounds simple, but in practice it is not that simple. 
It can be difficult to do in the beginning, to really 
look at all your activities and figure out how your 
mood is related to them. It takes skill and hard work 
on both our parts. Is there anything that we can think 
of now that might get in the way of your doing this 
monitoring this week? 

The therapist ended the session by discussing with 
Mark potential barriers to doing the assignment, encouraging 
him to make contact by phone if any questions 
arose, and offering encouragement about the likelihood 
that she could be helpful to him. 

Session 3 

As noted earlier, one of the necessary competencies 
of a BA therapist is the ability to review an Activity 
Record and glean information that will help to customize 
activation and engagement strategies. Session 3 
focused heavily on reviewing Mark’s Activity Record 
(see Figure 9.3) and using the information collected 
as a springboard for more detailed assessment of key 
problem behaviors. Again, the therapist’s focus in these 
early sessions is on increasing activation in areas that 
will improve Mark’s mood; this work will set the foun



Behavioral Activation for Depression 

dation for later work on avoidance modification and 
problem solving. 

tHeraPist: Shall we go over your Activity Record? 
mark: OK. (Hands the therapist the record.) 
tHeraPist: Why don’t you walk me through it? What 

did you learn? (Hands the record back to Mark.) 
mark: I’m not sure if this is what you had in mind. 
I started the next day after our last session. I went 
to work that day, but I was feeling so lousy that I 
left early and came home. I was just kind of fiddling 
around the house until dinner. I felt really down all 
day up to that point; I rated my mood as a 7. I did 
make dinner, which was a little better for me. I used 
to love to cook for Diana and myself, and we would 
make these big feasts sometimes with the girls. Since 
the divorce, though, sometimes I just grab a bag of 
chips or something like that, or on a good night I 
might order a pizza. When I was cooking, I felt a 
little better then, about a 5. 
tHeraPist: This is terrific. You did a really great job 
with this. You completed the record exactly as we 
talked about—writing down your activities and also 
your mood rating—and all of this information is extremely 
useful. I want to ask you some more questions 
about specific parts of the day in a minute, but 
right now let me just get an overall sense of things. 

Notice how the therapist is careful to reinforce the 
client’s efforts early in the review process. Clients are 
often uncertain about how to complete the record, and 
it is not uncommon for them to return with partially or 
improperly completed records. In such cases, therapists 
must balance the need to provide corrective feedback 
and to reinforce the client’s efforts. Frequent client errors 
include writing down activities very globally (e.g., 
“at work” for 6 hours), failing to record mood ratings, 
or failing to record anything because they did “nothing.” 
In such cases, the therapist should address these 
problems in a straightforward and matter-of-fact manner. 


tHeraPist: What happened after you made dinner? 
mark: Well, after dinner, I started watching TV, and 
everything kind of tanked from there. I sat and 
watched TV until 2:00 in the morning. I guess it 
helped in that it kept my mind off of worries about 
work and just feeling lousy about Diana, but I was 

really depressed the whole time. In fact, I rated my 
mood as a 9. 

tHeraPist: That is really important information. I see 
that you were also up the next night watching TV 
until 1:00 A.M. Is this true of a lot of nights for you, 
or are these two more like exceptions? 

mark: I wish they were exceptions, but no, it’s been 
more the rule. And then what happens is that I just 
can’t get up in the morning. Well, I guess I do wake 
up, but I just lie there in bed. I’ve been getting to 
work pretty late, and some days I just call in sick. 

tHeraPist: So we’ll use this log to pick up themes of 
specific activities that can help you feel good and 
those that may be contributing to your depression, 
like we talked about last time, the “up” and “down” 
activities. It seems like there are a few that might be 
important. I’m thinking that the watching TV and 
going to bed late is one big one, and the other two are 
cooking and how you are doing at work. 

mark: I think the TV is a really big one. 

Notice here that the therapist identified a few broad 
areas that appear to be related to the maintenance of 
the client’s depression. The BA therapist is also alert 
to disruptions in the client’s normal routines; in Mark’s 
case, both eating and sleeping routines appear to have 
been significantly altered. The therapist then works 
collaboratively with Mark to target a specific area for 
further assessment and problem solving (i.e., nighttime 
TV watching). At this point, the therapist begins the 
more explicit process of functional analysis. 

tHeraPist: OK, why don’t we start there? Let’s get 
clear first about what the problem is because it 
doesn’t sound like it’s watching TV in general. 

mark: That’s true. Normally, I would watch some TV, 
like I might watch for an hour. But, actually, come to 
think of it, I was more involved in my writing then, 
too. So, normally, I might watch TV until about 9:00 

P.M. and then turn off the TV and write for another 
hour. Or, if I had the girls, we might watch a show 
together and then turn off the TV and read or play a 
game, or just hang out together, or maybe I’d be on a 
phone call or something. 
tHeraPist: So, this is different for you. The problem, 
then, is that you don’t turn off the TV at 9:00 P.M. 
and instead watch it for an additional 4–5 hours. 

mark: Yes, that’s the problem. 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

tHeraPist: Are you doing this every night of the week 
or just on work nights? 

mark: I hate to admit it, but it’s pretty much all nights, 
not always so late, but pretty much always later than 
is good for me. 

To this point, the therapist has successfully defined 
the problem in specific and behavioral terms. With a 
clear and mutual understanding of the problem, therapist 
and client can begin to consider the contingencies 
that may be maintaining the problem and what may be 
amenable to change. 

tHeraPist: We should probably look at what gets in 
the way of turning the TV off, since it does not seem 
to have a great effect on your mood. If you were to 
turn off the TV at 9:00 P.M. now, what do you think 
would happen? 

mark: I thought about turning it off last night, but I 
just didn’t want to think about all of this stuff. 

tHeraPist: By “all this stuff,” do you mean the divorce 
and the pressures at work? 
mark: Yes, both of them. 

tHeraPist: So, that is what you are actively avoiding. 
And the TV helps you to distract? 

mark: Yes, I just don’t have the mental awareness now 
to start writing. I can’t focus on it, and I’m just not 
interested. 

tHeraPist: I think you have the right idea in terms of 
distraction, but the problem is that you are distracting 
yourself with something that doesn’t give you 
much pleasure and not much accomplishment. 

mark: And meanwhile the house is a mess. I haven’t 
paid my bills in months, and . . . 

tHeraPist: Yes, that makes sense. That’s the second 
downward spiral we talked about. What do you think 
about working together on the problem of watching 
TV? Then, we can tackle some of those other things 
you are raising. The TV problem might be simple to 
solve, but my guess is that there is more to understand 
about it. 

Notice how easily the client can become overwhelmed 
and hopeless in response to the myriad problems 
in his life. The therapist is alert to this possibility 
during sessions and is careful to refer back to the BA 
model as a way to understand the client’s experience 

and to refocus the client on the problem at hand. In 
addition, the therapist also takes a keen interest in the 
“minutiae” of the client’s day-to-day behavior, particularly 
if such behavior is related to mood. This detailed 
level of interest is critical. Its intent is twofold: First, 
such discussions guide the choice of activation targets 
and specific assignments; second, it is the intent that 
such discussions will teach Mark to take a similar interest 
and begin to notice patterns that are more and less 
helpful in working his way out of depression. 

tHeraPist: Let’s understand better what happens with 
the TV. Does it come into your mind, the thought 
that you might be better off if you turned off the TV? 

mark: Typically, I think, “I should go to bed.” But I 
know that if I go to bed, I’ll just lie there awake anyway, 
thinking about what Diana is doing, thinking 
about how much I am going to hate being at work the 
next day. So, then I think I might as well watch TV. 

tHeraPist: Is that what happens in bed? You lie there 
and ruminate about Diana or things you have done or 
haven’t done at work? 

mark: Pretty much exactly. 

In this transcript, the therapist has effectively identified 
a number of key relationships. Nighttime TV 
watching is associated with (1) deteriorated mood; (2) 
poor performance at work; and (3) a process of negative 
reinforcement in which negative affect (specifically, 
grief and anxiety) potentially is reduced when 
the client is watching TV. The therapist has done so 
in a collaborative and nonjudgmental manner, and the 
client is on board. At this point, the therapist explicitly 
examines her hypothesis with Mark about the relationship 
between TV and mood. On the basis of this understanding, 
they can then consider possible activation 
strategies. 

tHeraPist: I’m wondering if part of what is happening 
is that watching TV is helpful in the short run 
because it takes your mind away from these topics 
that are connected to a lot of potential sadness and 
also anxiety about the future. 

mark: Yeah, that’s true. 

tHeraPist: But the tough part is that while it works 
in the short run, it’s that same downward spiral or 
vicious cycle in the long run because watching TV 
gives you almost no pleasure and it keeps you from 


Behavioral Activation for Depression 

doing activities that you previously got a lot out of, 
and it sets you up for having problems at work. 
mark: Yes, exactly. It’s crazy, I know, but it’s such an 
easy way out when I’m just beaten by the day. 

tHeraPist: Absolutely! So we have to take that into 
account when we think about making any changes 
here. I’m thinking that you could try going to bed in 
spite of that, and we could work on the ruminating. 
Or, if you are going to be up, you could do things that 
are better than the TV. Which do you lean toward? 

The therapist attends to the function (distraction) of 
the problem behavior (TV watching), while engaging 
in problem solving in a very collaborative manner. 

mark: Probably finding other things, better than the 
TV. I used to go to a book group one night a week. 
It was made up of other writers and I liked a few of 
the people a lot, so when I was doing that, I was also 
doing reading in the evenings, too. 

tHeraPist: OK, does reading seem more of a way you 
could start getting back into some of your writing, 
versus jumping in with writing itself? 

mark: Yes, there is no way I could write now. I would 
just be staring at a blank page, feeling like crap. 

tHeraPist: OK, that makes sense. So what about starting 
with this? One option is that you could have a 
limit for yourself of 9:00 P.M. for TV and we could 
work on identifying a book that you could read instead. 


mark: It’s a good idea. It’s more a question of my 
doing it. 

It is very important that the therapist not gloss over 
comments such as Mark’s final statement. When clients 
express doubt about how or whether they will implement 
an activation strategy, it is essential to attend to 
this in detail. Additionally, it is helpful for the therapist 
to be attentive to statements such as “I’ll just have to 
make myself do it,” which generally indicate that therapist 
and client have not sufficiently identified the contingencies 
that control the behavior. In our experience, 
use of sheer willpower is unlikely to meet with great 
success, and suggestions of such signal that further assessment 
is required, as the therapist illustrates. 

tHeraPist: So we need to be sure we are getting at 
the real problem, instead of just saying, “Oh, you are 

going to do this,” and leaving it at that. What kind of 
reader are you? Are you someone who can get really 
involved in a book? 

mark: I do get really involved. In fact, I’ll think about 
the book a lot during the day, if I’m already into it. 

tHeraPist: But getting yourself to do it is hard. 

mark: Yes, it’s getting started on things. 

tHeraPist: That is great to know. So, we have to somehow 
get you involved in the book so that when 9:00 

P.M. rolls around, you are already involved, so it will 
be easier to turn off the TV. 
mark: That would make it easier. 

tHeraPist: What if you were to buy a book on the way 
back from our session and begin reading it in the 
café of the bookstore. 

mark: Oh, yeah, that is right on the way back. I can 
do that. 

tHeraPist: Mark, I think the trick with all of this is to 
figure out what is going to help you move toward the 
things that will be beneficial for your mood. And this 
is what is really hard—getting yourself to go back 
to the things that you used to enjoy, when you have 
no interest in them right now. When you feel good, 
you take it for granted that it’s easy to do things like 
reading, spending time with friends or your girls, 
and even writing. When you don’t feel good, you really 
notice it. The problem is that you’re in this vicious 
cycle again. The longer you do not do things, 
the more badly you feel and the less you want to do. 
The trick for us is to figure out ways to help you start 
to do some of the things that will give you pleasure 
again. 

The therapist acknowledges to the client that the new 
behavior will be hard to initiate because of mood, and 
that it is necessary to do so anyway. Many times, clients 
employ an “inside-out” or mood-dependent approach 
to their depression; that is, they passively wait for their 
mood to improve before making behavioral changes. 
BA therapists teach clients that when they feel down, 
they cannot afford to wait for a better mood to strike 
them. The goal is to get active when they feel down 
(as hard as that is). Increasing activation will eventually 
improve mood, even if not immediately, and it 
will interrupt the pattern of secondary problems created 
by withdrawal and avoidance. Addressing mooddependent 
behavior (or talking about an outside-in vs. 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

inside-out approach) is a sensitive point in therapy, in 
which a great deal of empathy for the experience of 
feeling depressed is required. The therapist must skillfully 
balance encouragement of action with validation 
of the difficulty of activating when depressed. In addition, 
strongly encouraging even the smallest signs 
of increased activation (frequently with the use of significant 
praise) is essential in supporting the process 
of change. 

mark: Yeah, I know. A lot of the time I might know 
what I need to do, but I have no idea how to get 
myself to do it. I’ve just dropped a lot of stuff, like 
anything social in the evenings. I don’t try to make 
plans. And, like I said, for almost a year I was going 
to that writer’s book group every Thursday. But then 
I said to myself, I’m not writing. This whole divorce 
is wiping me out. What is the point of going? I have 
nothing to add.” But it’s true that when I went, I 
used to get a lot out of it. I’m just not interested now, 
though. 

tHeraPist: Yes, exactly. That’s where you and I will 
work together. I want to come back to the social connections 
and the routines around writing, but let’s 
stick with the reading and nighttime TV for a bit longer 
first, if that’s OK? 

mark: Yeah, that makes sense. 

tHeraPist: Let’s think through this book plan again. 
Is there anything that might come up between here 
and the bookstore that would derail that plan? 

At this point, the therapist and Mark spend the remainder 
of the session discussing particular books he 
could purchase that would maximize his engagement, 
and they discuss potential barriers that might arise to 
derail him from the intended plan. They also continued 
to review the Activity Record to identify other key 
problems, including ruminating at work, withdrawing 
from social networks, and experiencing disruptions 
in routines that previously brought him pleasure (e.g., 
cooking, exercise). In each case, the therapist uses a 
similar method that she used with the problem of TV 
watching: defining the problem, identifying the antecedent 
and consequences, and checking out hypotheses 
about how the activity is related to mood with the client. 
The therapist also frequently returns to the overall 
BA model to help explain links between activities and 
mood. In each case, they work to learn together what 
possible targets will be most promising for activation. 

Also, the therapist continues to emphasize that simply 
deciding to “make myself do it” is not likely to 
be an effective activation strategy for Mark, and that 
it is essential to tie the activation plan to a clear understanding 
of the function of the problem behaviors. 
The therapist employs a combination of gentle questioning, 
consistent validation of the roles of withdrawal 
and avoidance through reliance on the BA model, and 
repeated discussion of potential barriers to activation 
plans. Importantly, the therapist also highlights for 
Mark that compliance with the homework assignments 
may not bring immediate relief. 

“What will be really good this week is to see what 
effect these things have on your mood. Even if they 
have just a little bit of a positive effect, then we know 
that we are on the right track. And, Mark, they might 
not have an immediate positive effect on your mood. 
It might be that the act of getting yourself to do it is 
the success itself, and that you need to keep doing it 
for a while before you start to feel better. But, it’s my 
guess that some of this stuff will help your mood a 
little bit, even in the short run.” 

The session concluded with the therapist and Mark 
reviewing the homework assignments, which included 
purchasing a new book, starting to read it in the café, 
and turning off the TV every night at 9:00 P.M. and 
reading. In addition, they agreed that Mark would return 
a telephone call of an old friend, Mary, who lived 
in his neighborhood and had been trying to contact him 
recently. 

Session 4 

Mark arrived at to Session 4 with little improvement 
in the severity of his depression. He reported that he 
had increased his social contact but was not feeling any 
better. Mark also had delayed the task of purchasing the 
new book and continued to watch TV late at night. The 
therapist addressed both of these problems in a direct, 
matter-of-fact way with curiosity and interest. 

mark: It was a really bad weekend. I did call Mary and 
ended up going to this kind of cocktail party at the 
community pool that she had organized. I was kind 
of shocked that I went, but I thought being outside 
would do me good. I was thinking about what we 
were talking about, and I thought about how much 
I used to love swimming. I was actually a lifeguard 


Behavioral Activation for Depression 

during summers in college. But I think I felt worse 
after I went. I suppose there were moments that were 
fun, but I was so frustrated by it all. I just spent the 
rest of the weekend holed up in my apartment. 

tHeraPist: Would that be good to put on the agenda? 
Doing things that you used to enjoy and not enjoying 
them? 

mark: Sure. 

tHeraPist: And I want to make sure we check in about 
how it went with the book versus the TV, too. Which 
do you want to talk about first—calling Mary and 
the party or the TV? 

mark: I guess we can do the TV first. I just bought the 
book today. On Friday, I was at that party, so I didn’t 

get home and in bed until midnight. 

tHeraPist: Did you watch TV then? 

mark: No, I do think I was more tired from being out


side all night, so I just fell asleep when I got back. 

tHeraPist: And what about Saturday and last night? 

mark: It was kind of par for the course. I stayed up late 

both nights. 

Given the importance of attending consistently and 
regularly to the completion of homework, here the therapist 
assesses what interfered with Mark’s full completion 
of the previous assignment. 

tHeraPist: I’m glad you bought the book. That’s terrific! 
I’m curious, too, though, about what got in the 
way of getting it sooner. Am I recalling correctly 
that you were going to buy it on the way back from 
the session last week? 

mark: Yeah, I was, but when I left, someone called me 
from work about needing to meet, so I didn’t have as 
much time as I thought. But I thought I could do it 
after work, and then in the evening, I thought, “I’ll 
get it on the weekend because I’ll have more time.” 
I don’t know. 

tHeraPist: If you go back to your leaving the session 
last time, when you got the phone call from work, 
was there anything else that derailed the plan? 

mark: No, that was really it. I was still pretty optimistic 
about getting the book. It was just that I didn’t 
have as much time as I thought I would, and I had to 
get to work. 

tHeraPist: OK, that is good to know. So your plan was 

to get the book on the weekend, and you just bought 
it today. On the weekend, did you think about getting 
it, or did it just come up again today? 

mark: I did, but I felt so bad after the party I just 
couldn’t get myself to do it. 

tHeraPist: It sounds like you were really down. Do 
you remember that diagram we used in our first session 
to understand the big picture of depression? I 
think it fits here, too. 

mark: How so? 

tHeraPist: So, if we think about the party as what 
happened, then you felt really down and discouraged, 
right? (Pulls out the model and writes in this 
situation.) 

mark: Definitely. 

tHeraPist: And you pulled away by staying at home 
over the weekend and not buying the book. My guess 
is that this fueled feeling more discouraged. Is that 
right? 

mark: Totally. I thought, good heavens, I can’t even do 
a simple thing like buy a damn book. 

tHeraPist: That’s it, so there is that downward spiral 
getting set into motion. 

mark: It’s it exactly. I wanted to do less and less and I 
felt worse and worse. 

tHeraPist: It’s great that you can see how these are all 
connected. I’m curious how it was that you got yourself 
to get the book today. Are you feeling better, or 
is it something else? 

mark: I’m not feeling quite as bad, and given that I 
was already out, it was easier to go get the book. 
Plus I knew that we were going to meet and you were 
probably going to ask me about it. 

tHeraPist: That is so great to know! So one thing we 
know is that I have got to keep following up about 
these things because it helps you do them. 

mark: (laughing a little) True, not that I enjoyed 
imagining being called to task on it, but it did help, 
I guess. 

tHeraPist: And getting yourself out of the house to 
buy a book this weekend was a lot harder than getting 
yourself out this morning, since you were already 
leaving to go to work. Being out already made 
it easier to accomplish your task. 

mark: Right. That sort of thing seems to happen a lot 
lately. 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

tHeraPist: So one solution would be to not wait for 
the weekend when you’ve got a specific task to do 
because that seems to be a harder time for you to 
accomplish things. The other thing would be for us 
to set up a system of phone check-ins when you are 
feeling particularly down, since it seems to help to 
know that we will be following up on these tasks 
when we meet. The other issue, though, is to figure 
out what brought you down so much this weekend, 
and what to do about that. 

mark: I think that is the biggest thing. 

tHeraPist: Shall we talk a bit about the party and the 
weekend in order to figure out what is going to help 
most? How does that sound? And we’ll make sure to 
come back to the TV and reading plan. 

mark: OK. I would like not to feel as lousy as I was 
feeling. 

tHeraPist: Why don’t we take a look at your Activity 
Record? (Reviews the record.) It looks like your 
mood ratings were moderate on Thursday and Friday 
after we met. Then, Friday, at the party and for the 
rest of the weekend, they were high—7’s, 8’s, and 
9’s, too. 

mark: I’m not sure this is for me, honestly. I think I 
gave it a fair shot, calling Mary, going to the party. 
I didn’t want to do either, but I did. And I felt worse 
afterwards. 

When clients report that they are increasing activation 
and their mood is not improving, it is important to 
assess a number of possible explanations. First, therapists 
may consider whether the activation assignments 
were too ambitious and did not incorporate successful 
grading. In such cases, it is important for therapists to 
acknowledge responsibility for this and recommend an 
assignment based on smaller components of the task. 
Second, therapists want to consider whether the functional 
analysis was accurate. Is it possible that they are 
activating the client in a domain that is unlikely to yield 
improvements in mood? Third, therapists want to consider 
whether ruminative thinking is interfering with 
activation. In such cases, clients “physically” engage in 
the activation assignments, whereas “mentally” they remain 
disengaged from their context and are less likely 
to have an opportunity to experience reward. Fourth, 
it is possible that although activation may not immediately 
improve mood, it may still be “on the right track,” 
because clients are taking active steps toward solving 
problems and addressing important life goals. 

In Mark’s case, the therapist decided initially to 
pursue the possibility that rumination was interfering 
with activation, based on Mark’s comments in earlier 
sessions about frequently ruminating about Diana and 
their divorce. 

tHeraPist: I guess one thing we could explore together 
is what was on your mind during the party. 
When you were standing by the pool talking to other 
people, or even swimming in the water, what was on 
your mind? 

mark: You know, when I was diving into the water, 
I do remember that those were the pleasurable moments 
of the party. The sound of the water splashing, 
the coolness, the silence under the water, that was 
all great. That is what I used to love about swimming 
too. But the other part—I think I was mentally 
checking out. I was with a lot of people I really like. 
Mary is great, and her whole family was back visiting 
from the East Coast. I haven’t seen them in years 
and I really enjoy all of them. They are great people. 
But, it didn’t really matter. I just wasn’t there. 

tHeraPist: Were you thinking about Diana or yourself 
in relation to her? 

mark: Yeah, that was mainly it. 

tHeraPist: Were the other folks there conversing with 
you? 

mark: Yes, and I was talking with them. I mean, I 
could hear the words coming out of my mouth, but I 
was just not there. 

tHeraPist: So you have one rating on this record for 
the party, a 7. But, if we were to break these different 
pieces apart—the swimming, when you were fully 
engaged with the activity, and the talking, when your 
mind was elsewhere—what would you rate each? 

mark: The swimming . . . it was good. I guess that 
would be a 3, if 0 is feeling good; I mean it didn’t 
take it all away. But the talking . . . that was terrible, 
a 9. 

The therapist has successfully identified the problem 
that was interfering with the potential benefits of activation. 
She continues to assess the nature and scope of 
the problem. 

tHeraPist: I’m trying to figure out if when you are 
actively engaged in an activity that kind of requires 
some attention to it, are those the times that are more 
enjoyable? 


Behavioral Activation for Depression 

mark: Yeah, that’s true. 

tHeraPist: Is this a problem that also interferes with 
your mood and accomplishment of tasks at work? 

mark: Yes, exactly. I go into my office and it’s like 
where does the time go? Hours go by and I haven’t 
done a damn thing. I’m just wandering over and over 
things that happened with Diana, what I said, what I 
could have said. It’s awful. 

tHeraPist: OK, so we know this is an important problem 
to address. It’s interfering with your enjoyment 
of times that have the potential to improve your 
mood, and it’s interfering with managing your job 
well. Can we spend a little more time on what hap


pened at the party? 

mark: OK. 

tHeraPist: How would you normally be when talking 
with Mary’s family, if you were not thinking 
about all these things? What would I see differently 
in those times than what I might have observed on 
Friday? 

mark: I’d be talking to everyone. I wouldn’t be feeling 
so bad. 

tHeraPist: Yes, that is exactly true. What I’m really 
curious about is, when you are not feeling so bad, 
what would you be doing differently? Would you be 
asking them more questions? Making more eye contact? 
Responding differently? 

mark: Yeah, all of those things. I’d be more active in 
the conversation. 

tHeraPist: So you would be more engaged. 

mark: Yes, more engaged. Less of that heavy feeling; 
you know, that “this really sucks” feeling. 

In the preceding portion of the session, the therapist 
has begun to define behaviorally what Mark does 
in interpersonal interactions when he is not depressed. 
Carefully specifying these behaviors is an important 
step in developing some possible plans for targeted 
change in how Mark approaches similar situations. 

tHeraPist: Do you think that if you could practice 
talking, when you weren’t feeling down, more like 
you normally would with these people that you 
might feel better? 

mark: I don’t know. 

tHeraPist: I think the key is to notice what you do in 
response to the ruminating and to see whether that is 

helping or not helping your mood, and then for us to 
begin to explore what you may need to do differently. 
It seems that at the party, what you were doing when 
your mood was better, was to be more engaged. 

mark: It’s true. But, when I’m like this, I don’t have 
much to say. 

tHeraPist: Yes, when you are depressed, you are more 
quiet and withdrawn. 

mark: Yes, because it’s painful. I see Mary’s parents 
and I think, “They’ve been married for 30 years. I 
could have had that with Diana.” Then, I start thinking 
that she is with someone else. It just goes downhill 
from there. 

tHeraPist: You are absolutely right. There is a lot of 
pain there. And what’s happened is that in response 
to that pain, you have narrowed activity in your life. 
So you not only feel the pain of being reminded of 
that loss, but also there is not a lot else going on in 
your life. And even when you are doing things, you 
are not as engaged because you are feeling so much 
pain. I think we need to get you back to doing the 
things you did before you had the breakup, and before 
the two of you got together. We need to get you 
back to your baseline, and once we do that, we can 
figure out how to get you feeling even better than 
that. 

mark: It sounds good. 

tHeraPist: I know you are thinking this is like pie in 
the sky, but we can figure out how to do this. The key 
is to figure out some concrete and manageable steps 
to help you engage more when you are doing some of 
these activities, like going to the party. You are right. 
It’s worlds harder to do when you are not feeling 
well, but these behaviors are partly why you enjoyed 
those occasions more in the past. We know that you 
enjoyed Mary and her family in the past, and we 
know that you got a lot of pleasure from swimming 
when your mind was fully present with the activity. 
So the trick is not only to call your friends, like you 
did so wonderfully with Mary, but also to go to the 
gathering, and to get yourself really to interact instead 
of just being there at the party. For times when 
you find yourself withdrawing into your thoughts, 
we need to develop specific strategies to help you do 
less of that. Can you think of anything that would 
help you do that? 

mark: I don’t know. I just don’t seem to have much to 
say these days. 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

tHeraPist: I know it’s hard. There are a variety of 
things you could try, such as asking more questions, 
and then closely attending to the response. Or you 
could focus on something more specific, such as 
voice or facial expression, to keep your mind from 
wandering. Sometimes it works just to notice that 
you’ve drifted and to take a deep breath to refocus 
on your goal in that moment. 

mark: I suppose I could try it. My mind just seems to 
keep wandering. 

tHeraPist: I know. So your job here would be to practice 
being more vigilant as to when that happens 
because it will happen. The more you notice you’re 
drifting, the more you can practice refocusing yourself 
back on your friend. Does your mind wander in 
here? 

mark: I guess a little. 

tHeraPist: Why don’t we try it in here? Let’s pick 
something to focus on, and then you can practice 
here. 

mark: OK. What do I do? 

tHeraPist: I’m going to time us for the next 5 minutes 
and, as we talk, I want you to practice fully engaging 
in our discussion. Your mind is going to wander, 
particularly if we are talking about something that 
reminds you of Diana, I would guess. So let’s pick 
something you can focus on to bring your attention 
back to our conversation. How about the sound of my 
voice, like changes in tone, how I articulate words, 
the pace of my speech? 

mark: I can try. 

tHeraPist: Great. So, let’s talk about some options for 
social connections that you could make this weekend. 

The therapist and Mark continued this discussion for 
the next few minutes, at which time, the therapist interrupted 
their conversation to ask Mark for feedback 
about his experience. 

tHeraPist: What did you notice? 

mark: I don’t know, maybe you are talking kind of 
softly. 

tHeraPist: How engaged were you with our discussion? 
Why don’t you give me a rating, with 0 being 
not engaged at all and 10 being totally engaged? 

mark: I guess maybe 7. It wasn’t that hard here because 
I was really focused. I guess I did start to think 

about Diana a little when we were talking about my 
calling Mary. I did remind myself to pay attention 
to your voice, and I guess you just sounded so interested. 
It made it harder for me to wander off in my 
thoughts when you seemed to be paying so much attention 
to what we were talking about. 

tHeraPist: That was my impression, too, that your 
engagement was generally high, and that you did appear 
to refocus your attention a couple times. That 
is terrific! 

mark: Yeah, but it was a little strange. I mean, usually 
people aren’t that focused when they are just talking 
about usual stuff. 

tHeraPist: That is very true. I might have been paying 
closer attention to what you were doing and saying 
than other folks are in typical social interactions. 
And this may feel pretty artificial now in general. My 
guess, though, is that once you get more engaged in 
social interactions, it won’t be necessary to concentrate 
so hard. It will just come automatically again. 

mark: That makes sense. 

In this way, the therapist generates a strategy to block 
avoidance (rumination) by substituting a new behavior 
in the form of attending to direct and immediate experience. 
Although, in this case, Mark experimented with 
directing his attention to interpersonal stimuli, clients 
may also be directed to experiment with attention to 
other aspects of sensory stimuli, such as sights, smells, 
and so forth. The in-session behavioral rehearsal is 
very important in that it allows the client to practice 
and receive direct feedback from the therapist, both of 
which increase the likelihood of success outside of the 
session. The therapist then returns to the specific task 
of reviewing and developing behavioral assignments 
for the next session. 

tHeraPist: Let’s go back to your not getting out all 
weekend. Do you think going out to buy the book 
was too hard? Is there something easier you could’ve 
done to help you get a little more engaged this weekend? 


mark: I’m not sure. How hard is it to go out and buy 
a book? 

tHeraPist: Very hard, when you’re really down. Let’s 
think about smaller steps. If you can do a smaller 
step and get a little reinforcement for it, then it becomes 
easier to move toward your goal. 


Behavioral Activation for Depression 

The therapist and client continue along these lines 
with graded task assignment. Given that Mark has previously 
enjoyed socializing, he and the therapist came 
up with a plan that on the weekend, he would start by 
returning some phone calls from friends and inviting 
Mary for lunch. During lunch, he would focus specifically 
on attending to their conversation. The therapist 
also raised the possibility of swimming as an exercise 
activity. Mark reported that he thought his plate was 
full with the assignments they had already developed, 
and they decided to table further discussion of swimming. 
The therapist then uses the final moments of the 
session to review the homework, to encourage progress, 
to validate the difficulty of change, and to reinforce the 
basic treatment model. 

Session 5 

At the outset of the session, Mark reports improvement 
in his mood and the therapist includes this as an item 
on the agenda. Their discussion allows the therapist to 
emphasize an important point about maintaining new 
behaviors in consistent and regular routines. In this session, 
the therapist continues to emphasize the pattern of 
social connections and to assess factors that increase 
Mark’s vulnerability to exacerbated mood when alone. 

tHeraPist: Let’s understand in more detail how it is 
that you are feeling better? 
mark: I think the reading plan is helping. I finished 
the book. 

tHeraPist: Great! So you probably need another book. 

mark: (laughing) I guess that’s true. You don’t think 
just the one cured the problem? 

tHeraPist: (laughing) Oh, how I wish that were the 
case! Seriously, though, Mark, I think that is such an 
important question. There is a real temptation when 
you start feeling a little better to back off from some 
of the very things that are helping. It makes sense 
because making these changes requires so much 
effort, I know. But maintaining the routines are so 
important. 

mark: It’s true. I actually think I’ve been doing pretty 
well with that this week. I’ve been reaching out more 
to other people. 

tHeraPist: This is fantastic. 

mark: And Mary called me again. So, I guess I didn’t 
do what we talked about in terms of calling her, but 

I did ask her about lunch when she called. I didn’t 
really want to because I was feeling down when 
she called. I had just gotten a letter from the lawyer 
about some new money stuff with Diana. But, I did 
ask Mary, and I took the girls, too. I think they enjoyed 
it a lot. I did really focus on asking them all a 
lot of questions during lunch. I think that helped, too. 

tHeraPist: Mark, you have definitely had more social 
contact in the last few days! You are doing a huge 
part of this treatment, which is acting in accordance 
with the goals and plans that we are setting here, as 
opposed to being directed by how you feel in the moment. 


mark: I tried. 

tHeraPist: You did it! You talked about having lunch 
with your coworker. Did you do that? 

mark: I did do that. 

tHeraPist: You did a lot! That’s great. OK, I may be 
pushing our luck here, but what do you think about 
adding swimming to our agenda? 

mark: I knew you were going to ask about that again. 

tHeraPist: (laughing) You know me too well. What’s 
your thought about it? 

mark: It’s probably a good idea. There is actually a 
swim lesson that the girls like to do on the weekends, 
and I could take them and do laps at the same time 
in the other pool. 

tHeraPist: Fantastic! Do you have them with you this 
weekend? Could we schedule that for the weekend? 

mark: Yeah, I think that would help. 

tHeraPist: Mark, do you think that reconnecting with 
people and some of these activities, like reading, are 
connected with your improved mood? 

mark: Yes, that definitely had a lot to do with it. I am 
still not sure that we are getting to the real problem 
with all of this, but you are right that it does help. 

tHeraPist: So we should talk about that, too. Before 
we move to that, is there anything else that you think 
is contributing to your positive mood, or is it mostly 
having more social contact, which you find reinforcing? 


mark: It’s the social contact and trying to distract myself 
with the reading. 

tHeraPist: That is so great! Good reminder, too. Let’s 
talk some about another book and how to keep up 
that schedule. 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

At this point, the therapist and Mark focus on developing 
a specific plan for selecting and purchasing a new 
book to continue the reading routine. Next, the therapist 
returns to Mark’s comments about whether the interventions 
are addressing what is most important. 

tHeraPist: What you mentioned before about the real 
problem . . . I’m curious what you meant. 

mark: I guess I’m still thinking about Diana a lot. I 
think that there is a part of me that has to let go, yet 
just isn’t letting go. I am thinking, just asking myself, 
“Is there still a chance for us? What did I do to screw 
it all up so badly?” And then I start thinking, “Is 
this all I have now—having lunch with people, reading 
by myself at night?” You know, the kind of stuff 
we’ve been focusing on . . . I don’t know. Is it really 
going to fix anything? 

tHeraPist: Mark, I know it feels like this stuff isn’t 
really getting at the real problem in terms of your 
thinking about Diana, and I agree that is really important 
to talk about. At the same time, I don’t want 
us to lose sight of the fact that this other stuff makes 
a huge difference. It’s important for you to reconnect 
with ways to buoy up your mood before you start 
to tackle some of the past problems and those that 
still come up with Diana. Also, I think we will find 
that there are some similar patterns, so maybe the 
ways you have tended to pull away from other people 
since you’ve been down might have some connections 
with what happened with Diana. 

mark: That’s true. I guess they are not totally separate. 

tHeraPist: Are you saying that it’s time now to start 
focusing our time more directly on those topics? 

mark: I think so. Maybe I’m more aware of it because 
I’m feeling a little better. I guess I’m asking more 
often, “Is this all there is now?” It just seems like a 
damn lonely life to be leading, if this is it. 

The therapist and Mark end the session by reviewing 
the assignments. In addition, they agree on a plan to 
return to Mark’s important questions in the next session. 


Sessions 6–9 

In this next series of sessions, the therapist and Mark 
return to Mark’s question from Session 5. In repeated 
sessions, he reports improvements in mood related 
to making progress on projects at home, exercising, 
and becoming more socially connected in casual and 
friendship circles. These areas of progress are reflected 
consistently on his Activity Record forms, which now 
specifically target the areas of social engagement, 
reading, and swimming (see Figure 9.4). (This version 
of the Activity Record can be considered when the activation 
targets are clear and well developed, and the 
detailed information gained via hour-by-hour monitoring 
is not as necessary. It can also be used for clients 
who have difficulty with the more detailed Activity 
Record.) 

Even with clear areas of improved activation and 
mood, Mark also reports that his mood is vulnerable to 
his tendency to ruminate frequently about his ex-wife. 
The therapist and Mark begin to explore the potential 
function of rumination about his ex-wife. As they did 
with respect to both TV watching and rumination dur-

Task 
Monday 
Tuesday 
Wednesday 
Thursday 
Friday 
Saturday 
Sunday 
Reading 
Reaching 
out 
to 
other 
people 
Swimming 
Mood 
5 
5 
5 
6 
8 
3 
3 


figUre 9.4. Sample completed Activity Record (daily). 


Behavioral Activation for Depression 

ing social interactions, they develop some initial hypotheses 
about the consequences of Mark’s ruminating 
about his ex-wife. 

TherapisT: Is it possible that ruminating might be a 
form of avoidance itself? It’s like your mind gets 
stuck in a broken record format. You keep replaying 
what you did wrong, what you could have done, and 
one of the effects is that you are actually avoiding 
the painful emotions about the loss of the relationship, 
and maybe also avoiding exploring new relationships? 


Mark: It feels like I can’t stand the loss of it. That’s 
what I can’t accept—that it is lost. I keep thinking 
maybe there is a way to recapture it, even though I 
know there simply is not. We can’t even communicate 
about the kids’ health care without a lawyer. 

TherapisT: So, in a way, ruminating may be a way to 
avoid feeling grief and sadness. I wonder if part of 
this comes from what you learned about how to cope 
with major loss after your dad left. It seems like no 
one talked about that and you got pretty caught up 
in thinking about how you might have been responsible. 
I wonder if it’s hard to know what to do emotionally 
right now. 

Mark: It’s certainly true about what happened when I 
was a kid. 

TherapisT: So one possibility we could experiment 
with is taking time specifically to experience the 
sadness and loss. 

Mark: I don’t know. Thinking about her and what I’ve 
lost seems overwhelming. I just want to be done with 
it and move on. 

TherapisT: I know. Exactly! The problem is that ruminating 
seems to have the effect of keeping you 
from moving on. Instead of moving onto other relationships 
or pursuits in your life, your mind keeps 
replaying what happened and didn’t happen with 
Diana. 

Mark: I just don’t know if I’m ready for other relationships. 


TherapisT: So, if you weren’t ruminating as much, do 
you think you might experience more fear? 

Mark: When I think about getting into another relationship. 
. . . You know, I think that there is actually a 
person at work who is interested in dating, but that’s 
been part of the reason that I’ve kind of held back 

from doing things with her. She’s asked me to lunch 
a couple of times. I just don’t want to be back in the 
same place again 2 years from now. I can’t take this 
whole thing again, and I don’t want to subject my 
kids to it either. 

TherapisT: So, it may be possible that ruminating has 

the effect of keeping at bay not only feelings of loss 

about Diana but also fears about future loss. 

The therapist also emphasized the importance of 
continuing with activation plans developed in earlier 
sessions to maintain adaptive routines and improve 
mood. In particular, they highlight the need for consistent 
attention to social contact, exercise, and reading. 
In addition, the therapist and Mark discuss his return to 
the writers’ group into more detail, beginning to break 
down that larger task into manageable pieces. Work on 
these targets forms the majority of the middle of the 
course of treatment. As Mark begins to address feelings 
of loss more directly and continues his work on social 
connections, exercise, and limiting TV watching, he 
also begins to express interest in dating again. 

Sessions 10–15 

In this section of treatment, the therapist and Mark 
begin to address directly the prospect of his developing 
new intimate relationships in his life, specifically with 
a woman at work to whom he is attracted. They explore 
what is necessary to approach rather than avoid Mark’s 
fear of starting a new relationship, and the therapist 
hypothesizes in particular that Mark’s ruminative style 
may have functioned to avoid learning from patterns in 
past relationships. The therapist used the TRAP/TRAC 
acronym as a simple way to help Mark recognize the 
conditions under which he was likely to avoid (the 
TRAP), and to then engage in more adaptive coping 
behavior to get back on “TRAC.” For example, Mark 
reported that he would see the woman at work (trigger), 
begin to feel nervous (response), and either not 
talk with her or restrict his conversation to perfunctory 
work issues (the avoidance pattern). His alternative 
coping under the same conditions involved asking her 
if she would like to have coffee. Sessions then focus 
heavily on examining in detail what Mark might learn 
from his former marriage that would be instructive in 
future relationships. The following dialogue provides 
an example of the types of foci that these sessions target. 



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

mark: One of the things that happened a lot with 
Diana is I never felt like I was really present with her 
or the girls. It was like they were in this little world 
together and I was always on the outside somehow. 
I often thought that I should put myself more in the 
center, like say more of what I thought, but I just 
didn’t. I never did. 

tHeraPist: Did that cause conflict with her? 

mark: Yes, absolutely. It was one of things that she 
said when she ended things. Being on the outside is 
a big thing for me. 

tHeraPist: What does being on the outside involve 
specifically? How would I know if you were doing 
that? 

mark: It’s just not being willing to speak up about 
things. She always said it was like I wasn’t really 
in or out on anything, just kind of on the fence the 
whole time. 

tHeraPist: Can you think of a specific example when 
that was an issue? 

mark: Well, my mother and brothers never really liked 
Diana very much, but I didn’t do much to stand up 
for her with them. I just kind of let things unfold. . . . 

tHeraPist: So, that might have been a TRAP with 
her? Was it a trigger that you thought she wanted 
something from you in terms of your commitment? 

mark: Yes, it was, because I ended up feeling really 
overwhelmed by that. 

tHeraPist: And the avoidance pattern was withdrawing. 


mark: I did. I just backed off, and she had to handle 
the whole scene with my family. 

tHeraPist: So with your coworker, if you were to take 
a stand with her now, what would that look like? 
What would alternative coping be? 

mark: I have no idea. 

tHeraPist: Do you think there is a similar trigger? 

mark: Maybe, because I think she is wondering what’s 
up with me? Like am I interested or not? 

tHeraPist: Have you been clear with her about being 
interested in dating her? 

mark: Not really. We talk often at work, but I can’t say 
that I’ve really said much about it. 

tHeraPist: Would you like to ask her out? 

mark: Yes, I guess I would. 

tHeraPist: Why don’t we think of some specific 

things you could say as alternatives to withdrawing 

and practice with some of them? 

In these sessions, the therapist and Mark define, in 
very specific and concrete terms, the types of behaviors 
associated with decreased satisfaction and quality 
in his former marriage. For instance, the therapist’s 
following question to Mark is a central question asked 
repeatedly over the course of BA: “What does being on 
the outside involve specifically? What does it look like? 
How would I know if you were doing that?” The therapist 
emphasizes identifying clear, specific, and observable 
behaviors when analyzing behaviors and defining 
goals. Then, the therapist and Mark work to identify 
specific strategies that he can use to practice alternative 
behaviors in pursuing a future relationship. They continue 
to use the TRAP/TRAC framework to examine 
situations that arise and Mark’s response, and to guide 
him toward a more engaged approach to intimate interpersonal 
relationships. As Mark begins dating, they 
have ample opportunity to revise and refine strategies 
through activation assignments that target being direct 
and present in intimate interactions. 

Sessions 16–19 

By Session 16, the therapist and Mark agree that the 
bulk of the work of understanding and problem-solving 
Mark’s depression in terms of his unique life context 
and avoidant response patterns that maintain his depression 
has been completed. Mark has successfully 
activated in terms of his secondary problem behaviors 
(e.g., increased reading, exercise, social contacts, and 
projects around the house; decreased TV watching) and 
he has taken steps toward solving the problems of grief 
and fear of intimacy via initiating a new relationship. 

Thus, the final sessions of treatment focused on reviewing 
and consolidating primary themes and methods 
used in therapy. Specifically, the therapist and 
Mark identified the importance of continuing to practice 
his new skills of blocking rumination by attending 
to immediate goals and to his direct and immediate 
experience, and being more direct and expressive with 
his new partner. In addition, the therapist carefully reviewed 
with Mark the ways he had learned to use the 
BA fundamentals himself. Together they reviewed 
ways that Mark would know when he was starting to 
feel depressed or to engage in avoidance response patterns. 
They also reviewed specific steps he could take 


Behavioral Activation for Depression 

to begin self-monitoring his mood and activities, and to 
problem-solve alternative coping behaviors. They also 
specifically identified a number of alternative behaviors 
that were uniquely helpful in breaking the vicious cycle 
of depression, avoidance, and withdrawal; these antidepressant 
behaviors included, for example, exercise, 
calling a friend, and reading. Mark reported that he felt 
well equipped with these tools and the opportunities he 
had had to practice them in therapy. He also reported 
feeling encouraged about the positive changes he had 
already made in his life. He ended treatment expressing 
optimism about his future and warmly thanked the 
therapist for all of their work together. Over time, Mark 
continued to maintain the gains he made in treatment. 
He established a new relationship with a woman, and 
they became engaged over the course of the following 
year. He continued to practice many of the skills 
he had learned in therapy in the context of this new 
relationship, with his children, and with his coworkers 
and friends. 

Case Summary 

The course of treatment with Mark provides an example 
of many of the core principles and strategies of BA. The 
treatment followed from careful and ongoing functional 
analysis of key problems that Mark presented, which 
in turn allowed the therapist to develop the organizing 
case conceptualization. This work was completed in 
collaboration with Mark during sessions and was also 
a focus of the ongoing clinical consultation team meetings, 
of which Mark’s therapist was a member. During 
treatment, the therapist used a range of specific strategies, 
including goal setting, self-monitoring, graded 
task assignment, problem solving, behavioral rehearsal, 
and attention to experience. She also addressed a number 
of important treatment targets frequently observed 
in BA, including interpersonal avoidance, rumination, 
and routine disruption. 

Overall, the therapist worked as a coach throughout 
therapy, helping Mark to problem-solve specific steps 
to overcome patterns of avoidance and to engage in activities. 
She also taught Mark to identify links between 
activity and mood so that they could learn together 
where to focus time and attention. She used the EN-
LIVEN strategies within each session. She maintained 
the structure of each session and the overall course of 
treatment, with a sustained focus on learning together 
and taking action. She maintained a matter-of-fact, 
nonjudgmental, problem-solving approach to the chal


lenge of treating depression and the difficulties that 
arose during the course of Mark’s therapy, responding 
with warmth, encouragement, and understanding. She 
relied consistently on the BA model, acknowledging 
the difficulty of change when depressed and the importance 
of action, especially when mood is low. She returned 
regularly and persistently to an activation focus 
on the selected targets of change and worked as a team 
with Mark to support him in learning how to build a life 
that was rich and rewarding. 

coNclusioN 

This chapter provides the conceptual basics and the 
how-to specifics that are required to use BA with depressed 
clients. Evolving from the seminal foundation 
established by the work of Ferster, Lewinsohn, and 
Beck, BA highlights the power of direct and sustained 
attention to behavior change. BA aims to help clients 
become active and engaged in their lives in ways that 
reduce current depression and help to prevent future 
episodes. BA therapists help depressed clients to increase 
activities that bring greater reward and to solve 
important problems. Both outcome research and other 
converging lines of empirical inquiry suggest that BA 
holds promise as an efficacious treatment for depression 
(Dimidjian et al., 2011). Future research will examine 
in greater detail the process of change in BA and 
the ease with which BA can be transported to a wide 
range of clinical practice settings. 

referenCes 

Acierno, R., Rheingold, A., Amstadter, A., Kurent, J., Amella, 
E., Resnick, H., et al. (2012). Behavioral activation 
and therapeutic exposure for bereavement in older adults. 

American Journal of Hospice and Palliative Medicine, 
29(1), 13–25. 

Addis, M. E., & Carpenter, K. M. (2000). The treatment 
rationale in cognitive behavioral therapy: Psychological 
mechanisms and clinical guidelines. Cognitive and Behavioral 
Practice, 7(2), 147–156. 

Addis, M. E., & Martell, C. R. (2004). Overcoming depression 
one step at a time: The new behavioral activation 
approach to getting your life back. Oakland, CA: New 
Harbinger. 

American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and 
statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.). Arlington, 
VA: Author. 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

Armento, M. E. A., & Hopko, D. R. (2007). The Environmental 
Reward Observation Scale (EROS): Development, 
validity, and reliability. Behavior Therapy, 38, 107–119. 

Armento, M. E. A., & Hopko, D. R. (2009). Behavioral activation 
of a breast cancer patient with coexistent major depression 
and generalized anxiety disorder. Clinical Case 
Studies, 8(1), 25–37. 

Barraca, J., Pérez-Álvarez, M., & Lozano Bleda, J. H. (2011). 
Avoidance and activation as keys to depression: Adaptation 
of the Behavioral Activation for Depression Scale in 
a Spanish sample. Spanish Journal of Psychology, 14(2), 
998–1009. 

Beck, A. T., Rush, A. J., Shaw, B. F., & Emery, G. (1979). 
Cognitive therapy of depression. New York: Guilford 
Press. 

Beck, A. T., Steer, R. A., & Brown, G. K. (1996). Manual for 
the BDI-II. San Antonio, TX: Psychological Corporation. 

Bennett-Levy, J., Butler, G., Fennell, M., Hackman, A., Mueller, 
M., & Westbrook, D. (2004). Oxford guide to behavioural 
experiments in cognitive therapy. Oxford, UK: Oxford 
University Press. 

Borkovec, T. D., Newman, M. G., Pincus, A. L., & Lytle, R. 
(2002). A component analysis of cognitive-behavioral 
therapy for generalized anxiety disorder and the role of 
interpersonal problems. Journal of Consulting and Clinical 
Psychology, 70, 288–298. 

Carvalho, J. P., Gawrysiak, M. J., Hellmuth, J. C., McNulty, 

J. K., Magidson, J. F., Lejuez, C. W., et al. (2010). The 
reward probability index: design and validation of a scale 
measuring access to environmental reward. Behavior 
Therapy, 42(2), 249–262. 
Christopher, M. S., Jacob, K. L., Neuhaus, E. C., Neary, T. J., 
& Fiola, L. A. (2009). Cognitive and behavioral changes 
related to symptom improvement among patients with a 
mood disorder receiving intensive cognitive-behavioral 
therapy. Journal of Psychiatric Practice, 15(2), 95–102. 

Cuijpers, P., van Straten, A., & Warmerdam, L. (2007). 
Behavioral activation treatments of depression: A metaanalysis. 
Clinical Psychology Review, 27, 318–326. 

Cullen, J. M., Spates, C. R., Pagoto, S. L., & Doran, N. 
(2006). Behavioral activation treatment for major depressive 
disorder: A pilot investigation. Behavior Analyst 
Today, 7, 151–166. 

Curran, J., Lawson, P., Houghton, S., & Gournay, K. (2007). 
Implementing behavioural activation in inpatient psychiatric 
wards. Journal of Mental Health Training, Education 
and Practice, 2(2), 28–35. 

Daughters, S. B., Braun, A. R., Sargeant, M. N., Reynolds, E. 
K., Hopko, D. R., Blanco, C., et al. (2008). Effectiveness of 
a brief behavioral treatment for inner-city illicit drug users 
with elevated depressive symptoms: The Life Enhancement 
Treatment for Substance Use (LETS Act!). Journal 
of Clinical Psychiatry, 69(1), 122–129. 

Dimidjian, S. (2011, July). Behavioral activation. Workshop 
presentation at Sangath, Goa, India. 

Dimidjian, S., Barrera, M., Jr., Martell, C., Muñoz, R. F., & 
Lewinsohn, P. M. (2011). The origins and current status 
of behavioral activation treatments for depression. Annual 
Review of Clinical Psychology, 7, 1–38. 

Dimidjian, S., Hollon, S. D., Dobson, K. S., Schmaling, K. 
B., Kohlenberg, R. J., Addis, M., et al. (2006). Randomized 
trial of behavioral activation, cognitive therapy, and 
antidepressant medication in the acute treatment of adults 
with major depression. Journal of Consulting and Clinical 
Psychology, 74, 658–670. 

Dobson, K. S., Hollon, S. D., Dimidjian, S., Schmaling, K. 
B., Kohlenberg, R. J., Gallop, R., et al. (2008). Randomized 
trial of behavioral activation, cognitive therapy, and 
antidepressant medication in the prevention of relapse and 
recurrence in major depression. Journal of Consulting and 
Clinical Psychology, 76(3), 468–477. 

Ekers, D. M., Dawson, M. S., & Bailey, E. (2013). Dissemination 
of behavioural activation for depression to mental 
health nurses: training evaluation and benchmarked clinical 
outcomes. Journal of Psychiatric and Mental Health 
Nursing, 20(2), 186–192. 

Ekers, D., Richards, D., & Gilbody, S. (2008). A metaanalysis 
of randomized trials of behavioural treatment of 
depression. Psychological Medicine, 38(5), 611–623. 

Ekers, D., Richards, D., McMillan, D., Bland, J. M., & Gilbody, 
S. (2011). Behavioural activation delivered by the 
non-specialist: Phase II randomised controlled trial. British 
Journal of Psychiatry, 198(1), 66–72. 

Ferster, C. B. (1973). A functional analysis of depression. 
American Psychologist, 28, 857–870. 

Ferster, C. B. (1981). A functional analysis of behavior therapy. 
In L. P. Rehm (Ed.), Behavior therapy for depression: 
Present status and future directions (pp. 181–196). New 
York: Academic Press. 

First, M. B., Spitzer, R. L., Gibbon, M., & Williams, J. B. W. 
(1997). User’s guide for the Structured Clinical Interview 
for DSM-IV Axis I Disorders. Washington, DC: American 
Psychiatric Press. 

First, M. B., Spitzer, R. L., Gibbons, M., Williams, J. B. W., & 
Benjamin, L. (1996). User’s guide for the Structured Clinical 
Interview for DSM-IV Axis II Personality Disorders 
(SCID-II). New York: Biometrics Research Department, 
New York State Psychiatric Institute. 

Foa, E. B., Rothbaum, B. O., & Furr, J. M. (2003). Augmenting 
exposure therapy with other CBT procedures. Psychiatric 
Annals, 33, 47–53. 

Gawrysiak, M., Nicholas, C., & Hopko, D. R. (2009). Behavioral 
activation for moderately depressed university students: 
Randomized controlled trial. Journal of Counseling 
Psychology, 56(3), 468–475. 

Gloaguen, V., Cottraux, J., Cucherat, M., & Blackburn, I. M. 
(1998). A meta-analysis of the effects of cognitive therapy 
in depressed patients. Journal of Affective Disorders, 49, 
59–72. 

Gollwitzer, P. M. (1999). Implementation intentions: Strong 


Behavioral Activation for Depression 

effects of simple plans. American Psychologist, 54, 493– 
503. 

Gortner, E. T., Gollan, J. K., Dobson, K. S., & Jacobson, N. 

S. (1998). Cognitive-behavioral treatment for depression: 
Relapse prevention. Journal of Consulting and Clinical 
Psychology, 66, 377–384. 
Gros, D. F., & Haren, W. B. (2011). Open trial of brief behavioral 
activation psychotherapy for depression in an integrated 
Veterans Affairs primary care setting. Primary 
Care Companion to CNS Disorders, 13(4). 

Hamilton, M. A. (1960). A rating scale for depression. Journal 
of Neurology, Neurosurgery, and Psychiatry, 23, 
56–61. 

Hayes, A. M., Castonguay, L. G., & Goldfried, M. R. (1996). 
Effectiveness of targeting the vulnerability factors of depression 
in cognitive therapy. Journal of Consulting and 
Clinical Psychology, 64(3), 623–627. 

Hayes, S. C., Strosahl, K. D., & Wilson, K. G. (1999). Acceptance 
and commitment therapy: An experiential approach 
to behavior change. New York: Guilford Press. 

Hopko, D. R., Armento, M. E. A., Robertson, S., Ryba, M. M., 
Carvalho, J. P., Colman, L. K., et al. (2011). Brief behavioral 
activation and problem-solving therapy for depressed 
breast cancer patients: Randomized trial. Journal of Consulting 
and Clinical Psychology, 79(6), 834–849. 

Hopko, D. R., Bell, J. L., Armento, M. E. A., Hunt, M. K., 
& Lejuez, C. W. (2005). Behavior therapy for depressed 
cancer patients in primary care. Psychotherapy, 42(2), 
236–243. 

Hopko, D. R., Lejuez, C. W., & Hopko, S. D. (2004). Behavioral 
activation as an intervention for coexistent depressive 
and anxiety symptoms. Clinical Case Studies, 3(1), 
37–48. 

Hopko, D. R., Lejuez, C. W., LePage, J. P., Hopko, S. D., & 
McNeil, D. W. (2003). A brief behavioral activation treatment 
for depression: A randomized pilot trial within an 
inpatient psychiatric hospital. Behavior Modification, 27, 
458–469. 

Hopko, D. R., Sanchez, L., Hopko, S. D., Dvir, S., & Lejuez, 

C. W. (2003). Behavioral activation and the prevention 
of suicidal behaviors in patients with borderline personality 
disorder. Journal of Personality Disorders, 17(5), 
460–478. 
Houghton, S., Curran, J., & Saxon, D. (2008). An uncontrolled 
evaluation of group behavioural activation for 
depression. Behavioural and Cognitive Psychotherapy, 
36(2), 235–239. 

Hubley, S., Woodcock, E. A., Dimeff, L. A., & Dimidjian, 

S. (in press). Disseminating behavioural activation for 
depression via online training: Preliminary steps. Behavioural 
and Cognitive Psychotherapy. 
Jacobson, N. S., Dobson, K. S., Truax, P. A., Addis, M. E., Koerner, 
K., Gollan, J. K., et al. (1996). A component analysis 
of cognitive-behavioral treatment for depression. Journal 
of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 64, 295–304. 

Jacobson, N. S., Martell, C. R., & Dimidjian, S. (2001). Behavioral 
activation treatment for depression: Returning to 
contextual roots. Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 
8, 255–270. 

Jakupcak, M., Roberts, L. J., Martell, C., Mulick, P., Michael, 
S., Reed, R., et al. (2006). A pilot study of behavioral activation 
for veterans with posttraumatic stress disorder. 
Journal of Traumatic Stress, 19(3), 387–391. 

Kanter, J. W., Hurtado, G. D., Rusch, L. C., Busch, A. M., 
& Santiago-Rivera, A. (2008). Behavioral activation for 
Latinos with depression. Clinical Case Studies, 7(6), 
491–506. 

Kanter, J. W., Mulick, P., Busch, A. M., Berlin, K. S., & Martell, 
C. (2007). The Behavioral Activation for Depression 
Scale (BADS): Psychometric properties and factor structure. 
Journal of Psychopathology and Behavioral Assessment, 
29(3), 191–202. 

Kanter, J. W., Rusch, L. C., Busch, A. M., & Sedivy, S. K. 
(2009). Validation of the Behavioral Activation for Depression 
Scale (BADS) in a community sample with elevated 
depressive symptoms. Journal of Psychopathology 
and Behavioral Assessment, 31(1), 36–42. 

Kanter, J. W., Santiago-Rivera, A. L., Rusch, L. C., Busch, 

A. M., & West, P. (2010). Initial outcomes of a culturally 
adapted behavioral activation for Latinas diagnosed with 
depression at a community clinic. Behavior Modification, 
34(2), 120–144. 
Kroenke, K., Spitzer, R., & Williams, J. (2001). The PHQ-9: 
Validity of a brief depression severity measure. Journal of 
General Internal Medicine, 16, 606–613. 

Lazzari, C., Egan, S. J., & Rees, C. S. (2011). Behavioral activation 
treatment for depression in older adults delivered 
via videoconferencing: A pilot study. Cognitive and Behavioral 
Practice, 18(4), 555–565. 

Lejuez, C. W., Hopko, D. R., Acierno, R., Daughters, S. B., 
& Pagoto, S. L. (2011). Ten year revision of the brief behavioral 
activation treatment for depression: Revised treatment 
manual. Behavior Modification, 35(2), 111–161. 

Lejuez, C. W., Hopko, D. R., LePage, J. P., Hopko, S. D., & 
McNeil, D. W. (2001). A brief behavioral activation treatment 
for depression. Cognitive and Behavioral Practice, 
8(2), 164–175. 

Lewinsohn, P. M. (1974). A behavioral approach to depression. 
In R. M. Friedman & M. M. Katz (Eds.), The psychology 
of depression: Contemporary theory and research 
(pp. 157–185). New York: Wiley. 

Lewinsohn, P. M., Antonuccio, D. O., Steinmetz-
Breckenridge, J., & Teri, L. (1984). The Coping with Depression 
Course: A psychoeducational intervention for 
unipolar depression. Eugene, OR: Castalia. 

Lewinsohn, P. M., Biglan, A., & Zeiss, A. S. (1976). Behavioral 
treatment of depression. In P. O. Davidson (Ed.), The 
behavioral management of anxiety, depression and pain 

(pp. 91–146). New York: Brunner/Mazel. 
Lewinsohn, P. M., & Graf, M. (1973). Pleasant activities and 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

depression. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 
41, 261–268. 

Lewinsohn, P. M., Hoberman, H., Teri, L., Hautzinger, M. 
(1985). An integrative theory of depression. In S. Reiss & 

R. Bootzin (Eds.) Theoretical issues in behavior therapy, 
(pp. 331–359). New York: Academic Press. 
Lewinsohn, P. M., Sullivan, J. M., & Grosscup, S. J. (1980). 
Changing reinforcing events: An approach to the treatment 
of depression. Psychotherapy: Theory, Research, 
Practice, and Training, 17, 322–334. 

Linehan, M. M. (1993). Cognitive-behavioral treatment 
of borderline personality disorder. New York: Guilford 
Press. 

Locke, E. A., & Latham, G. P. (2002). Building a practically 
useful theory of goal setting and task motivation: A 35year 
odyssey. American Psychologist, 57, 705–717. 

MacPherson, L., Tull, M. T., Matusiewicz, A. K., Rodman, 
S., Strong, D. R., Kahler, C. W., et al. (2010). Randomized 
controlled trial of behavioral activation smoking cessation 
treatment for smokers with elevated depressive symptoms. 
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 78(1), 
55–61. 

Mairs, H., Lovell, K., Campbell, M., & Keeley, P. (2011). 
Development and pilot investigation of behavioral activation 
for negative symptoms. Behavior Modification, 35(5), 
486–506. 

Manos, R. C., Kanter, J. W., & Busch, A. M. (2010). A critical 
review of assessment strategies to measure the behavioral 
activation model of depression. Clinical Psychology Review, 
30, 547–561. 

Manos, R. C., Kanter, J. W., & Luo, W. (2011). The Behavioral 
Activation for Depression Scale–Short Form: Development 
and validation. Behavior Therapy, 42(4), 
726–739. 

Martell, C. R., Addis, M. E., & Jacobson, N. S. (2001). Depression 
in context: Strategies for guided action. New 
York: Norton. 

Martell, C. R., Dimidjian, S., & Herman-Dunn, R. (2010). 
Behavioral activation for depression: A clinician’s guide: 
Guilford Press. 

Mazzucchelli, T., Kane, R., & Rees, C. (2009). Behavioral 
activation treatment of depression in adults: A metaanalysis 
and review. Clinical Psychology: Science and 
Practice, 16, 383–411. 

McCauley, E., Schloredt, K., Gudmundsen, G., Martell, C., 
& Dimidjian, S. (2011). Expanding behavioral activation 
to depressed adolescents: Lessons learned in treatment 
development. Cognitive and Behavioral Practice, 18(3), 
371–383. 

Meeks, S., Looney, S. W., Van Haitsma, K., & Teri, L. (2008). 
BE-ACTIV: A staff-assisted behavioral intervention for 
depression in nursing homes. The Gerontologist, 48(1), 
105–114. 

Meeks, S., Teri, L., Van Haitsma, K., & Looney, S. (2006). 

Increasing pleasant events in the Nursing Home Collaborative 
Behavioral Treatment for Depression. Clinical Case 
Studies, 5(4), 287–304. 

Mohammadi, A., & Amiri, M. (2010). Behavioral Activation 
for Depression Scale: Psychometric properties and confirmatory 
factor analysis for Persian version. Iranian Journal 
of Psychiatry and Clinical Psychology, 16, 65–73. 

Mulick, P. S., & Naugle, A. E. (2004). Behavioral activation 
for comorbid PTSD and major depression: A case study. 
Cognitive and Behavioral Practice, 11(4), 378–387. 

National Institute of Health and Clinical Excellence. (2009). 
Depression: The treatment and management of depression 
in adults. London: Author. 

Nolen-Hoeksema, S. (2000). The role of rumination in depressive 
disorders and mixed anxiety/depressive symptoms. 
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 109, 504–511. 

Pagoto, S., Bodenlos, J. S., Schneider, K. L., Olendzki, B., 
& Spates, C. R. (2008). Initial investigation of behavioral 
activation therapy for co-morbid major depressive disorder 
and obesity. Psychotherapy Theory Research and Practice, 
45, 410–415. 

Porter, J. F., Spates, C. R., & Smitham, S. (2004). Behavioral 
activation group therapy in public mental health settings: 
A pilot investigation. Professional Psychology: Research 
and Practice, 35(3), 297–301. 

Quijano, L. M., Stanley, M. A., Petersen, N. J., Casado, B. L., 
Steinberg, E. H., Cully, J. A., et al. (2007). Healthy IDEAS: 
A depression intervention delivered by community-based 
case managers serving older adults. Journal of Applied 
Gerontology, 26(2), 139–156. 

Raes, F., Hoes, D., Van Gucht, D., & Kanter, J. W. (2010). 
The Dutch version of the behavioral activation for depression 
scale (BADS): Psychometric properties and factor 
structure. Journal of Behavior Therapy and Experimental 
Psychiatry, 41, 246–250. 

Reynolds, E. K., MacPherson, L., Tull, M. T., Baruch, D. E., 
& Lejuez, C. W. (2011). Integration of the brief behavioral 
activation treatment for depression (BATD) into a college 
orientation program: Depression and alcohol outcomes. 
Journal of Counseling Psychology, 58(4), 555–564. 

Ritschel, L. A., Ramirez, C. L., Jones, M., & Craighead, 

W. E. (2011). Behavioral activation for depressed teens: 
A pilot study. Cognitive and Behavioral Practice, 18(2), 
281–299. 
Ruggiero, K. J., Morris, T. L., Hopko, D. R., & Lejuez, C. W. 
(2007). Application of behavioral activation treatment for 
depression to an adolescent with a history of child maltreatment. 
Clinical Case Studies, 6(1), 64–78. 

Schneider, K. L., Pagoto, S. L., Handschin, B., Panza, E., 
Bakke, S., Liu, Q., et al. (2011). Design and methods for a 
pilot randomized clinical trial involving exercise and behavioral 
activation to treat comorbid type 2 diabetes and 
major depressive disorder. Mental Health and Physical 
Activity, 4(1), 13–21. 


Behavioral Activation for Depression 

Scogin, F., Jamison, C., & Gochneaur, K. (1989). Comparative 
efficacy of cognitive and behavioral bibliotherapy for 
mildly and moderately depressed older adults. Journal of 
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 57, 403–407. 

Segal, Z. V., Williams, J. M. G., & Teasdale, J. D. (2002). 
Mindfulness-based cognitive therapy for depression. New 
York: Guilford Press. 

Snarski, M., Scogin, F., DiNapoli, E., Presnell, A., McAlpine, 
J., & Marcinak, J. (2011). The effects of behavioral activation 
therapy with inpatient geriatric psychiatry patients. 
Behavior Therapy, 42(1), 100–108. 

Sood, J. R., Cisek, E., Zimmerman, J., Zaleski, E. H., & Fillmore, 
H. H. (2003). Treatment of depressive symptoms 
during short-term rehabilitation: An attempted replication 
of the DOUR project. Rehabilitation Psychology, 48(1), 
44–49. 

Spates, C. R., Kalata, A. H., Ozeki, S., Stanton, C. E., & Peters, 
S. (2012). Initial open trial of a computerized behavioral 
activation treatment for depression. Behavior Modification, 
36(6), 1–39. 

Spek, V., Cuijpers, P. I. M., Nyklicek, I., Riper, H., Keyzer, 
J., & Pop, V. (2007). Internet-based cognitive behaviour 
therapy for symptoms of depression and anxiety: A metaanalysis. 
Psychological Medicine, 37(3), 319–328. 

Spek, V., Cuijpers, P., Nyklicek, I., Smits, N., Riper, H., 
Keyzer, J., et al. (2008). One-year follow-up results of a 
randomized controlled clinical trial on internet-based 
cognitive behavioural therapy for subthreshold depression 
in people over 50 years. Psychological Medicine, 38(5), 
635–640. 

Teri, L., Logsdon, R. G., Uomoto, J., & McCurry, S. M. 
(1997). Behavioral treatment of depression in dementia 
patients: A controlled clinical trial. Journals of Gerontology: 
Psychological Sciences, 52, 59–66. 

Uebelacker, L. A., Weisberg, R. B., Haggarty, R., & Miller, 

I. W. (2009). Adapted behavior therapy for persistently 
depressed primary care patients: An open trial. Behavior 
Modification, 33(3), 374–395. 

Van Voorhees, B. W., Fogel, J., Reinecke, M. A., Gladstone, 
T., Stuart, S., Gollan, J., et al. (2009). Randomized clinical 
trial of an internet-based depression prevention program 
for adolescents (Project CATCH-IT) in primary care: 12week 
outcomes. Journal of Developmental and Behavioral 
Pediatrics, 30(1), 23–37. 

Wagner, A. W., Zatzick, D. F., Ghesquiere, A., & Jurkovich, 

G. J. (2007). Behavioral activation as an early intervention 
for posttraumatic stress disorder and depression among 
physically injured trauma survivors. Cognitive and Behavioral 
Practice, 14(4), 341–349. 
Ware, J. E., & Sherbourne, C. D. (1992). The MOS 36-Item 
Short-Form Health Survey (SF-36), I: Conceptual framework 
and item selection. Medical Care, 30, 473–483. 

Warmerdam, L., Van Straten, A., Twisk, J., Riper, H., & Cuijpers, 
P. (2008). Internet-based treatment for adults with 
depressive symptoms: Randomized controlled trial. Journal 
of Medical Internet Research, 10, e44. 

Watson, D. L., & Tharp, R. G. (2002). Self directed behavior. 
Belmont, CA: Wadsworth/Thomson Learning. 

Weinstock, L. M., Munroe, M. K., & Miller, I. W. (2011). Behavioral 
activation for the treatment of atypical depression: 
A pilot open trial. Behavior Modification, 35(4), 403–424. 

Weissman, M. M., & Bothwell, S. (1976). Assessment of social 
adjustment by patient self-report. Archives of General 
Psychiatry, 33(9), 1111–1115. 

Zeiss, A. M., Lewinsohn, P. M., & Muñoz, R. F. (1979). 
Nonspecific improvement effects in depression using interpersonal 
skills training, pleasant activity schedules, 
or cognitive training. Journal of Consulting and Clinical 
Psychology, 47, 427–439. 

Zettle, R. D., & Rains, J. C. (1989). Group cognitive and contextual 
therapies in treatment of depression. Journal of 
Clinical Psychology, 45(3), 436–445. 


CHaPter 10 

Borderline Personality Disorder 

aNDraDa D. Neacsiu 
Marsha M. liNehaN 

This chapter presents one of the more remarkable developments in all of psychotherapy. 
few therapists are willing to undertake the overwhelmingly difficult and wrenching task 
of treating individuals with “borderline” characteristics, yet these people are among the 
neediest encountered in any therapeutic setting. They also impose an enormous burden 
on the health care system. over the past several decades, linehan and her colleagues 
have developed a demonstrably effective treatment for individuals with borderline personality 
disorder (BPD) that constitutes one of the most substantial contributions to the 
armamentarium of the psychotherapist in recent times. What is even more interesting 
is that this approach blends emotion regulation, interpersonal systems, and more traditional 
cognitive‑behavioral approaches into a coherent whole. To this mix linehan adds 
her personal experience with eastern philosophies and religions, yet the authors remain 
true to the empirical foundations of their approach. The fascinating case study presented 
in this chapter illustrates linehan’s therapeutic expertise and strategic timing in a way 
that will be invaluable to all therapists who deal with personality disorders. The surprising 
and tragic outcome underscores the enormous burden of clinical responsibility inherent 
in any treatment setting, as well as the practical issues that arise when treatment 
ultimately fails.—D. H. B. 

Clinicians generally agree that clients with a diagnosis 
of borderline personality disorder (BPD) are 
challenging and difficult to treat. As a result, BPD 
has become a stigmatized disorder resulting in negative 
attitudes, trepidation, and concern with regard to 
providing treatment (Aviram, Brodsky, & Stanley, 
2006; Lequesne & Hersh, 2004; Paris, 2005). Perhaps 
of greatest concern is the generally high incidence of 
suicidal behavior among this population. Approximately 
75% of clients who meet criteria for BPD have 
a history of suicide attempts, with an average of 3.4 attempts 
per individual (Soloff, Lis, Kelly, Cornelius, & 
Ulrich, 1994). Suicide threats and crises are frequent, 
even among those who never engage in any suicidal or 

nonsuicidal self-injurious behavior (NSSI). Suicidal 
ideation is also frequent and contributes to the onset 
and maintenance of daily negative mood (Nisenbaum, 
Links, Eynan, & Heisel, 2010). Although much of this 
behavior is without lethal consequence, follow-up studies 
of individuals with BPD have found suicide rates 
of about 7–8%, and the percentage who eventually 
commit suicide is estimated at 10% (for a review, see 
Linehan, Rizvi, Shaw-Welch, & Page, 2000). Among 
all individuals who have committed suicide, from 7 to 
38% meet criteria for BPD, with the higher incidence 
occurring primarily among young adults with the disorder 
(e.g., Brent et al., 1994; Isometsa et al., 1994). 
Lethality and frequency of suicidal behavior seem to 

394 


Borderline Personality Disorder 

be strongly related to impulsivity (Chesin, Jeglic, & 
Stanley, 2010) and poor psychosocial functioning (Soloff 
& Chiappetta, 2012), which may make it difficult to 
decide what to prioritize in treatment. Individuals with 
BPD also have difficulties with anger and anger expression. 
Not infrequently, intense anger is directed at their 
therapists. The frequent coexistence of BPD with both 
Axis I conditions (e.g., mood or anxiety disorders) and 
other personality disorders clearly complicates treatment 
further. In particular, comorbid posttraumatic 
stress disorder (PTSD) results in greater impairment 
in individuals with BPD (Harned, Rizvi, & Linehan, 
2010). 

The criteria for BPD, as defined in the fifth edition 
of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental 
Disorders (DSM-5; American Psychiatric Association, 
2013), reflect a pervasive pattern of instability and 
dysregulation across all domains of functioning. An 
additional popular measure for BPD is Zanarini’s Rating 
Scale for BPD (ZAN-BPD; Zanarini, 2003). Other 
assessment measures used to diagnose BPD include 
the International Personality Disorders Examination 
(IPDE; Loranger, 1995) and the Diagnostic Interview 
for DSM-IV Personality Disorders (DIPD-IV; Zanarini, 
Frankenburg, Sickel, & Yong, 1996). The Borderline 
Symptom List (BSL; Bohus et al., 2001, 2007) and 
the McLean Screening Instrument for Borderline Personality 
Disorder (MSI-BPD; Zanarini et al., 2003) are 
additional screening measures for BPD. 

Linehan (1993a), followed by additional theorists, 
proposed BPD to be a disorder of pervasive emotion 
dysregulation (see also Conklin & Westen, 2005; Livesley, 
Jang, & Vernon, 1998). Indeed, most DSM-5 BPD 
criterion behaviors can be defined either as a direct 
consequence of emotion dysregulation or as responses 
that function to modulate the aversive emotional states 
(Linehan, 1993b; McMain, Korman, & Dimeff, 2001). 

More recent research is finding that problems with 
emotion dysregulation are common in many other 
DSM disorders (Kring & Sloan, 2010). Individuals diagnosed 
with a variety of other mental health disorders 
appear to have emotion dysregulation patterns that are 
similar to those seen in BPD. Increased sensitivity and 
reactivity, when compared to controls, has been connected 
to generalized anxiety disorder (GAD; Mennin, 
Heimberg, Turk, & Fresco, 2005), substance dependence 
(Thorberg & Lyvers, 2006), and social anxiety 
disorder (SAD) and specific phobias (Etkin & Wager, 
2007). Furthermore, the transaction between vulnerability 
and an insufficient coaching environment is 

similar to the etiological theories presented in panic 
disorder (Barlow, Allen, & Choate, 2004), GAD (Mennin, 
2004), and some specific phobias (Cisler, Olatunji, 
Feldner, & Forsyth, 2010). Thus, pervasive emotion 
dysregulation is likely relevant to many other clinical 
populations beyond BPD. 

This chapter focuses primarily on describing dialectical 
behavior therapy (DBT), as a treatment of BPD 
(Linehan, 1993a, 1993b) and of pervasive emotion 
dysregulation. Before describing DBT, we first review 
other treatments for BPD and provide information on 
their theoretical rationales and supporting data (when 
such data are available). We then present the empirical 
support for DBT as a treatment for BPD and for emotion 
dysregulation. This is followed by a more in-depth 
description of DBT—its philosophical roots, underlying 
theory, and treatment protocols. 

overview of other 
treatMeNt aPProaches 

Various approaches have been applied to the treatment 
of BPD. Although it is not our purpose to present a 
scholarly review of all the many treatments for BPD, 
we believe it helpful to review briefly the status of other 
treatments before presenting DBT in detail. 

Psychodynamic 

Psychodynamic approaches currently receiving the 
most attention include those of Kernberg (1984; Kernberg, 
Selzer, Koenigsberg, Carr, & Appelbaum, 1989), 
Adler and Buie (1979; Adler, 1981, 1993; Buie & Adler, 
1982), and Bateman and Fonagy (2004). Among these, 
Kernberg’s (1984) theoretical contributions are clearly 
prominent. His object relations model is comprehensive 
as to theory and technique and has had considerable influence 
on the psychoanalytic literature. His expressive 
psychotherapy for clients with “borderline personality 
organization” (BPO) or BPD, transference-focused 
psychotherapy (TFP), emphasizes three primary factors: 
interpretation, maintenance of technical neutrality, 
and transference analysis. The focus of the therapy 
is on exposure and resolution of intrapsychic conflict. 
Treatment goals include increased impulse control and 
anxiety tolerance, ability to modulate affect, and development 
of stable interpersonal relationships. TFP 
also uses a target hierarchy approach in the first year of 
treatment. The targets are (1) containment of suicidal 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

and self-destructive behaviors, (2) therapy-destroying 
behaviors, and (3) identification and recapitulation of 
dominant object relational patterns, as experienced in 
the transference relationship (Clarkin, Levy, Lenzenweger, 
& Kernberg, 2007). Kernberg (1984) has also distinguished 
a supportive psychotherapy for more severely 
disturbed clients with BPO or BPD. Like expressive 
psychotherapy, supportive psychotherapy also places 
great emphasis on the importance of the interpersonal 
relationship in therapy (transference); however, interpretations 
are less likely to be made early in treatment, 
and only the negative responses to the therapist and to 
therapy (negative transference) are explored. Both expressive 
and supportive psychotherapy are expected to 
last several years, with primary foci on suicidal behaviors 
and therapy-interfering behaviors. The data supporting 
the use of TFP are not extensive. Clarkin and 
colleagues (2007) conducted a multisite randomized 
controlled trial (RCT) comparing TFP with the leading 
evidence-based treatment (DBT) and with an additional 
psychodynamic psychotherapy treatment designed to 
exclude elements considered to be the mechanism of 
change in TFP. A sample of mixed-gender individuals 
with BPD was randomized to DBT (N = 30), TFP (N = 
30), and dynamic supportive treatment (ST; N = 30). 
Research therapists were supervised on a weekly basis, 
and adherence ratings were assessed although not reported. 
Results indicated that all three treatments demonstrated 
improvement in depression, anxiety, global 
functioning, and interpersonal adjustment. Only DBT 
and TFP were associated with significant improvement 
in suicidality (small effect sizes); similarly, only 
the psychodynamic treatments resulted in significant 
reductions in anger (medium effect sizes). According 
to the Clarkin and colleagues, irritability, physical and 
verbal assault, and impulsivity only changed in TFP. 
These results represent within-condition changes, as 
there were no differences between conditions. TFP was 
superior to control conditions in a secondary analysis 
including several measures of psychodynamic constructs, 
such as metacognitive and social-cognitive 
capacities, and reflective functioning (Levy & Scala, 
2012). These results must be interpreted with caution. 
While positive changes were evident in all conditions, 
the mechanism of change proposed for TFP was not 
supported, and the comparison condition was questionable 
given that it is unclear whether the DBT therapists 
were adherent to the model. 

Doering and colleagues (2010), followed up with an 
independent RCT comparing TFP with treatment by 

behavioral and nonbehavioral community experts. One 
hundred and four women diagnosed with BPD underwent 
1 year of treatment. The authors reported that TFP 
was superior in reducing suicidality, dropout, borderline 
psychopathology, use of services, and poor global 
functioning. Participants in TFP on average received 
twice as many sessions. When researchers controlled 
for the number of sessions attended, group differences 
on suicide attempts and use of services were no longer 
significant, although all other results remained 
significant (Doering et al., 2010). This study has been 
criticized for including all participants in the analyses 
(regardless of whether they attended any therapy session) 
and for choosing post hoc a statistical test that did 
not accurately reflect the findings on suicidal behavior 
(Kleindienst, Krumm, & Bohus, 2011). 

Mentalization therapy, developed by Bateman and 
Fonagy (2004), is an intensive therapy grounded in attachment 
theory (i.e., BPD is viewed as an attachment 
disorder), with a focus on relationship patterns and 
nonconscious factors inhibiting change. “Mentalization” 
refers to one’s perception or interpretation of the 
actions of others and oneself as intentional. The treatment 
is based on the theory that individuals with BPD 
have an inadequate capacity for mentalization. Treatment, 
therefore, focuses on bringing the client’s mental 
experiences to conscious awareness, facilitating a more 
complete, integrated sense of mental agency. The goal 
is to increase the client’s capacity for recognizing the 
existence of the thoughts and feelings he/she is experiencing. 
Mentalization-based therapy (MBT) has been 
successfully offered as an 18-month partial hospitalization 
followed by 18-month biweekly therapy (Bateman 
& Fonagy, 1999) or as an 18-month outpatient individual 
and group intervention (Bateman & Fonagy, 2009). 
MBT as a treatment for BPD has been tested with two 
RCTs. 

The first RCT compared 18 months of treatment 
as usual (TAU) with MBT for 18 months in a partial 
hospitalization setting, followed by 18 months of outpatient 
MBT (Bateman & Fonagy, 1999). Clients were 
randomly assigned to either standard psychiatric care 
without individual psychotherapy (control condition) 
or to partial hospitalization, a treatment program with 
the following goals of therapy: (1) psychoanalytically 
informed engagement of clients in treatment; (2) 
reduction of psychopathology, including depression 
and anxiety; (3) reduction of suicidal behavior; (4) 
improvement in social competence; and (5) reduction 
in lengthy hospitalizations. The experimental treat



Borderline Personality Disorder 

ment group received once-weekly individual psychotherapy 
provided by psychiatric nurses, once-weekly 
psychodrama-based expressive therapy, thrice-weekly 
group therapy sessions, a weekly community meeting, 
a monthly meeting with a case administrator, and 
a monthly medications review. At the end of the 18month 
partial-hospitalization treatment, those receiving 
MBT showed significant reductions in suicidal 
behavior (suicide attempts and self-mutilation), inpatient 
hospitalization stays, measures of psychopathology 
(including depression and anxiety), and social 
functioning relative to the control group. These gains 
were maintained and increased during an 18-month 
follow-up period consisting of twice-weekly group 
therapy (Bateman & Fonagy, 2001). The researchers 
noted that their program contains three characteristics 
they hypothesize to be related to treatment effectiveness: 
a consistent theoretical rationale for treatment, 
a relationship focus, and consistent treatment 
over time. Gains were maintained at a 5-year followup, 
although participants in MBT continued to have 
impairments in general social function (Bateman & 
Fonagy, 2008). 

The second RCT (Bateman & Fonagy, 2009) compared 
18 months of outpatient MBT with a structured 
clinical management (SCM) control condition. 
MBT included individual and group psychotherapy, 
as well as crisis phone coaching. SCM developed by 
the authors to mirror best practices in the treatment 
of BPD was primarily a supportive intervention, with 
case management including both group and individual 
therapy. It was unclear from the study description 
whether participants in both conditions were offered a 
similar amount of time in therapy. Assessments were 
conducted at pretreatment, at 6 and 12 months during 
treatment, and at the end of treatment. One hundred 
and thirty-four men and women with a diagnosis 
of BPD and a recent history of suicidal behavior were 
included in the study. Analyses were conducted at each 
assessment time point, and not longitudinally, which 
makes results difficult to interpret. Nevertheless, substantial 
improvements in both conditions was reported, 
with MBT being superior to SCM in reducing suicide 
attempts in the last 6 months, self-injury episodes in 
the last 12 months, and hospitalization throughout the 
treatment year. SCM was superior to MBT in reducing 
self-harm episodes in the first 6 months of treatment. 
MBT was also significantly better than SCM at increasing 
general assessment of functioning, depression, and 
social adjustment (Bateman & Fonagy, 2009). 

Psychopharmacological 


Reviews of the literature regarding drug treatments for 
BPD highlight a dilemma for the prescribing pharmacotherapist: 
BPD involves dysregulation in too many 
domains for a single drug to serve as a panacea (Dimeff, 
McDavid, & Linehan, 1999; Lieb, Zanarini, Linehan, 
& Bohus, 2004; Nose, Cipriani, Biancosino, Grassi, & 
Barbui, 2006). In general, results indicate that several 
agents may be useful for improving global functioning, 
cognitive-perceptual symptoms (e.g., suspiciousness, 
ideas of reference, transitory hallucinations), emotion 
dysregulation, or impulsive–behavioral dyscontrol (for 
reviews, see Lieb et al., 2004; Nose et al., 2006). 

Lieb, Völlm, Rücker, Timmer, and Stoffers (2010) 
conducted a meta-analysis of 27 RCTs and organized the 
evidence based on class of medications. They found that 
for first-generation antipsychotics, evidence supports the 
effectiveness of haloperidol in the reduction of anger 
and flupentixol in the reduction of suicidal behavior. 
Thiothixene was found not to be effective. For secondgeneration 
antipsychotics, evidence supports aripiprazole’s 
effectiveness in reducing pathological symptoms 
of BPD, as well as comorbid psychopathology. Olanzapine 
is accumulating increased evidence with regard to 
its positive effect in reducing affective instability, anger, 
and psychotic symptoms, although findings for its effect 
on suicidal behavior are mixed (Lieb et al., 2010). In 
addition to superiority to placebo, olanzapine has been 
shown to decrease impulsive aggression and chronic 
dysphoria more effectively than fluoxetine (Zanarini, 
Frankenburg, & Parachini, 2004). Olanzapine is consistently 
found to have a weight gain side effect. Ziprasidone 
was found not to be effective (Lieb et al., 2010). 

With regard to mood stabilizers and antidepressants, 
valproate semisodium was found to have a significant 
effect in reducing interpersonal problems and depression 
in clients with BPD, including those with aggressive 
and impulsive behavior (Stein, Simeon, Frenkel, 
Islam, & Hollander, 1995). Lamotrigine is more effective 
than placebo in reducing impulsivity, and topiramate 
was found to reduce associated psychopathology 
and anger. Topiramate was found to have a significant 
side effect of weight loss. Antidepressants evidenced 
limited effectiveness in the treatment of BPD problems. 
Finally, omega-3 fatty acids were found to reduce 
suicidality and depression above and beyond placebo 
(Lieb et al., 2010). 

In summary, some drug treatments may be effective 
in treating aspects of the BPD psychopathology. Never



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

theless, caution is in order when considering pharmacotherapy 
for BPD. Clients with BPD are notoriously 
noncompliant with treatment regimens, may abuse 
the prescribed drugs or overdose, and may experience 
unintended effects of the drugs. With these caveats in 
mind, carefully monitored pharmacotherapy may be a 
useful and important adjunct to psychotherapy in the 
treatment of BPD. 

Cognitive‑Behavioral 

Treatment of BPD has received increasing attention 
from cognitive and behavioral theorists. The cognitive 
approach views the problems of the client with BPD as 
residing within both the content and the process of the 
individual’s thoughts. Beck’s approach to treating BPD 
(Beck & Freeman, 1990) is representative of cognitive 
psychotherapy generally, with the focus of treatment on 
restructuring thoughts and on developing a collaborative 
relationship through which more adaptive ways of 
viewing the world are developed. More specifically, it 
focuses on decreasing negative and polarized beliefs 
that result in unstable affect and destructive behaviors 
(Brown, Newman, Charlesworth, Crits-Christoph, 
& Beck, 2004). In an open clinical trial of cognitive 
therapy for clients with BPD, decreases in problems associated 
with BPD including depression, hopelessness, 
and suicide ideation were found at the end of treatment 
and during follow-up. 

An RCT compared 1 year of cognitive therapy (CT) 
and Rogerian supportive therapy (RST) for 65 men and 
women who met diagnostic criteria for BPD. In this 
study, participants were offered one session weekly 
in each condition for 6 months, followed by 12 sessions 
aimed at maintaining gains over the subsequent 
6 months. Cottraux and colleagues (2009) found that 
CT was superior to RST in retaining clients in therapy. 
No additional differences between conditions were 
found, although CT led to reductions in hopelessness 
and impulsivity faster than RST. Follow-up analyses, 
nevertheless, showed a significant difference between 
conditions, with participants who underwent CT demonstrating 
higher clinical global improvement than participants 
treated with RST. Given the small sample size 
and the large number of dropouts from this study, the effectiveness 
of CT is still unclear (Cottraux et al., 2009). 

The cognitive-behavioral therapies of Young, Klosko, 
and Weishaar (2003; Kellogg & Young, 2006), 
Pretzer (1990), Blum, Pfohl, St. John, Monahan, and 
Black (2002), and Schmidt and Davidson (as cited in 

Weinberg, Gunderson, Hennen, & Cutter, 2006) attempt 
to address some of the difficulties experienced in 
applying traditional cognitive approaches to the treatment 
of BPD. Pretzer’s approach emphasizes modifying 
standard CT to address difficulties often encountered in 
treating clients with BPD, such as establishing a collaborative 
relationship between therapist and client, maintaining 
a directed treatment, and improving homework 
compliance. Blum and colleagues developed a twiceweekly 
outpatient group treatment that uses a psychoeducational 
approach to teaching cognitive-behavioral 
skills (e.g., distancing, goal setting, and problem solving) 
to clients with BPD and to their support systems 
(e.g., family, friends, other care providers). The treatment 
is offered in a group setting and has been tested 
under the acronym STEPPS (Systems Training for 
Emotional Predictability and Problem Solving). The 
treatment focuses on destigmatization of BPD, emotional 
control, and behavioral control. Bos, van Wel, 
Verbraak, and Appelo (2011) conducted the most recent 
RCT on STEPPS. In their study, participants loosely 
diagnosed with BPD, representative of routine clinical 
practice, were randomized to either STEPPS and individual 
therapy (N = 84) or TAU (N = 84). At the end of 
the 18-week treatment, as well as at 6-month follow-up, 
participants treated with STEPPS reported less general 
and BPD-specific psychopathology, and more improvements 
in quality of life. Treatment was offered weekly 
for 18 sessions and also included a one-time follow-up 
session within the third and sixth months in the study. 
These findings, coupled with prior studies comparing 
STEPPS and TAU with rigorously selected BPD 
samples (Blum et al., 2008; Bos, van Wel, Verbraak, & 
Appelo, 2010) supports the effectiveness and efficacy 
of this intervention. 

Young’s schema-focused therapy (SFT; Young et 
al., 2003; also see Young, Rygh, Weinberger, & Beck, 
Chapter 7, this volume) postulates that stable patterns 
of thinking (“early maladaptive schemas”) can develop 
during childhood and result in maladaptive behavior 
that reinforces the schemas. SFT includes a variety of 
interventions aimed at challenging and changing these 
early schemas through the identification of a set of dysfunctional 
schema modes that control the individual’s 
thoughts, emotions, and behaviors (i.e., detached protector, 
punitive parent, abandoned/abused child, angry/ 
impulsive child). Giesen-Bloo and colleagues (2006) 
completed the first RCT of TFP and SFT. TFP was 
compared to SFT in a study in which 86 participants 
received 3 years of twice-weekly individual sessions of 


Borderline Personality Disorder 

either SFT or TFP. Study results indicated an overall 
decrease in BPD symptoms for both treatments; however, 
participants who received SFT had significantly 
greater improvements overall and a lower attrition rate. 
Suicide and NSSI behaviors were not assessed as an 
outcome measure in this study. A follow-up secondary 
analyses study also demonstrated that SFT’s cost 
to implement was 20% lower than the cost needed to 
implement TFP (van Asselt et al., 2008). In addition, 
Farrell, Shaw, and Webber (2009) demonstrated the 
effectiveness of SFT in an 8-month group format. In 
their study, the authors tested the effect of augmenting 
TAU with an SFT group. When compared to TAU 
alone, TAU–SFT resulted in significantly higher remission 
from BPD. 

An effectiveness trial was also conducted in 2009. 
Nadort and colleagues (2009) tested a disseminated 
version of SFT in regular health care centers with or 
without afterhours crisis support by phone. Data from 
62 participants suggested that the added phone availability 
did not result in additional improvement, and 
that across conditions SFT was successful, leading to 
42% recovery from BPD after 1.5 years of treatment. 

Weinberg and colleagues (2006) completed an RCT 
of manual-assisted cognitive treatment (MACT) and 
TAU. MACT is a brief cognitive-behavioral treatment 
that incorporates strategies from DBT, CT, and bibliotherapy. 
The treatment targets NSSI behaviors in participants 
diagnosed with BPD. MACT was provided as 
an adjunctive treatment to TAU for study participants 
(N = 30). Participants were 30 women diagnosed with 
BPD, with a history of NSSI behaviors and at least one 
in the last month; however, suicide was considered one 
of the exclusionary criteria for study participation. Participants 
were randomly assigned to MACT plus TAU 
or to TAU-alone conditions. Upon completion of the 
6-week treatment and at the 6-month follow-up, participants 
who received MACT had significantly fewer and 
less severe NSSI behaviors than those in the TAU-alone 
condition. These results should be interpreted with caution 
due to small sample size and the use of self-report 
measures only in assessment of NSSI behaviors. 

eviDeNce for DBt 
as aN effective BPD treatMeNt 

DBT evolved from standard cognitive-behavioral therapy 
as a treatment for BPD, particularly for recurrently 
suicidal, severely dysfunctional adults. The theoretical 

orientation to treatment is a blend of three theoretical 
positions: behavioral science, dialectical philosophy, 
and Zen practice. Behavioral science, the principles of 
behavior change, is countered by acceptance of the client 
(with techniques drawn both from Zen and from 
Western contemplative practice); these poles are balanced 
within the dialectical framework. Although 
dialectics was first adopted as a description of this emphasis 
on balance, dialectics soon took on the status of 
guiding principles that have advanced the therapy in directions 
not originally anticipated. DBT is based within 
a consistent behaviorist theoretical position. However, 
the actual procedures and strategies overlap considerably 
with those of various alternative therapy orientations, 
including psychodynamic, client-centered, strategic, 
and cognitive therapies. 

Efficacy 

Although, as described earlier, several treatments have 
demonstrated efficacy in the treatment of people diagnosed 
with BPD, DBT has the most empirical support 
at present and is generally considered the frontline 
treatment for the disorder. DBT as a treatment for BPD 
has been evaluated in a number of controlled trials (see 
Table 10.1). Four of the RCTs specifically recruited 
clients with suicidal behaviors (Linehan et al., 1999, 
2006; Linehan, Armstrong, Suárez, Allmon, & Heard, 
1991; McMain et al., 2009). Two RCTs included DBT 
in both conditions, with the addition of medication in 
one condition (Linehan, McDavid, Brown, Sayrs, & 
Gallop, 2008; Soler et al., 2005). The results in general 
have shown DBT to be highly effective. In adults 
diagnosed with BPD who are at high risk for suicide, 1 
year of DBT yielded significantly higher improvements 
on anger outbursts, suicidal behavior, and hospitalization 
compared to TAU (Linehan et al., 1991; Linehan, 
Heard, & Armstrong, 1993), client-centered therapy 
(CCT, Turner, 2000), and community treatment by 
non-behavioral experts (CTBE; Linehan et al., 2006) 
but not to a dynamic emotion-focused treatment plus 
protocol-based pharmacotherapy program (McMain et 
al., 2009). One study showed that participants treated 
with DBT were half as likely to engage in suicidal behaviors 
compared to participants in the CTBE condition, 
further indicating that DBT is an effective treatment 
for reducing suicidal behavior. During the 1 year 
of treatment, depression, hopelessness, and suicidal 
ideation improved in both DBT and control treatments 
(Linehan et al., 1991, 2006; McMain et al., 2009). Fur



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

thermore, there was similar remission from major depressive 
disorder (MDD) and anxiety disorders in the 
DBT and in the control condition (Harned et al., 2008), 
although remission from substance dependence was 
significantly higher in DBT. 

Treatment superiority was maintained when participants 
in the DBT condition were compared to only 
those control subjects who received stable individual 
psychotherapy during the treatment year, and even 
after researchers controlled for number of hours of psychotherapy 
and telephone contacts (Linehan & Heard, 
1993; Linehan et al., 1999). Superiority was also maintained 
when comparing DBT with a treatment that had 
equal prestige, and was administered by expert therapist 
with allegiance to the treatment model (CTBE; 
Linehan et al., 2006). These studies suggest that the 
efficacy of DBT is due to specific treatment factors and 
not general factors or the expertise of the treating psychotherapists. 


In BPD samples selected regardless of their suicide 
risk, findings are mixed with regard to suicidal behavior; 
nevertheless DBT outperforms control conditions 
in improving indices of emotion regulation (Koons et 
al., 2006; Verheul et al., 2003). DBT is also effective 
for adults diagnosed with BPD and a comorbid drug 
dependence disorder (Linehan et al., 1999, 2002). 

Evidence also suggests that DBT adaptations are 
successful in treating people diagnosed with BPD. 
Soler and colleagues (2009) found a 13-week DBT 
skills-only intervention to be more successful in reducing 
problematic emotions than a psychodynamically 
informed standard group therapy (SGT) for participants 
meeting diagnostic criteria for BPD. 

Bohus and colleagues (2004) compared a 12-week 
inpatient DBT adaptation with TAU for females diagnosed 
with BPD who reported a history of suicidal behavior. 
In a self-harming subsample, significantly more 
patients in DBT than in TAU abstained from NSSI at 
posttreatment (62 vs. 31%). Roepke and colleagues 
(2011) also found that a 12-week inpatient course of 
DBT resulted in significant improvement in depression 
and self-esteem when compared to TAU for women diagnosed 
with BPD. 

Beyond BPD, studies have demonstrated the effectiveness 
of DBT with older depressed adults (Lynch et 
al., 2007; Lynch, Morse, Mendelson, & Robins, 2003), 
with adults with binge-eating disorder (Safer & Joyce, 
2011; Safer, Robinson, & Jo, 2010), with suicidal adolescents 
(Barnoski, 2002; Katz, Cox, Gunasekara, & 
Miller, 2004; McDonell et al., 2010; Rathus & Miller, 

2002) and suicidal college students (Pistorello, Fruzzetti, 
MacLane, Gallop, & Iverson, 2012), and with 
adults with a cluster B personality disorder (Feigenbaum 
et al., 2012). 

eviDeNce for DBt as aN effective 
treatMeNt for eMotioN 
DysreGulatioN 

As noted earlier, many mental disorders, including 
BPD, can be conceptualized as disorders of emotion 
regulation with deficits in both emotion up-regulation 
and down-regulation. For example, theorists have proposed 
that MDD should be conceptualized as an emotion 
dysregulation disorder based partly on a deficit in 
up-regulating and maintaining positive emotions (see 
Kring & Bachorowski, 1999, for a review). Similarly, 
literature reviews have demonstrated that anxiety disorders, 
schizophrenia, and even bipolar disorders are 
directly linked to emotion dysregulation (Kring & 
Werner, 2004). Once one realizes that emotions include 
both actions and action tendencies, one can see the link 
between emotion dysregulation and many disorders 
defined as behavior dyscontrol (e.g., substance dependence). 
As previously discussed, difficulties with emotion 
dysregulation, similar to those seen in BPD, are 
common in other disorders. Specifically problems with 
recognizing emotions, describing and labeling emotions, 
knowing what to do when an emotion is on the 
scene, and emotional avoidance are common in many 
Axis I disorders. Therefore, an important theoretical 
premise in DBT is that people who exhibit emotion dysregulation 
lack the skills needed for successful regulation. 
DBT includes a set of skills aimed at improving 
emotion regulation in BPD in particular, and in people 
who report emotion dysregulation in general. 

An increasing number of RCTs suggest that DBT 
skills training alone is a promising intervention for a 
variety of populations (see Table 10.1). The majority of 
these studies offered only the skills training component 
of DBT. Therefore, although skills training was originally 
developed to be part of a comprehensive intervention, 
the number of studies suggests that DBT skills 
training by itself can be a successful intervention for a 
variety of populations with emotion regulation difficulties. 
Furthermore, DBT skills use (the product of skills 
training) has been shown to be an active mechanism of 
change for emotion regulation outcomes in treatment 
for BPD (Neacsiu, Rizvi, & Linehan, 2010). 


table 10.1. table of randomized Control trials and Controlled trials for dbt 

Emotion regula-
DBT variant General out-tion outcomes Study inclusion Study exclusion 
Citation Design Methodology N/condition offered comes reported reported criteria criteria 

401 

Barnoski Controlled DBT vs. TAU (his-DBT = 42 rDBT (stan-DBT < TAU None Adolescents at a None 

(2002) trial torical controls), TAU = 116 dard)—1 year in number of juvenile rehabili12-
month FU reconvictions for tation institution 
assessment a felony offense 
in the 12 months 
following discharge 


Bohus et al. RCT iDBT-PTSD vs. iDBT-PTSD iDBT adapted iDBT-PTSD None Females 17–65 Schizophrenia, 

(2013) TAU-WL; assess-= 36 for PTSD—3 > TAU-WL in years old, mental retardation, 
ments at pre- and TAU-WL months PTSD remis-referred for requiring immediposttreatment 
and = 38 sion and PTSD childhood sexual ate other treatment, 
at 6-week FU interview and abuse recent life-threatenself-
report ing suicide attempt, 
assessments medical condition 
contraindicated for 
exposure 

Bohus et al. RCT iDBT vs. WL + iDBT = 40 Inpatient DBT iDBT > TAU on DBT = TAU on Female, BPD, Lifetime schizo


(2004) TAU; assessments TAU = 20 (iDBT)—3 abstinence from anger; DBT > suicide attempt phrenia, mental 
at pre- and post-months NSSI (62% vs. TAU on decrease (SA) or two retardation, bipolar 
treatment; at 1- and 31%) in depression and NSSI episodes in I, current substance 
3-month FU anxiety last 2 years abuse 

Bradley & RCT DBT-ST vs. no DBT-ST DBT-ST adapted No significant DBT-ST > con-Self-reported None 

Follingstad treatment (con-= 24 differences trol in decrease childhood abuse 

(2003) trol)—9 weeks Control = 25 between condi-in depression and significant 
tions across and trauma and 
trauma symp-depression 
toms 

Carter et al. RCT DBT vs. TAU + DBT = 38 DBT (stan-DBT = TAU in None Female, BPD, Not a fi t/unmoti


(2010) WL; assessments TAU + WL dard)—6 months NSSI, hospital 18–65; mul-vated, presence of 
at pretreatment, = 35 admissions or tiple episodes a disabling organic 
3 months, and 6 length of stay in of NSSI, at least condition, schizomonths 
hospital, quality three in the last phrenia, bipolar 
of life, disability year disorder, psychotic 
depression, florid 
antisocial behavior, 
developmental disability 


(continued) 


table 10.1. (continued) 

Emotion regula-
DBT variant General out-tion outcomes Study inclusion Study exclusion 
Citation Design Methodology N/condition offered comes reported reported criteria criteria 

402 

Cavanaugh, RCT Dialectical psycho-DPEW = 28 DBT-ST modi-DPEW > AMW DPEW > AMW Males, 18 or None 
Solomon, & educational work-AMW = 27 fi ed for interper-(at postreat-(at postreatment) older, never 
Gelles (2011) shop (DPEW) vs. sonal violence ment) in adaptive in anger manage-engaged in inti


anger management (DPEW)—8 coping skills, ment skills mate partner vioworkshop 
(AMW); weeks empathy skills, lence, endorsed 
assessments at pre- and in decreas-violent urges 
and posttreatment ing potential risk 

for interpersonal 
violence 

Clarkin, Levy, RCT DBT vs. TFP DBT = 17 DBT (stan-DBT = TFP = DBT = TFP = BPD, 18–50 Comorbid psychotic 
Lenzenweger, vs. supportive TFP = 23 dard)—1 year ST in improving ST in improving disorders, bipolar I 
& Kernberg treatment (ST); ST = 22 adapted to global function-depression and disorder, delusional 
(2007) assessments at include medica-ing and social anxiety; TFP = disorder, delirium, 

pretreatment, 4, 8, tion management adjustment; TFP ST (not DBT) in dementia, amnestic 

and 12 months = DBT (not ST) reducing anger and other cognitive 
in reducing sui-and impulsivity; disorders; active subcidality 
(analyses only TFP signifi -stance dependence 
only included cantly changed 
people with ≥ 3 irritability and 
assessments) assault behaviors 

Courbasson, RCT DBT vs. TAU; TAU = 8 DBT (stan-DBT < TAU in DBT posttreat-Women ≥ 18; any Organic brain 
Nishikawa, & assessments at DBT = 13 dard)—1 year dropout; DBT ment > pretreat-eating disorder syndrome; mental 
Dixon (2012) pretreatment, 3, 6, posttreatment > ment in ability and substance retardation; 

9, 12, 15, and 18 pretreatment in to cope and abuse/ depen-psychosis; and 
months (last two dysfunctional regulate negative dence, agreed chronic suicidality; 
are FU time points) eating behaviors emotions not to change in treatment for an 

and attitudes; medication eating disorder or 
severity and use substance use 
of substances 

Evershed et al. Controlled rDBT vs. TAU; rDBT = 8 Residential DBT > TAU in DBT > TAU in Male, inpatient None 

(2003) trial assessments at TAU = 9 DBT adapted seriousness of self-reported in a high security 
pre-, mid-, and for forensic violence inci-hostility and hospital, havposttreatment, 
and sample—18 dents anger ing borderline 
at 6-month FU months features 

Feigenbaum et RCT DBT vs. TAU; DBT = 26 DBT (stan-DBT < TAU in DBT = TAU in Age range = Extensive forensic 

al. (2012) assessments at TAU = 16 dard)—1 year decrease of self-aggression, anger 18–65, diag-history that suggests 
pretreatment, 6 rated risk expression, nosed with a immediate danger to 
months, and 1 year 


behavior depression, irri-cluster B person-others; schizophre-
DBT = TAU in tability (signifi -ality disorder nia, bipolar disorder; 
NSSI reductions, cant decrease in primary substance 
use of services both conditions) use disorder, severe 

cognitive impairment 

Harley et RCT TAU + DBT-ST vs. TAU + DBT-ST group See next column TAU + DBT-ST Diagnosis of BPD, bipolar, 

al. (2008); TAU + WL; assess-DBT-ST intervention > TAU + WL depression, psychotic spectrum 

Feldman et al. ments at pre- and = 13 adapted for treat-at improving 18–65, on stable disorders, active 

(2009) posttreatment and TAU + WL ment-resistant depression from medication substance abuse/ 
at a 6-month FU = 11 depression—16 Week 0 to Week dependence, mental 
weeks 16 retardation, pervasive 
developmental disorder, 
active suicidality, 
unstable medical 
conditions, exposure 
to CBT 

Hill, Craig-RCT DBT-AF vs. WL DBT-AF DBT-ST—modi-DBT-AF = WL DBT-AF > WL Recent BED Male, 18 or older, 

head, & Safer = 18 fi ed for AF in improvement in decreasing behavior, vomit-current diagnosis of 

(2011) WL = 14 in number of depression, emo-ing as primary anorexia nervosa, 
bingeing and tion dysregula-compensatory in psychotherapy, 
purging episodes tion behavior. Stable current suicidal 
psychotropic ideation, substance 
medication. dependence, present 
psychosis 

Hirvikoski et RCT DBT-ST vs. DBT-ST Adapted DBT-DBT-ST = Con-None Meets diagnos-Substance abuse; 

al. (2011) loosely structured = 26 ST for Swedish trol in satisfac-tic criteria for IQ ≤ 70; diagnosed 
discussion group Control = 25 population—14 tion ADHD, adult, brain injury; autism 
(control) sessions on stable dose of spectrum disorder; 
medication suicidality; homelessness; 
severe depression, 
psychosis, or 
bipolar without stable 
medication 

Katz et al. Controlled rDBT vs. TAU rDBT = 31 rDBT—average rDBT < TAU rDBT = TAU Inpatients, 14–17, Mental retardation, 

(2004) trial residential unit; TAU = 31 stay = 18 days in incidents in depression admitted for sui-psychosis, bipolar 
assessments at pre- on the ward; reduction and cide attempts, or disorder, severe 
and posttreatment rDBT = TAU hopelessness suicidal ideation learning disability 
and at 1-year FU in emergency (significant 
room visits and decrease in both 
hospitalizations conditions) 
after discharge; 
in NSSI, and in 
suicidal ideation 

(continued) 

403 


table 10.1. (continued) 

Emotion regula-
DBT variant General out-tion outcomes Study inclusion Study exclusion 
Citation Design Methodology N/condition offered comes reported reported criteria criteria 

404 

Koons et al. RCT DBT vs. TAU DBT = 10 DBT (stan-DBT < TAU in DBT > TAU on Women veterans, Schizophrenia, 

(2001) TAU = 10 dard)—6 months NSSI, hospital-hopelessness, BPD bipolar, substance 
izations, suicidal depression, anger dependence and 
ideation, and suppression, and antisocial personality 
dissociation expression disorder 

Koons et al. RCT DBT vs. TAU; DBT = 10 DBT (stan-Trend for DBT DBT > TAU Women veterans, Schizophrenia, 

(2006) assessments at TAU = 10 dard)—6 months to reduce NSSI in reduction of BPD bipolar disorder, subpretreatment, 
3, more than TAU depression (self-stance dependence, 
and 6 months (p < .10), DBT = report) and hope-antisocial personality 
TAU on reduc-lessness; DBT = disorder 
tion of services TAU in reduction 
use; DBT > TAU of depression 
in reduction of (interview), 
suicidal ideation anxiety, anger 
suppression; 
DBT > TAU 
in reduction of 
anger expression 

Linehan et al. RCT DBT vs. TAU; DBT = 22 DBT (stan-DBT > TAU in DBT = TAU BPD, women, Lifetime psychotic 

(1991, 1993, assessments every TAU = 22 dard)—1 year reducing risk for in reduction of 18–45 with disorder, lifetime 

1994) 4 months, includ-suicidal behavior depression and current and past bipolar disorder, 
ing during a 1-year and decreasing hopelessness suicidal behavior mental retardation, 
FU use of services; (significant (at least one epi-seizure disorder 
DBT < TAU in decrease in both sode in the last 8 requiring medicareducing 
drop-conditions) weeks) tion, mandate to 
out; DBT = TAU treatment, need for 
in decreasing primary treatment 
suicidal ideation for a debilitating 
condition 

Linehan et al. RCT DBT vs. TAU; DBT = 12 DBT (stan-DBT > TAU in DBT = TAU in BPD, female, Psychotic disorder, 

(1999) assessments every TAU = 16 dard)—1 year substance abuse anger outcomes current drug bipolar disorder, 
4 months; 4 month (significant dependence mental retardation 
FU decrease in both) 

Linehan et al. RCT DBT + LAAM vs. DBT = 11 DBT (stan-DBT participants None Females 18–45, Bipolar disorder, 

(2002) comprehensive CVT-12S dard)—1 year maintained BPD, with psychosis, seizure 
validation therapy = 12 reductions in current opiate disorder, mental 
with 12-step (CVT-opiate use dependence retardation, 


405 

12s) + LAAM; throughout the 
assessments 12-month treatevery 
4 months, ment; CVT-12S 
including one FU participants 
assessment attained the 

same reductions 
but increased 
their use of opiates 
in the last 4 
months; similar 
decreases in psychopathology 


Linehan et RCT DBT vs. commu-DBT = 52 DBT (stan-DBT < CTBE in 
al. (2006); nity treatment by CTBE = 49 dard)—1 year suicide attempts, 
Harned et experts (CTBE); use of crisis seral. 
(2008); assessments every vices, dropout; 
Bedics, Atkins, 4 months and dur-DBT led to a 
Comtois, & ing a 1-year FU significant reduc-
Linehan (2012) tion in substance 

use disorders; 
DBT = CTBE 
in reduction of 
suicidal ideation, 
remission from 
major depression, 
anxiety, and 
eating disorders; 
DBT > CTBE in 
introject affi liation 
increases 

Linehan et al. RCT DBT + placebo vs. DBT + pla-DBT (stan-Placebo > olan


(2008) DBT + olanzapine cebo = 12 dard)—6 months zapine in reduc-
DBT + tion of NSSI 
olanzapine 
= 12 

DBT = CTBE 
in reduction 
of depression 
(significant 
decrease in both 
conditions; DBT 
showed signifi 
cant 
change in 
self-affi rming, 
self-loving, selfprotecting, 
and 
less self-attacking 
through 
treatment and 
FU; CTBE 
showed signifi 
cant 
treatment 
interaction for 
therapist affi rm/ 
therapist protect 

Olanzapine was 
faster than placebo 
at reducing 
irritability and 
physical aggression 


BPD, women, 
18–45 with 
current and past 
suicidal behavior 
(at least one episode 
in the last 8 
weeks) 

18–60, BPD, 
dysregulated 
anger, scored 
high on irritability 


pregnancy, medical 
condition for which 
the use of opiate 
replacement medication 
was contraindicated, 
indications of 
treatment coercion 

Lifetime psychotic 
disorder, lifetime 
bipolar disorder, 
mental retardation, 
seizure disorder 
requiring medication, 
mandate to 
treatment, need for 
primary treatment 
for a debilitating 
condition 

Schizophrenia, bipolar 
I, schizoaffective, 
psychotic disorder, 
mental retardation, 
seizure disorder, substance 
dependence 
within last 6 month. 
NSSI in the prior 8 
weeks from screening, 
pregnant 

(continued) 


table 10.1. (continued) 

406 

Emotion regula-
DBT variant General out-tion outcomes Study inclusion Study exclusion 
Citation Design Methodology N/condition offered comes reported reported criteria criteria 

Lynch et al. RCT 8-week medication DBT + DBT (stan-DBT + MED None Over 55 years of Bipolar disorder, 

(2007) trial followed by MED = 21 dard)—6 months achieves remis-age; meets cri-psychotic symptoms, 
RCT for nonre-MED = 14 sion from major teria for at least signs of cognitive 
sponders: standard depressive dis-one personality impairment, current 
DBT + medication order faster than disorder; scores ECT 
(DBT-MED) vs. MED only high on depresmedication 
only sion 
(MED); assessments 
at pretreatment, 
2, 6, 9, and 
15 months 

Lynch et al. RCT Antidepres-MED = 15 DBT-ST adapta-Remission from Self-reported Current MDD, Bipolar disorder, 

(2003) sants (MED) vs. DBT-ST + tion (skills depression (DBT depression (DBT age 60+; scores psychotic symptoms, 
DBT-ST + MED; MED = 16 and 30-minute > MED) gap > MED) high on two signs of cognitive 
assessments at phone coach-even wider at depression impairment, current 
pretreatment, ing/week)—7 FU; dependency measures ECT 
posttreatment, and months & adaptive cop6-
month FU ing improved in 

DBT only 

McDonell et Controlled rDBT vs. residen-rDBT = 106 rDBT (varied With DBT, sig-None Youth ages Admissions for legal 
al. (2010) trial tial TAU (historical TAU = 104 intensity of DBT nifi cantly fewer 12–17 competence restoramatches) 
therapy in resi-NSSI episodes tion 

dential setting) during 1 year of 
treatment than 
with TAU 

McMain et al. RCT DBT vs. general DBT = 90 DBT (stan-DBT = GPM in DBT = GPM BPD, ages Psychotic disorder, 

(2009) psychiatric man-GPM = 90 dard)—1 year decreasing sui-in decreasing 18–60, at least bipolar I disorder, 
agement (GPM); cidal behavior, depression, two episodes of delirium, dementia, 
assessments every use of crisis ser-anger, symptom suicidal or NSSI mental retarda4 
months and dur-vices (significant distress (signifi -episodes in the tion, substance 
ing 1-month FU decrease in both cant decrease in past 5 years, dependence in the 

conditions) both conditions) at least one of last month, mediwhich 
was in the cal condition that 
3 months preced-precluded psychiatric 
ing enrollment medications, serious 

medical condition, 
plans to leave in the 
next 2 years 


Neacsiu, RCT 16-week DBT-DBT-ST DBT-ST con-DBT-ST= ASG DBT-ST >ASG Adults, ages Current psychotic 
Eberle, ST vs. 16-week = 22 densed to 16 in improvements in improvements 18–65, high disorder, Bipolar 
Kramer, Activities Support ASG = 22 weeks in depression in diffi culties emotion I, BPD, had DBT 
Weismann, & Group (ASG); severity; DBT-with emotion dysregulation, before, mandated to 
Linehan (2013) assessment every 2 ST > ASG in regulation and meets criteria for treatment, severe sui


months including a improvements in affect control a DSM-IV-TR cidality, not willing 

2-month FU anxiety severity, DBT-ST = ASG diagnosis for a to discontinue ancilincrease 
in skills in alexithymia depressive or lary psychotherapy 
use decrease anxiety disorder 

Pistorello et al. RCT DBT vs. supervi-DBT = 31 DBT (stan-DBT > SBE in DBT > SBE Ages 18–25, Psychosis, had indi


(2012) sion by experts in SBE = 32 dard)—7 months decreasing NSSI, in decreasing current suicidal vidual or group DBT 
psychodynamic to 1 year use of psychotro-depression (self-ideation, past 
treatment (SBE); pic medication, report) history of at least 
assessment every 3 and suicidality one NSSI or one 
months and during and in increasing suicide attempt 
6-month FU quality of life 

Rakfeldt Controlled rDBT vs. no treat-rDBT = 7 rDBT adapted rDBT = Control None Living in the None 

(2005) trial ment—17 weeks; Control = 8 to include two in functioning young adult serassessments 
at pre- 1-hour skills ses-index; rDBT vices residential 
and posttreatment sions/ week > Control in program; has 

interpersonal serious emorelationships, 
tional distursocial 
networks, bance 
intentionality, 
and global functioning 


Rathus & Controlled rDBT vs. TAU rDBT = 29 rDBT DBT > TAU None Adolescents in None 

Miller (2002) trial (assignment to TAU = 82 adapted—12 in reducing DBT: suicide 
TAU for less severe weeks, twice psychiatric attempt in last 
clients) weekly hospitalizations 16 weeks, at 

DBT = TAU in least three BPD 
suicide attempts criteria 
(1 in DBT, 7 in 
TAU) 

Roepke et al. Controlled iDBT vs. WL + iDBT = 40 iDBT—3 months DBT > TAU in With DBT, Female, BPD Lifetime diagnosis 

(2011) trial TAU; assessments TAU = 20 increasing self-significant of schizophrenia, 
at pretreatment and esteem improvement in bipolar I or II, subat 
10 weeks depression; with stance abuse within 

TAU, no change last 6 months, mental 
in depression retardation 

(continued) 

407 


408 

table 10.1. (continued) 

Emotion regula-
DBT variant General out-tion outcomes Study inclusion Study exclusion 
Citation Design Methodology N/condition offered comes reported reported criteria criteria 

Safer, Telch, & RCT DBT-ST vs. WL DBT-ST DBT-ST—20 DBT > WL at Ages 18–65, at None 
Agras (2001) = 14 weeks significantly least one binge– 

WL = 15 reducing rates of purge episode 
bingeing–purg-per week 
ing 

Safer, Rob-RCT (DBT-ST BED) vs. DBT-ST DBT skills DBT-ST BED = No differences Men and women Body mass index < 
inson, & Jo active comparison BED = 50 training adapted ACGT in binge-in emotion-regu-over age 18; 17.5 kg/m2; in psy(
2010); Safer group therapy ACGT = 51 for BED (DBT-ing abstinence lation measures, binge-eating chotherapy; unstable 
& Joyce (2011) (ACGT)—20 ST BED)—20 posttreatment eating-related disorder; within medications; regular 

weekly sessions; weeks (64% in DBT and depression, commuting use of compensaassessments 
at pre- 36% in ACGT); anxiety or anger, distance from tory behaviors; 
and posttreatment, DBT < ACGT in depression, or study psychosis; current 
and at 3-, 6-, and binge days post-self-esteem alcohol/drug abuse or 
12-month FU treatment but not dependence; severe 

at FU; moder-depression with 
ate effect size suicide attempts; use 
favoring DBT for of weight-altering 
self-reports on medications; severe 
restraining and medical condition; 
eating concerns; current pregnancy or 
DBT more likely breast feeding; planto 
produce rapid ning gastric bypass 
responders who 
do better at FU 

Salbach-RCT 25 weeks CBT vs. CBT = 19 DBT adapted for 57.9% in CBT, Small positive AN or BN ado-Unable to speak/ 
Andrae et al. 25 weeks DBT-DBT-AN/ adolescents with 62.5% in DBT-effect sizes in lescent females understand German; 
(2009) AN/BN vs. 12 BN = 16 anorexia/bulimia AN/BN, and emotion regula-(ages 12–21), IQ psychotic disorder 

weeks waitlist WL = 15 nervosa 0% in waitlist tion >85 

remitted from 

DSM-IV-TR 

criteria for eating 

disorders; DBT-

AN/BN= CBT 


> WL in calorie 
avoidance, meal 
frequency, and 
psychological 
distress 

409 

Soler et al. RCT DBT-ST + placebo DBT-ST+ DBT– ST Olanzepine > Olanzapine BPD, ages None 

(2005) vs. DBT-ST + placebo = 30 adapted—12 placebo in reduc-< placebo in 18–45, no Axis 
olanzapine DBT-ST + weeks, with ing weight gain frequency of I disorder, high 
olanzapine phone coaching and cholesterol impulsivity clinical severity, 
= 30 added levels; olanz-and aggressive not in psychoepine 
= placebo behavior. olan-therapy 
in decreases of zapine > placebo 
psychopathology in decreasing 
depression and 
anxiety 

Soler et al. RCT DBT-ST vs. DBT-ST DBT-ST See next column DBT > SGT in BPD, ages Schizophrenia, 

(2009) sychodynamically = 29 adapted—3 reductions of 18–45, Clinical drug-induced psyoriented 
standard SGT = 30 months depression, anxi-Global Impres-chosis, organic brain 
group therapy ety, irritability, sion of Severity syndrome, substance 
(SGT); assess-anger, and affect score = 4, no dependence, bipolar, 
ments every 2 instability current psycho-mental retardation, 
weeks therapy current depression 

Telch, Agras, RCT DBT-ST vs. WL; DBT-ST DBT skills train-DBT = WL on DBT women Females, ages Current psycho


& Linehan assessments at pre- = 22 ing adapted for all outcomes reported less 18–65, meet cri-therapy, weight loss 

(2001) and posttreatment WL = 22 BED desire to eat teria diagnostic program, or using 
and at 6-month FU when angry criteria for BED psychotropic medication; 
current substance 
use disorder, 
current suicidality, 
psychosis, pregnancy 

Trupin, Stew-Controlled rDBT vs. TAU; rDBT = 45 rDBT—variable Behavioral None Adolescents in None 

art, Beach, & trial assessments pre TAU = 45 length problems signifi -a Washington 

Boesky (2002) and posttreatment cantly decreased State JRA, in 
in DBT cottages three different 
but not in TAU cottages 
cottage 

(continued) 


TABLE 10.1. (continued) 


Emotion regula-
DBT variant General out-tion outcomes Study inclusion Study exclusion 
Citation Design Methodology N/condition offered comes reported reported criteria criteria 

410 

Turner (2000) RCT DBT vs. TAU; DBT = 12 DBT (stanassessments 
at 6 TAU = 12 dard)—1 
and 12 months year, adapted 
to reduce 
therapy time 
and incorporate 
psychodynamic 
techniques 

Van den Bosch RCT DBT vs. TAU; DBT = 27 DBT (stanet 
al. (2002); assessments at TAU = 31 dard)—1 year 
Verheul et al. pretreatment, at 
(2003) 11, 22, 33, 44, and 

52 weeks, and at 
18-month FU 

Van Dijk, RCT DBT-ST vs. WL DBT-ST DBT-ST adapted 
Jeffrey, & Katz = 13 for bipolar disor(
2013) WL = 13 ders—12 weeks 

DBT > TAU in 
mental health 
functioning; 
DBT > TAU in 
amount of suicidal 
behavior, 
although signifi 
cant improvement 
in both 

DBT < TAU in 
reducing suicide 
attempts (DBT 
= 2, TAU = 8); 
NSSI signifi 
cantly 
decreased 
in DBT and 
increased in 
TAU; effects 
moderated by 
severity of suicidal 
behavior; 
DBT = TAU in 
substance use 

DBT-ST=WL in 
reducing depression, 
mindfulness 
(both 
improved) 

DBT = TAU in BPD, willing to Schizophrenia, 
improvement be randomized schizoaffective, bipoof 
emotional lar, organic mental 
functioning disorder, and/or 

mental retardation 

DBT > TAU in BPD, female; Psychotic disorder, 
reducing impul-ages 18–70 bipolar disorder, 
sive acts mental retardation; 

not living in the area 

DBT-ST=WL in BPD, age 18 or Currently in a manic 
improving affect older state, developmencontrol 
(both tal delay, ongoing 
improved) violent or aggressive 

behaviors, unable to

understand English 


411 

Waltz et al. RCT DBT skills video N = 30 DBT video on Of those who DBT video view-18 or older, Previous formal DBT 

(2009) vs. control (infor-“opposite action” participated in ers showed sig-literate, BPD, experience, actively 
mational video), the FU, 80% had nifi cant decrease IQ > 90, aware psychotic 
alternating viewing used opposite in emotional of diagnosis, in 
order action at least intensity. treatment 

once 

Wasser, Tyler, Controlled rDBT vs. STM Primary: rDBT adapted STM > rDBT DBT = STM Adolescents at None 
McIlhaney, trial (Standard Thera-rDBT = 7 due to lack for psychomo-in reducing KidsPeace 
Taplin, & Hen-peutic Milieu); STM = 7 of resources tor excitation at depression 
derson (2008) one primary match Secondary: (conducted by discharge; rDBT (both reduced it 

(exact match on rDBT = 12 non-DBT clini-> STM psycho-significantly). 
age, gender, & STM = 12 cians) pathology 
having an Axis 
I disorder), one 
secondary match 
(similar match in 
age, gender) 

Wolf et al. RCT DBT-ST vs. DBT-DBT-ST DBT-ST—6 DBT-ST + CBST None BPD, in therapy Schizophrenia, 

(2011) ST + Computer-= 11 months with or > DBT-ST in current substance 
Based Skills DBT-ST + without adjunct improvement of dependence, severe 
Training (CBST) CBST = 13 CD-ROM–based skills acquisition cognitive dysfunction 
self-help pro-and knowledge 
gram 

Note. > denotes signifi cantly greater than; < denotes signifi cantly less than; = denotes no signifi cant difference between; AF, appetite-focused; FU, follow-up; iDBT, inpatient DBT; RCT, 
randomized controlled trial; TAU, treatment as usual; TFP, transference-focused psychotherapy; WL, wait list; NSSI, nonsuicidal self-injury; LAAM, levomethadyl acetate hydrochloride; 
PTSD, posttraumatic stress disorder; rDBT, residential DBT; ECT, electroconvulsive therapy; DBT-ST, DBT skills training; DBT-ST BED, DBT-ST for binge-eating disorder; ADHD, 
attention-defi cit/hyperactivity disorder. 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

DBt: treatMeNt overview 

Philosophical Basis: Dialectics 

The term “dialectics” as applied to behavior therapy 
refers both to a fundamental nature of reality and to a 
method of persuasive dialogue and relationship. (See 
Wells [1972, cited in Kegan, 1982] for documentation 
of a shift toward dialectical approaches across all the 
sciences during the last 150 years; more recently, Peng 
& Nisbett [1999] discussed both Western and Eastern 
dialectical thought.) As a worldview or philosophical 
position, dialectics guides the clinician in developing 
theoretical hypotheses relevant to the client’s problems 
and to the treatment. Alternatively, as dialogue and relationship, 
“dialectics” refers to the treatment approach 
or strategies used by the therapist to effect change. 
Thus, central to DBT are a number of therapeutic dialectical 
strategies. 

Dialectics as a Worldview 

DBT is based on a dialectical worldview that emphasizes 
wholeness, interrelatedness, and process (change) 
as fundamental characteristics of reality. The first characteristic, 
the Principle of Interrelatedness and Wholeness, 
provides a perspective of viewing the system as 
a whole and how people relate to the system, rather 
than seeing people as if they exist in isolation. Similar 
to contextual and systems theories, a dialectical view 
argues that analysis of parts of any system is of limited 
value unless the analysis clearly relates the part to the 
whole. The second characteristic is the Principle of Polarity. 
Although dialectics focuses on the whole, it also 
emphasizes the complexity of any whole. Thus, dialectics 
asserts that reality is nonreducible; that is, within 
each single thing or system, no matter how small, there 
is polarity. For example, physicists are unable to reduce 
even the smallest of molecules to one thing. Where 
there is matter, there is antimatter; even every atom is 
made up of both protons and electrons: A polar opposite 
is always present. The opposing forces are referred to 
as the “thesis” and “antithesis,” present in all existence. 
Dialectics suggests that the thesis and antithesis move 
toward a “synthesis,” and inherent in the synthesis will 
be a new set of opposing forces. It is from these opposing 
forces that the third characteristic is developed. This 
characteristic of the dialectical perspective refers to the 
Principle of Continuous Change. Change is produced 
through the constant synthesis of the thesis and the an


tithesis, and because new opposing forces are present 
within the synthesis, change is ongoing. These dialectical 
principles are inherent in every aspect of DBT and 
allow for continuous movement throughout the therapy 
process. A very important dialectical idea is that all 
propositions contain within them their own oppositions. 
Or, as Goldberg (1980, pp. 295–296) put it, “I assume 
that truth is paradoxical, that each article of wisdom 
contains within it its own contradictions, that truths 
stand side by side. Contradictory truths do not necessarily 
cancel each other out or dominate each other, but 
stand side by side, inviting participation and experimentation.” 
One way that client and therapist address this 
is by repeatedly asking: “What is being left out?” This 
simple question can assist in finding a synthesis and letting 
go of an absolute truth, a nondialectical stance. 

Dialectics as Persuasion 

From the point of view of dialogue and relationship, 
dialectics refers to change by persuasion and by making 
use of the oppositions inherent in the therapeutic 
relationship rather than by formal impersonal logic. 
Through the therapeutic opposition of contradictory 
positions, both client and therapist can arrive at new 
meanings within old meanings, moving closer to the essence 
of the subject under consideration. The spirit of a 
dialectical point of view is never to accept a proposition 
as a final truth or an undisputable fact. Thus, the question 
addressed by both client and therapist is “What 
is being left out of our understanding?” Dialectics as 
persuasion is represented in the specific dialectical 
strategies we describe later in this chapter. As readers 
will see, when we discuss the consultation strategies, 
dialectical dialogue is also very important in therapist 
consultation meetings. Perhaps more than any other 
factor, attention to dialectics can reduce the chances 
of what psychodynamic therapists have labeled “staff 
splitting,” that is, the frequent phenomenon of therapists’ 
disagreeing or arguing (sometimes vehemently) 
about how to treat and interact with an individual client 
who has BPD. This “splitting” among staff members is 
often due to one or more factions within the staff deciding 
that they (and sometimes they alone) know the truth 
about a particular client or clinical problem. 

Dialectical Case Conceptualization 

Dialectical assumptions influence case conceptualization 
in DBT in a number of ways. First, dialectics 


Borderline Personality Disorder 

suggests that a psychological disorder is best conceptualized 
as a systemic dysfunction characterized by 

(1) defining the disorder with respect to normal functioning, 
(2) assuming continuity between health and 
the disorder, and (3) assuming that the disorder results 
from multiple rather than single causes (Hollandsworth, 
1990). Similarly, Linehan’s biosocial theory 
of BPD assumes that BPD represents a breakdown in 
normal functioning, and that this disorder is best conceptualized 
as a systemic dysfunction of the emotion 
regulation system. The theory proposes that the pathogenesis 
of BPD results from numerous factors: Some 
are genetic–biological predispositions that create individual 
differences in susceptibility to emotion dysregulation, 
known as “emotion vulnerability”; others result 
from the individual’s interaction with the environment, 
referred to as the “invalidating environment.” Assuming 
a systemic view compels the theorist to integrate 
work from a variety of fields and disciplines. 
A second dialectical assumption that underlies the 
biosocial theory is that the relationship between the individual 
and the environment is a transaction between 
the person and the environment. Within social learning 
theory, this is the principle of “reciprocal determinism.” 
Besides focusing on reciprocal influence, a 
transactional view also highlights the constant state of 
flux and change of the individual–environment system. 
Therefore, BPD can occur in multiple environments 
and families, including chaotic, perfect, and even ordinary 
families. 

Both transactional and interactive models, such as 
the diathesis–stress model of psychopathology, call 
attention to the role of dysfunctional environments in 
bringing about disorder in the vulnerable individual. 
A transactional model, however, highlights a number 
of points that are easy to overlook in an interactive 
diathesis–stress model. For example, a person (Person 
A) may act in a manner stressful to an individual 
(Person B) only because of the stress Person B is putting 
on Person A. Take the child who, due to an accident, 
requires most of the parents’ free time just to 
meet survival needs. Or consider the client who, due 
to the need for constant suicide precautions, uses up 
much of the inpatient nursing resources. Both of these 
environments are stretched in their ability to respond 
well to further stress. Both may invalidate or temporarily 
blame the victim if any further demand on the 
system is made. Although the system (e.g., the family 
or the therapeutic milieu) may have been predisposed 
to respond dysfunctionally in any case, such responses 

may have been avoided in the absence of exposure to 
the stress of that particular individual. A transactional, 
or dialectical, account of psychopathology may allow 
greater compassion because it is incompatible with 
the assignment of blame, by highlighting the reality of 
the situation rather than judgments about each person. 
This is particularly relevant with a label as stigmatized 
among mental health professionals as “borderline” (for 
examples of the misuse of the diagnosis, see Reiser & 
Levenson, 1984). 

A final assumption in our discussion regards the 
definition of behavior and the implications of defining 
behavior broadly. Linehan’s theory, and behaviorists in 
general, take “behavior” to mean anything an organism 
does involving action and responding to stimulation 
(Merriam-Webster’s New Universal Unabridged 
Dictionary, 1983, p. 100). Conventionally, behaviorists 
categorize behavior as motor, cognitive/verbal, 
and physiological, all of which may be either public or 
private. There are several points to make here. First, 
dividing behavior into these three categories is arbitrary 
and is done for conceptual clarity rather than in 
response to evidence that these response modes actually 
are functionally separate systems. This point is especially 
relevant to understanding emotion regulation 
given that basic research on emotions demonstrates 
that these response systems are sometimes overlapping, 
somewhat independent, but definitely not wholly independent, 
thus remaining consistent with the dialectical 
worldview. A related point here is that in contrast 
to biological and cognitive theories of BPD, biosocial 
theory suggests that there is no a priori reason for favoring 
explanations emphasizing one mode of behavior 
as intrinsically more important or compelling than 
others. Rather, from a biosocial perspective, the crucial 
questions are under what conditions a given behavior– 
behavior relationship or response system–response system 
relationship holds, and under what conditions these 
relationships enter causal pathways for the etiology and 
maintenance of BPD. 

Biosocial theory 

Emotion Dysregulation 

Linehan’s biosocial theory suggests that BPD is primarily 
a dysfunction of the emotion regulation system. 
Behavioral patterns in BPD are functionally related to 
or are unavoidable consequences of this fundamental 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

dysregulation across several, perhaps all, emotions, 
including both positive and negative emotions. From 
Linehan’s point of view, this dysfunction of the emotion 
regulation system is the core pathology; thus, it is neither 
simply symptomatic nor definitional. Emotion dysregulation 
is a product of the combination of emotional 
vulnerability and difficulties in modulating emotional 
reactions. Emotional vulnerability is conceptualized as 
high sensitivity to emotional stimuli, intense emotional 
responses, and a slow return to emotional baseline. Deficits 
in emotion modulation may be due to difficulties in 

(1) inhibiting mood-dependent behaviors; (2) organizing 
behavior in the service of goals, independently of 
current mood; (3) increasing or decreasing physiological 
arousal as needed; (4) distracting attention from 
emotionally evocative stimuli; and/or (5) experiencing 
emotion without either immediately withdrawing or 
producing an extreme secondary negative emotion (see 
Crowell, Beauchaine, & Linehan, 2009, for a further 
discussion). 
Conceptually, the deficit in the emotion regulation 
system leads to not only immense emotional suffering 
but also multiple behavioral problems in people diagnosed 
with BPD. When clinicians’ ratings of characteristics 
associated with psychopathology are examined, 
tendencies toward being chronically anxious and unhappy, 
depressed, or despondent are the most highly descriptive 
of the BPD (Bradley, Zittel, & Westen, 2005). 
Dysfunction leads the individual to attempt to escape 
aversive emotions, often leading to further suffering. 
For example, a female client experiencing intense anger 
after a fight with her partner may, in an effort to escape 
the anger, engage in cutting behaviors. She begins to 
feel relief from her anger for a short period of time. 
However, once her anger begins to subside, shame in 
response to the cutting behavior begins to increase 
and the cycle of emotion escape behavior continues. 
Although the mechanisms of the initial dysregulation 
remain unclear, it is likely that biological factors play 
a primary role. Siever and Davis (1991) hypothesized 
that deficits in emotion regulation for clients with BPD 
are related to both instability and hyperresponsiveness 
of catecholamine function. The etiology of this dysregulation 
may range from genetic influences to prenatal 
factors, to traumatic childhood events affecting development 
of the brain and nervous system. Furthermore, 
adoption studies of monozygotic (MZ) twins (Davison 
& Neale, 1994) suggest a genetic vulnerability. However, 
researchers do not claim that genetic or biologi


cal factors account for all pathology. If pathology were 
solely determined by genetics, then 100% of the MZ 
twins would presumably share the same pathology. 
Because this does not occur, we can explain the differences 
through the transactions between biology, as 
described earlier, and the environment. 

Invalidating Environments 

Most people with an initial temperamental vulnerability 
to emotion dysregulation do not develop BPD. Thus, 
the theory suggests further that particular developmental 
environments are necessary. The crucial developmental 
circumstance in Linehan’s theory is the transaction 
between emotion vulnerability and the presence of 
the “invalidating environment” (Linehan, 1987,1993a), 
which is defined by its tendency to negate, punish, and/ 
or respond erratically and inappropriately to private 
experiences, independent of the validity of the actual 
behavior. Private experiences, and especially emotional 
experiences and interpretations of events, are not taken 
as valid responses to events by others; are punished, 
trivialized, dismissed, or disregarded; and/or are attributed 
to socially unacceptable characteristics, such 
as over reactivity, inability to see things realistically, 
lack of motivation, motivation to harm or manipulate, 
lack of discipline, or failure to adopt a positive (or, 
conversely, discriminating) attitude. The invalidating 
environment can be any part of an individual’s social 
environment, including immediate or extended family, 
school, work, or community. Within each of these environments 
are even more specific idiosyncrasies that 
may impact the environment, such as birth order, years 
between siblings, teachers and peers, and/or coworkers. 
It is important to note that because two children 
grew up in the same home does not mean that they were 
raised in identical environments. Furthermore, people 
are often not aware of their invalidating behaviors and 
are not acting with a malicious intent. 

There are three primary characteristics of the invalidating 
environment. First, the environment indiscriminately 
rejects communication of private experiences 
and self-generated behaviors. For example, a person 
may be told, “You are so angry, but you won’t admit it” 
or “You can’t be hungry, you just ate.” Second, the invalidating 
environment may punish emotional displays 
and intermittently reinforce emotional escalation. For 
example, a woman breaks up with her partner and is 
feeling depressed. Her friends and family begin tell



Borderline Personality Disorder 

ing her “Get over it,” “He wasn’t worth it,” and “Don’t 
feel sad.” Over the course of the next week, she becomes 
more depressed and is beginning to withdraw 
from daily activities. Again, her environment responds 
in an invalidating manner. Finally after another 3 days 
of high emotional arousal she makes a suicide attempt. 
At that moment the environment jumps in and provides 
support by taking care of her. Unfortunately, this type 
of pattern often results in inadvertent reinforcement of 
extreme dysfunctional behavior. Finally, the invalidating 
environment may oversimplify the ease of problem 
solving and meeting goals for an individual. 

The high incidence of childhood sexual abuse reported 
by adults diagnosed with BPD (e.g., Herman, 
1986; Herman, Perry, & van der Kolk, 1989) suggests 
that sexual abuse may be a prototypical invalidating experience 
for children. The relationship of early sexual 
abuse to BPD, however, is quite controversial and open 
to many interpretations. On the one hand, Silk, Lee, 
Hill, and Lohr (1995) reported that the number of criterion 
BPD behaviors met was correlated with severity 
of childhood sexual abuse in a group of clients with 
BPD. On the other hand, a review by Fossati, Madeddu, 
and Maffei (1999) suggested that sexual abuse is not a 
major risk factor for BPD. 

The overall results of this transactional pattern between 
the emotionally vulnerable individual and the 
invalidating environment are the emotional dysregulation 
and behavioral patterns exhibited by the borderline 
adult. Such an individual has never learned how 
to label and regulate emotional arousal, how to tolerate 
emotional distress, or when to trust his/her own 
emotional responses as reflections of valid interpretations 
of events, resulting in self-invalidation (Linehan, 
1993a). In more optimal environments, public validation 
of one’s private, internal experiences results in 
the development of a stable identity. In the family of 
a person with BPD, however, private experiences may 
be responded to erratically and with insensitivity. Thus, 
the individual learns to mistrust his/her internal states, 
and instead scans the environment for cues about how 
to act, think, or feel. This general reliance on others 
results in the individual’s failure to develop a coherent 
sense of self. Emotional dysfunction also interferes 
with the development and maintenance of stable interpersonal 
relationships, which depend on both a stable 
sense of self and a capacity to self-regulate emotions. 
The invalidating environment’s tendency to trivialize 
or ignore the expression of negative emotion also 

shapes an expressive style later seen in the adult with 
BPD—a style that vacillates from inhibition and suppression 
of emotional experience to extreme behavioral 
displays. Behaviors such as overdosing, cutting, and 
burning have important affect-regulating properties 
and are additionally quite effective in eliciting helping 
behaviors from an environment that otherwise ignores 
efforts to ameliorate intense emotional pain. From this 
perspective, the dysfunctional behaviors characteristic 
of BPD may be viewed as maladaptive solutions to 
overwhelming, intensely painful negative affect. 

Dialectical DileMMas 

Linehan (1993a) describes “dialectical dilemmas” as 
behavioral patterns of the client that often interfere 
with therapy. These behavioral patterns, also referred 
to as “secondary targets” in treatment (compared to 
other targets we describe later), represent six behaviors 
that are dichotomized into a set of three dimensions of 
behavior defined by their opposite poles (see Figure 
10.1). At one end of each dimension is the behavior that 
theoretically is most directly influenced biologically 
via deficits in emotion regulation. At the other end is 
behavior that has been socially reinforced in the invalidating 
environment. These secondary targets are characteristics 
of people diagnosed with BPD that often interfere 
with change, thus interfering with therapy. 

figUre 10.1. Dialectical dilemmas in DBT. 



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

Emotion Vulnerability–Self‑Invalidation 

One dialectical dilemma is represented by biologically 
influenced emotional vulnerability on the one hand 
(e.g., the sense of being out of control or falling into the 
abyss) and by socially influenced self-invalidation on 
the other (e.g., hate and contempt directed toward the 
self, dismissal of one’s accomplishments). Along this 
dimension of behavior, clients with BPD often vacillate 
between acute awareness of their own intense, unbearable, 
and uncontrollable emotional suffering on the 
one hand, and dismissal, judgment, and invalidation of 
their own suffering and helplessness on the other. 

Emotion vulnerability here refers to the client’s acute 
experience and communication of emotional vulnerability 
and excruciating emotional pain. “Vulnerability” 
here means the acute experience of vulnerability rather 
than the sensitivity to emotional cues that defines the 
term when discussing the emotion dysregulation difficulties 
of the person diagnosed with BPD. Three reactions 
to emotional vulnerability are common in BPD: 

(1) freezing or dissociating in the face of intense emotion; 
(2) rage, often directed at society in general or 
at people who are experienced as invalidating; and (3) 
intense despair. Suicide here can function to communicate 
to others the depth of one’s suffering (“I’ll show 
you”) and/or as an escape from an unendurable life. 
On the other side of this polarity is self-invalidation. 
What is invalidated, in essence, is one’s own emotional 
experiencing and dysregulated responses. The most 
typical pattern here is a reaction to emotional pain with 
intense self-blame and self-hate. These people identify 
themselves as perpetrators, which results in intense levels 
of shame and contempt toward the self (“There is 
nothing wrong with me, I’m just a bad person”). Mooddependent 
perfectionism is also common. Here, the 
individual belittles, ignores, or discounts the difficulty 
of his/her own life or may overestimate the ease of 
solving current problems. Unfortunately, this may initiate 
a cycle that may eventually end in death. Extreme 
perfectionism often ultimately leads to failure, especially 
in people who overestimate their abilities; the 
failure then results in self-hatred, which cues suicidal 
behaviors in these people. Finally, self-invalidation can 
also be expressed through willful suppression, meaning 
that the individual actively denies the experience 
of all emotion. Often clients who come into our offices 
simply state, “I don’t do emotions.” As with emotion 
vulnerability, self-invalidation needs to be attended to 

actively and directly, due to the lethal consequences of 
these behaviors. 

Active Passivity–Apparent Competence 

A second dimension of behavior is a tendency toward 
active passivity versus the socially mediated behavior 
of apparent competence. Either pole of this dimension 
can lead to anger, guilt, or shame on the part of the client, 
and a tendency for the therapist to either under- or 
overestimate the client’s capabilities. 

“Active passivity” may be defined as passivity in 
solving one’s own problems, while actively engaging 
others to solve one’s problems. It can also be described 
as passivity that appears to be an active process of shutting 
down in the face of seeing problems coming in 
the future. In a sense, people diagnosed with BPD do 
not appear to have the ability to regulate themselves 
internally, particularly when the regulation required is 
non-mood-dependent behaviors. people diagnosed with 
BPD appear to be “relational selves” rather than “autonomous 
selves”; that is, they are more highly regulated 
by their environment than by internal dialogues, choices, 
and decisions. Their best form of self-regulation is 
to regulate their environment, such that it then provides 
the regulation they need. The problem here is that managing 
one’s environment and getting the support one 
needs requires a good deal of emotional consistency 
and regulation, characteristics that ordinarily are difficult 
for people diagnosed with BPD. Lorna Benjamin 
has described this characteristic as “My misery is your 
command” (1996, p. 192). 

On the opposite side of the polarity is “apparent 
competence,” which refers to the tendency of other 
people to overestimate the capabilities of the individual 
with BPD. Thus, this characteristic is defined by the 
behavior of the observer rather than the behavior of the 
individual with BPD. This failure to perceive their difficulties 
and “disability” accurately has serious effects 
on people diagnosed with BPD. Not only do they not 
get the help they need, but also their emotional pain 
and difficulties may easily be invalidated, leading to 
a further sense of being misunderstood. A number of 
behavioral patterns can precipitate this overestimation 
of the competence of the individual with BPD. Often, 
as a result of a significant discrepancy between the individual’s 
verbal and nonverbal presentations, the individual 
with BPD believes that he/she has sufficiently 
communicated his/her level of distress, when in fact the 


Borderline Personality Disorder 

observer interprets the individual as effectively managing 
a difficult situation. An example would be a woman 
speaking nonchalantly and without emotion about 
urges toward suicide after a fight with her husband. 
People diagnosed with BPD also frequently have difficulty 
generalizing behaviors across situations, especially 
in relationships. For example, the person may be 
able to cope well in the presence of one person, such as 
a therapist, but be unable to cope when he/she is alone 
or with someone other than the therapist. The therapist, 
understandably, may then fail to predict the dysregulation 
that occurs as the client walks away from the therapy 
session. Additionally, there may be a difficulty in 
generalizing coping behaviors across different moods. 
In one mood, a problem is solvable; in another, it is 
not. This may not be so difficult to figure out if mood 
changes are readily apparent to the observer, but often 
they are not. Thus, accurate estimates of the person’s 
competence actually require the observer, such as the 
therapist, constantly to anticipate mood changes that 
might occur to be able to predict what a client might 
or might not do. It is this characteristic, more than any 
other, that leads so often to a client walking out of a session, 
with the therapist believing that all is well, only to 
end up in the emergency department with a suicide attempt 
2 hours later. At times, client failures are nothing 
more than failures of the therapist (and often the client, 
also) to predict future behavior accurately. 

Unrelenting Crisis–Inhibited Grieving 

The third dimension of behavior is the tendency of the 
client with BPD to experience life as a series of unrelenting 
crises as opposed to the behavior of “inhibited 
grieving” (i.e., an inability to experience emotions 
associated with significant trauma or loss). The client 
experiences each of these extremes in a way that facilitates 
movement to the other extreme; for example, 
attempting to inhibit emotional experiences related to 
current crises may result in problem behaviors that add 
to existing crises. As with all of these dialectical dilemmas, 
the solution is for therapist and client to work 
toward a more balanced position that represents a synthesis 
of the opposing poles. 

People diagnosed with BPD who experience unrelenting 
crises have lives that are often characterized 
as chaotic and in crisis. “Crisis” is defined as the occurrence 
of problems that are extreme, with significant 
pressure to resolve them quickly. The consequence of 

the unrelenting crisis is that the individual with BPD, 
as well as the person’s environmental resources, such 
as family, friends, coworkers, and even the therapist, 
slowly wear down. There are three typical scenarios 
that result in a pattern of unrelenting crisis. First, people 
with extreme impulsivity and emotion dysregulation 
engage in behaviors that result in crisis situations. 
Poor judgment is a key element to assess when analyzing 
the impulsive behaviors of people diagnosed with 
BPD. Second, situations that do not start out as crises 
can quickly become critical due to the lack of resources 
available to many people with a BPD diagnosis. This 
may be due to socioeconomic status, or to lack of family 
or peer support. Finally, unrelenting crises can be 
due simply to fate or bad luck at a given moment, a 
phenomenon that is out of the person’s control. For example, 
an unexpected disaster in a client’s apartment 
due to the neighbors running the water in their sink for 
an extended period of time, might occur. The floors in 
the client’s apartment are damaged by the water and 
he/she does not have the financial resources to pay for 
renter’s insurance or to replace the carpet in the apartment. 
His/her apartment is now uninhabitable, but he/ 
she does not have any place else to stay. This problem 
is out of the person’s control, but it is still that person’s 
responsibility to solve. 

At the other extreme, and often precipitated by a crisis, 
is the phenomenon of “inhibited grieving.” In this 
context, “grief” refers to the process of grieving, which 
includes experiencing multiple painful emotions associated 
with loss, particularly traumatic loss, not just 
the one emotion of deep sadness or grief. People with a 
BPD diagnosis may not be able to experience or process 
the grief related to loss of the life they had expected 
for themselves, and ordinarily they do not believe they 
will recover from the grief if they actually try to experience 
or to cope with it on their own. As one client said 
to us, “I don’t do sadness.” Another said, “I feel sad, 
I die.” People diagnosed with BPD may not recognize 
their own emotional avoidance and shutdown. Thus, it 
is crucial for the therapist to attend to emotional avoidance, 
particularly of sadness and grief, and to assist 
clients through the grief process. Areas that must be 
confronted, grieved, and finally accepted include an insurmountably 
painful childhood, a biological makeup 
that makes life harder rather than easier, inability to “fit 
in” in many environments, absence of loving people in 
the current environment, or loss of hope for a particular 
future for which one had ardently hoped. What must be 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

confronted by the therapist is that egregious losses can 
be real and clients might be right: They really cannot 
get out of the abyss if they fall into it. Regardless of 
the situation to be grieved, avoidance of these situations 
may lead to increased shame. The shame is a result of 
believing that one is unloved, being alone, or fearing 
that one will not be able to cope in the face of emotional 
situations. Many of our clients believe that if they begin 
to address any of these areas, they will not be able to 
function in their lives, and often this is true. They do 
not have the skills or resources to assist them with the 
process of experiencing emotions. We often tell clients 
that managing grief or processing emotions requires 
going to the cemetery to pay tribute to what is lost, but 
building a house at the cemetery and living there is not 
a good idea. It is a place to visit, experience the sadness 
of the loss, and then leave. The use of this metaphor 
has helped many of our clients to experience emotion 
without falling into the abyss. 

staGes of theraPy 
aND treatMeNt Goals 

In theory, treatment of all clients with BPD can be organized 
and determined based on their levels of disorder, 
and is conceptualized as occurring in stages. 
“Level of disorder” is defined by the current severity, 
pervasiveness, complexity, disability, and imminent 
threat presented by the client. Clients can enter into five 
stages of treatment based on their current level of disorder. 
First, a pretreatment stage prepares the client for 
therapy and elicits a commitment to work toward the 
various treatment goals. Orientation to specific goals 
and treatment strategies, and commitment to work toward 
goals addressed during this stage, are likely to be 
important throughout all stages of treatment. 

In Stage 1 of therapy, the primary focus is on stabilizing 
the client and achieving behavioral control. 
Out-of-control behaviors constitute those that are disordered 
due to the severity of the disorder (e.g., as seen in 
an actively psychotic client) or severity combined with 
the complexity of multiple diagnoses (e.g., as seen in a 
suicidal client who has BPD with comorbid panic disorder 
and depression). Generally, the criteria for putting a 
client in Stage 1 are based on level of current functioning, 
together with the inability of the client to work on 
any other goals before behavior and functioning come 
under better control. As Mintz (1968) suggested in discussing 
treatment of the suicidal client, all forms of 

psychotherapy are ineffective with a dead client. In the 
subsequent stages (2–4), the treatment goals are to replace 
“quiet desperation” with nontraumatic emotional 
experiencing (Stage 2); to achieve “ordinary” happiness 
and unhappiness, and to reduce ongoing disorders 
and problems in living (Stage 3); and to resolve a sense 
of incompleteness and to achieve freedom (Stage 4). In 
summary, the orientation of the treatment is first to get 
action under control, then to help the client to feel better, 
to resolve problems in living and residual disorder, 
and to find freedom (and, for some, a sense of transcendence). 
Most research to date has focused on the 
severely or multiply disordered clients who enter treatment 
at Stage 1. The construct of stages aids in treatment 
planning and conceptualization with the client, 
and in identifying the appropriate level of care needed. 

Pretreatment: Orienting and Commitment 

Specific tasks of orientation are twofold. First, client 
and therapist must arrive at a mutually informed decision 
to work together. Typically, the first one to four 
sessions are presented to the client as opportunities for 
client and therapist to explore this possibility. Diagnostic 
interviewing, history taking, and formal behavioral 
analyses of high-priority, targeted behaviors can 
be woven into initial therapy sessions or be conducted 
separately. Second, client and therapist must negotiate a 
common set of expectancies to guide the initial steps of 
therapy. Client and therapist discuss, outline, and agree 
specifically on what they can expect from each other. 
When necessary, the therapist attempts to modify the 
client’s dysfunctional beliefs regarding the process of 
therapy. Issues addressed include the rate and magnitude 
of change that can reasonably be expected, the 
goals of treatment and general treatment procedures, 
and various myths the client may have about the process 
of therapy in general. The dialectical/biosocial view of 
BPD is also presented. Orientation covers several additional 
points. First, DBT is presented as a supportive 
therapy requiring a strong collaborative relationship 
between client and therapist. DBT is not a suicide prevention 
program, but a life enhancement program in 
which client and therapist function as a team to create 
a life worth living. Second, DBT is described as a 
cognitive-behavioral therapy with a primary emphasis 
on analyzing problematic behaviors and replacing them 
with skillful behaviors, and on changing ineffective beliefs 
and rigid thinking patterns. Third, the client is told 
that DBT is a skills-oriented therapy, with special em



Borderline Personality Disorder 

phasis on behavioral skills training. The commitment 
and orienting strategies, balanced by validation strategies 
described later, are the most important strategies 
during this phase of treatment. The therapist places a 
strong effort into getting the client to commit to not engaging 
in suicidal or NSSI behaviors for some specified 
period of time before allowing the client to leave the 
session; it can be for 1 year, 6 months, until the next 
session, or until tomorrow. 

Stage 1: Attaining Basic Capacities 

The primary focus of the first stage of therapy is attaining 
behavioral control in order to build a life pattern 
that is reasonably functional and stable. Furthermore, 
DBT does not promote itself as a suicide prevention 
program; instead, it focuses on “building a life worth 
living.” Therefore, the primary treatment goal in DBT 
and in Stage 1 specifically is to assist clients in building 
a life they will experience as worth living. DBT attains 
this goal by focusing the treatment on specific behavioral 
targets agreed upon by both therapist and client. 
Specific targets in order of importance are to reduce 
life-threatening behaviors (e.g., suicide attempts, suicide 
ideation, NSSI behaviors, homicidal threats and 
behaviors), therapy-interfering behaviors (e.g., late to 
session, missing sessions, not following treatment plan, 
hostile attacks on the therapist), and quality-of-life– 
interfering behaviors (e.g., substance abuse, eating disorder, 
homelessness, serious Axis I disorders), and to 
increase behavioral skills. These targets are approached 
hierarchically and recursively as higher-priority behaviors 
reappear in each session. However, this does not 
mean that these behaviors must be addressed in this 
specific order during a session; it means that, based on 
the hierarchy, all relevant behavior must be addressed 
at some point within the session. For example, if a client 
is 30 minutes late to session (therapy-interfering behavior) 
and has attempted suicide within the last week 
(life-threatening behavior), the therapist may choose 
to address the therapy-interfering behavior first, then 
move on to address the life-threatening behaviors. 

With severely dysfunctional and suicidal clients, significant 
progress on Stage 1 targets may take up to 1 
year or more. In addition to these therapy targets, the 
goal of increasing dialectical behaviors is universal to 
all modes of treatment. Dialectical thinking encourages 
clients to see reality as complex and multifaceted, to 
hold contradictory thoughts simultaneously and learn 
to integrate them, and to be comfortable with incon


sistency and contradictions. For people with a BPD 
diagnosis, who are extreme and dichotomous in their 
thinking and behavior, this is a formidable task indeed. 
A dialectical emphasis applies equally to a client’s patterns 
of behavior because the client is encouraged to 
integrate and balance emotional and overt behavioral 
responses. In particular, dialectical tensions arise in 
the areas of skills enhancement versus self-acceptance, 
problem solving versus problem acceptance, and affect 
regulation versus affect tolerance. Behavioral extremes, 
whether emotional, cognitive, or overt responses, are 
constantly confronted while more balanced responses 
are taught. 

Life-Threatening Behaviors 

Keeping a client alive must, of course, be the first priority 
in any psychotherapy. Thus, reducing suicide crisis 
behaviors (any behaviors that place the client at high 
and imminent risk for suicide or threaten to do so, including 
credible suicide threats, planning, preparations, 
obtaining lethal means, and high suicide intent) is the 
highest priority in DBT. The target and its priority are 
made explicit in DBT during orientation and throughout 
treatment, simply because suicidal behavior and 
the risk of suicide are of paramount concern for clients 
with BPD. Similarly, any acute, intentional NSSI behaviors 
share the top priority. The priority here is due 
to the risk of suicidal and NSSI behavior as the single 
best predictor of subsequent suicide. Similarly, DBT 
also targets suicide ideation and client expectations 
about the value and long-term consequences of suicidal 
behavior, although these behaviors may not necessarily 
be targeted directly. 

Therapy-Interfering Behaviors 

Keeping clients and therapists working together collaboratively 
is the second explicitly targeted priority 
in DBT. The chronic nature of most problems among 
clients with BPD, including their high tendency to end 
therapy prematurely and the likelihood of therapist 
burnout and iatrogenic behaviors when treating BPD, 
requires such explicit attention. Both client and therapist 
behaviors that threaten the relationship or therapeutic 
progress are addressed directly, immediately, 
consistently, and constantly—and most importantly, 
before rather than after either the therapist or the client 
no longer wants to continue. Interfering behaviors of 
the client, including those that actually interfere with 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

receiving the therapy (e.g., lateness to sessions, missed 
sessions, lack of transportation to sessions, dissociating 
in sessions) or with other clients benefiting from therapy 
(in group or milieu settings; e.g., selling drugs to 
other clients in the program), and those that burn out or 
cross the personal limits of the therapist (e.g., repeated 
crisis calls at 3:00 A.M., repeated verbal attacks on the 
therapist) are treated within therapy sessions. Behaviors 
of the therapist include any that are iatrogenic (e.g., 
inadvertently reinforcing dysfunctional behaviors), as 
well as any that cause the client unnecessary distress 
or make progress difficult (e.g., therapist arriving late 
to sessions, missing sessions, not returning phone calls 
within a reasonable time frame). These behaviors are 
dealt with in therapy sessions, if brought up by either 
the client or the therapist, and are also discussed during 
the consultation/supervision meeting. 

Quality-of-Life–Interfering Behaviors 

The third target of Stage 1 addresses all other behaviors 
that interfere with the client having a reasonable quality 
of life. Typical behaviors in this category include serious 
substance abuse, severe major depressive episodes, 
severe eating disorders, high-risk and out-of-control 
sexual behaviors, extreme financial difficulties (uncontrollable 
spending or gambling, inability to handle 
finances), criminal behaviors that are likely to lead to 
incarceration, employment- or school-related dysfunctional 
behaviors (a pattern of quitting jobs or school prematurely, 
getting fired or failing in school, not engaging 
in any productive activities), housing-related dysfunctional 
behaviors (living with abusive people, not finding 
stable housing), mental health–related patterns (going 
in and out of hospitals, failure to take or abuse of necessary 
medications), and health-related problems (failure 
to treat serious medical disorders). The goal here is for 
the client to achieve a stable lifestyle that meets reasonable 
standards for safety and adequate functioning. 

When necessary, DBT incorporates evidence-based 
behavioral interventions to address specific quality-oflife–
interfering behaviors. Because DBT is a principlebased 
treatment, it allows seamless integration of other 
evidence-based protocols as long as they are compatible 
with the basic assumptions and philosophy of DBT. 
For example we have recently added to DBT a prolonged 
exposure protocol to treat PTSD among highly 
suicidal BPD clients (Harned, Korslund, Foa, & Linehan, 
2012). Following Harned and colleagues’ (2012) 
guidelines for client readiness and implementation of 

the protocol within standard DBT, a pilot study was 
conducted with 13 women diagnosed with comorbid 
BPD and PTSD, and at high risk for suicide. Outcomes 
showed 70% with reliable improvement in PTSD symptoms 
and a 60% remission rate, results similar to PE 
findings in the standard PTSD literature. 

Behavioral Skills 

The fourth target of Stage 1 is for the client to achieve 
a reasonable capacity for acquiring and applying 
skillful behaviors in the areas of distress tolerance, 
emotion regulation, interpersonal effectiveness, selfmanagement, 
and the capacity to respond with awareness 
without being judgmental (“mindfulness” skills). 
In our outpatient program, the primary responsibility 
for skills training lies with the weekly DBT skills 
group. The individual therapist monitors the acquisition 
and use of skills over time, and aids the client in 
applying skills to specific problem situations in his/her 
own life. Additionally, it is the role of the individual 
therapist, not the skills group leader, to provide skills 
coaching to the client as needed when problems arise. 

Stage 2: Quiet Desperation 

Stage 1 of DBT takes a direct approach to managing 
dysfunctional behavioral and regulating emotional patterns. 
Although the connection between current behavior 
and previous traumatic events (including those from 
childhood) may be explored and noted, the focus of the 
treatment is distinctly on analyzing the relationship 
among current thoughts, feelings, and behaviors, and 
on accepting and changing current patterns. The aim of 
Stage 2 DBT is to reduce “quiet desperation,” which can 
be defined as extreme emotional pain in the presence of 
control of action (Linehan et al., 1999). A wide range of 
emotional experiencing difficulties (e.g., avoidance of 
emotions and emotion-related cues) are targeted in this 
stage, with the goal of increasing the capacity for normative 
emotional experiencing (i.e., the ability to experience 
a full range of emotions without either severe 
emotional escalation or behavioral dyscontrol). Stage 2 
addresses four goals: remembering and accepting the 
facts of earlier distressing and/or traumatic events; reducing 
stigmatization and self-blame often associated 
with traumatic social invalidation; reducing oscillating 
denial and intrusive response syndromes; and resolving 
dialectical tensions regarding placement of blame for 
past difficulties. 


Borderline Personality Disorder 

Stage 3: Resolving Problems in Living 
and Increasing Respect for Self 

In the third stage, DBT targets the client’s unacceptable 
unhappiness and problems in living. At this stage, the 
client with BPD has either done the work necessary to 
resolve problems in the prior two stages or was never 
severely disordered enough to need it. Although problems 
at this stage may still be serious, the individual is 
functional in major domains of living. The goal here is 
for the client to achieve a level of ordinary happiness 
and unhappiness, as well as independent self-respect. 
To this end, the client is helped to value, believe in, 
trust, and validate him/herself. The targets here are 
the abilities to evaluate one’s own behavior nondefensively, 
to trust one’s own responses, and to hold on to 
self-evaluations, independent of the opinions of others. 
Ultimately, the therapist must pull back and persistently 
reinforce the client’s independent attempts at selfvalidation, 
self-care, and problem solving. Although 
the goal is not for clients to become independent of all 
people, it is important that they achieve sufficient selfreliance 
to relate to and depend on others without selfinvalidating. 


Stage 4: Attaining the Capacity for Freedom 
and Sustained Contentment 

The final stage of treatment in DBT targets the resolution 
of a sense of incompleteness and the development 
of a capacity for sustained contentment. The focus on 
freedom encompasses the goal of freedom from the 
need to have one’s wishes fulfilled, or one’s current life 
or behavioral and emotional responses changed. Here 
the goals are expanded awareness, spiritual fulfillment, 
and the movement into experiencing flow. For clients at 
Stage 4, insight-oriented psychotherapy, spiritual direction 
or practices, or other organized experiential treatments 
and/or life experiences may be of most benefit. 

structuriNG treatMeNt: 
fuNctioNs aND MoDes 

Functions of Treatment 

Standard DBT is structured around five essential functions: 
(1) to enhance behavioral capabilities by expanding 
the individual’s repertoire of skillful behavioral patterns; 
(2) to improve the client’s motivation to change 
by reducing reinforcement for dysfunctional behaviors 

and high-probability responses (cognitions, emotions, 
actions) that interfere with effective behaviors; (3) to 
ensure that new behaviors generalize from the therapeutic 
to the natural environment; (4) to enhance the 
motivation and capabilities of the therapist, so that effective 
treatment is rendered; and (5) to structure the 
environment so that effective behaviors, rather than 
dysfunctional behaviors, are reinforced. 

Modes of Treatment: Who Does What 
and When 

Responsibility for performing functions and meeting 
target goals of treatment in standard DBT is spread 
across the various modes of treatment, with focus and 
attention varying according to the mode of therapy. 
The individual therapist (who is always the primary 
therapist in DBT) attends to the order of targets and 
is also, with the client, responsible for organizing the 
treatment so that all goals are met. In skills training, 
a different set of goals is targeted; during phone calls, 
yet another hierarchy of targets takes precedence. In 
the consultation/supervision mode, therapists’ behaviors 
are the targets. Therapists engaging in more than 
one mode of therapy (e.g., individual, group, and telephone 
coaching) must stay cognizant of the functions 
and order of targets specific to each mode, and switch 
smoothly from one hierarchy to another as the modes 
of treatment change. 

Individual Therapy 

DBT assumes that effective treatment must attend both 
to client capabilities and behavioral skills deficits, and 
to motivational and behavioral performance issues that 
interfere with use of skillful responses (function 2). Although 
there are many ways to effect these principles, 
in DBT the individual therapist is responsible for the 
assessment and problem solving of skill deficits and 
motivational problems, and for organizing other modes 
to address problems in each area. 

Individual outpatient therapy sessions are scheduled 
on a once-a-week basis for 50–90 minutes, although 
twice-weekly sessions may be held as needed during 
crisis periods or at the beginning of therapy. The priorities 
of specific targets within individual therapy are the 
same as the overall priorities of DBT discussed earlier. 
Therapeutic focus within individual therapy sessions 
is determined by the highest-priority treatment target 
relevant at the moment. This ordering does not change 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

over the course of therapy; however, the relevance of a 
target does change. Relevance is determined by either 
the client’s most recent, day-to-day behavior (since the 
last session) or by current behavior during the therapy 
session. If satisfactory progress on one target goal has 
been achieved or the behavior has never been a problem, 
or if the behavior is currently not evident, then the 
therapist shifts attention to another treatment target according 
to the hierarchy. The consequence of this priority 
allocation is that when high-risk suicidal behaviors 
or intentional self-injury, therapy-interfering behaviors, 
or serious quality-of-life–interfering behaviors occur, 
at least part of the session agenda is devoted to each 
of these topics. If these behaviors are not occurring 
at the moment, then the topics to be discussed during 
Stages 1, 3, and 4 are set by the client. The therapeutic 
focus (within any topic area discussed) depends on 
the stage of treatment, the skills targeted for improvement, 
and any secondary targets. During Stage 1, for 
example, any problem or topic area can be conceptualized 
in terms of interpersonal issues and skills needed, 
opportunities for emotion regulation, and/or a necessity 
for distress tolerance. During Stage 3, regardless 
of the topic, the therapist focuses on helping the client 
decrease problems in living and achieve independent 
self-respect, self-validation, and self-acceptance both 
within the session and in everyday life. (These are, 
of course, targets all through the treatment, but the 
therapist pulls back further during Stage 3 and does 
less work for the client than during the two preceding 
stages.) During Stage 2, the major focus is on reducing 
pervasive “quiet desperation,” as well as changing the 
extreme emotions and psychological meanings associated 
with traumatizing cues. 

For highly dysfunctional clients, it is likely that early 
treatment will necessarily focus on the upper part of 
the hierarchy. For example, if suicidal or NSSI behavior 
has occurred during the previous week, attention to it 
takes precedence over attention to therapy-interfering 
behavior. In turn, focusing on therapy-interfering behaviors 
takes precedence over working on quality-oflife–
interfering behaviors. Although it is often possible 
to work on more than one target (including those generated 
by the client) in a given session, higher-priority 
targets always take precedence, but all relevant targets 
must be addressed adequately during the session. 
Again, targets do not need to be addressed in sequential 
order; they just have to be addressed during the session. 
Determining the relevance of targeted behaviors is assisted 
by the use of diary cards, filled out by the client 

during at least the first two stages of therapy and brought 
to weekly sessions. Failure to complete or to bring in a 
card is considered a therapy-interfering behavior and 
should be openly addressed as such. Diary cards record 
daily instances of suicidal and NSSI behavior, urges to 
self-harm or to engage in suicide behaviors (on a 0- to 
5-point scale), “misery,” use of substances (licit and illicit), 
and use of behavioral skills. Other targeted behaviors 
(bulimic episodes, daily productive activities, 
flashbacks, etc.) may also be recorded on the blank area 
of the card. The therapist doing DBT must develop the 
pattern of routinely reviewing the card at the beginning 
of each session. The card acts as a road map for each 
session; therefore, a session cannot begin until a diary 
card has been completed. If the card indicates that a 
life-threatening behavior has occurred, it is noted and 
discussed. If high suicide or self-harm urges are recorded, 
or there is a significant increase (e.g., an increase of 
3 points or higher on the 0- to 5-point scale for urges) 
over the course of the week, they are assessed to determine 
whether the client is at risk for suicide. If a pattern 
of substance abuse or dependence appears, it is treated 
as a quality-of-life–interfering behavior. 

Work on targeted behaviors involves a coordinated 
array of treatment strategies, described later in this 
chapter. Essentially, each session is a balance among 
structured, as well as unstructured, problem solving 
(including simple interpretive activities by the therapist) 
and unstructured validation. The amount of the 
therapist’s time allocated to each—problem solving 
and validating—depends on (1) the urgency of the behaviors 
needing change or problems to be solved, and 

(2) the urgency of the client’s needs for validation, understanding, 
and acceptance without any intimation 
of change being needed. However, there should be an 
overall balance in the session between change (problem 
solving) and acceptance (validation) strategies. Unbalanced 
attention to either side may result in a nondialectical 
session, in addition to impeding client progress. 
Skills Training 

The necessity of crisis intervention and attention to 
other primary targets makes skills acquisition within 
individual psychotherapy very difficult. Thus, a separate 
component of treatment directly targets the acquisition 
of behavioral skills (function 1). In DBT this usually 
takes the form of separate, weekly, 2- to 2½-hour 
group skills training sessions that clients must attend, 
ordinarily for a minimum of 6 months and preferably 


Borderline Personality Disorder 

for a year. Skills training can also be done individually, 
although it is often more difficult to stay focused on 
teaching new skills in individual than in group therapy. 
After a client has gone through all skills modules twice 
(i.e., for 1 year), remaining in skills training is a matter 
of personal preference and need. Some DBT programs 
have developed graduate groups for clients who have 
acquired the skills but still need weekly consultation in 
applying the skills effectively to everyday difficulties. 
It is important to note that there is no research to date 
on the effectiveness of graduate groups. In adolescent 
programs, family members are usually invited. Some 
programs include a separate friends and families skills 
training group as well. 

Each group typically has a leader and a co-leader. 
Whereas the primary role of the leader is to teach the 
skills, the co-leader focuses on managing group process 
by keeping members both focused and attending to 
the material being taught, as well as processing the information 
(e.g., ensuring that everyone is on the correct 
page, noticing when the leader’s invalidation has led 
to a member shutting down, waking someone up, sitting 
next to a member who is crying during group). We 
have found that it is difficult to keep the group focused 
and the leader on schedule for teaching the skills if the 
leader attempts to manage both roles on his/her own. 
Oftentimes, the co-leader role is more difficult to learn. 

Skills training in DBT follows a psychoeducational 
format. In contrast to individual therapy, in which the 
agenda is determined primarily by the problem to be 
solved, the skills training agenda is set by the skill to 
be taught. As mentioned earlier, skills training also 
uses a hierarchy of treatment targets to keep the group 
focused: (1) therapy-destroying behaviors (e.g., using 
drugs on premises, which could lead to the clinic being 
shut down; property damage; threatening imminent suicide 
or homicidal behavior to a fellow group member or 
therapist); (2) increasing skills acquisition and strengthening; 
and (3) decreasing therapy-interfering behaviors 
(e.g., refusing to talk in a group setting, restless pacing 
in the middle of sessions, attacking the therapist and/ 
or the therapy). However, therapy-interfering behaviors 
are not given the attention in skills training that they 
are given in the individual psychotherapy mode. If such 
behaviors were a primary focus, there would never be 
time for teaching behavioral skills. Generally, therapyinterfering 
behaviors are put on an extinction schedule, 
while a client is “dragged” through skills training and 
simultaneously soothed. In DBT, all skills training clients 
are required to be in concurrent individual psycho


therapy. Throughout group or individual skills training, 
each client is urged to address other problematic behaviors 
with his/her primary therapist; if a serious risk of 
suicide develops, the skills training therapist refers the 
problem to the primary therapist. 

Although all of the strategies described below are 
used in both individual psychotherapy and skills training, 
the mix is decidedly different. Skills acquisition, 
strengthening, and generalization strategies are the 
predominant change strategies in skills training. In addition, 
skills training is highly structured, much more 
so than the individual psychotherapy component. Half 
of each skills training session is devoted to reviewing 
homework practice of the skills currently being taught, 
and the other half is devoted to presenting and practicing 
new skills. Except when interpersonal process issues 
seriously threaten progress, the agenda and topics 
for discussion in skills training are usually predetermined. 


Four skills modules are taught on a rotating basis over 
the course of 6 months. In standard DBT, mindfulness 
skills are taught for 2 consecutive weeks at the beginning 
of each of the subsequent modules. New members 
join a group during either the 2 weeks of mindfulness 
or the first 2 weeks of the subsequent module. 

Mindfulness skills are viewed as central in DBT; 
thus, they are labeled the “core” skills. These skills represent 
a behavioral translation of meditation (including 
Zen and contemplative prayer) practice and include observing, 
describing, spontaneous participating, being 
nonjudgmental, focusing awareness, and focusing on 
effectiveness. Unlike standard behavioral and cognitive 
therapies, which ordinarily focus on changing 
distressing emotions and events, a major emphasis of 
DBT is on learning to manage pain skillfully. Mindfulness 
skills reflect the ability to experience and to observe 
one’s thoughts, emotions, and behaviors without 
evaluation, and without attempting to change or control 
them. Distress tolerance skills comprise two types of 
skills. First, crisis survival skills are used to regulate 
behavior, in order to manage painful situations without 
making them worse (e.g., without engaging in lifethreatening 
behavior) until the problem can be solved. 
Second, “accepting reality” skills are used to tolerate 
the pain of problems that cannot be solved in either the 
short-term future or that may have occurred in the past 
and, therefore, cannot be changed ever. 

Emotion regulation skills target the reduction of 
emotional distress and include affect identification and 
labeling, mindfulness of current emotions (i.e., expe



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

riencing nonjudgmentally), identifying obstacles to 
changing emotions, increasing resilience, and acting 
opposite to the emotion. Interpersonal effectiveness 
skills teach effective methods for deciding on objectives 
within conflict situations (either asking for something 
or saying “no” to a request) and strategies that 
maximize the chances of obtaining those objectives 
without harming the relationship or sacrificing selfrespect. 


It is important to highlight here one skill that is essential 
in the DBT emotion regulation module: the 
skill of opposite action. This emotion regulation skill 
encourages clients to act opposite to their emotional 
urge in order to reduce their emotional arousal. The 
theoretical premise behind opposite action is that acting 
in accordance with the action urge associated with 
an emotion increases the likelihood that that emotion 
will fire again (Linehan, Bohus, & Lynch, 2007). Clients 
are taught that reversing expressive (e.g., facial expression, 
posture, voice tone) and action components 
of emotion responses is common to many treatments 
that address emotional disorders and, in essence, can 
be one of the main mechanisms of change in effective 
psychotherapy. For example, effective treatments for 
anxiety are based on principles of exposure and response 
prevention that encourage active replacement 
of an emotion-consistent behavior with an emotioninconsistent 
behavior (e.g., Foa & Kozak, 1986). The 
skill of opposite action expands this principle to be applicable 
all emotions, not just to fear. It also provides 
specific guidelines for how exactly to implement opposite 
actions for each problematic emotion. Therefore, 
if an emotion is not justified in the situation or is not 
effective, opposite action involves (1) exposure to the 
stimuli or cues evoking the emotion, (2) blocking of the 
behavior prompted by the emotion’s action urge, and 

(3) acting in a way that is opposite or inconsistent with 
the emotional response (Linehan, 1993b). For example, 
the action urge of fear is to avoid; therefore, the opposite 
action is to fully approach the situation. For anger, 
the action urge is to attack physically or emotionally, 
clench fists, and to judge the situation. The opposite action 
to anger therefore involves gently removing oneself 
from the situation, unclenching the fists, and opening 
the palms of hands, relaxing the shoulders, making 
empathic statements, and actively working to generate 
empathy for the person or situation with whom one is 
angry (Linehan, 1993b, 2013). 
The skill of opposite action is very similar to the 
recommendation to change action tendencies in order 

to change anxiety, which was proposed by Barlow in 
1988. According to Barlow and colleagues (2004), negative 
emotionality is a latent factor underlying depression 
and anxiety disorders; therefore they proposed a 
unified treatment protocol for mood and anxiety disorders. 
Barlow and colleagues’ unified protocol suggests 
that difficulties with negative emotions can be treated 
through altering antecedent cognitive reappraisals (i.e., 
the probability of an event to happen and the likelihood 
of a catastrophic outcome), preventing emotional 
avoidance, and facilitating action tendencies that are 
not associated with the emotion. For this last strategy, 
they highlight that a crucial step is to prevent action 
tendencies associated with the emotion and to facilitate 
different action tendencies, encouraging approach 
when emotions says avoidance. The examples given are 
similar to opposite action (e.g., asking an individual 
diagnosed with GAD to engage in nonperfect behavior; 
encouraging someone with an anger problem to act 
detached and passive; asking someone diagnosed with 
depression to act active and not withdraw). 

Self-management skills are taught in conjunction 
with the other behavioral skills; however, there is not 
a specific module allocated to these skills because 
behavioral principles are inherent in all of DBT. Selfmanagement 
skills include knowledge of the fundamental 
principles of learning and behavior change, 
and the ability to set realistic goals, to conduct one’s 
own behavioral analysis, and to implement contingency 
management plans. 

Telephone Consultation 

Telephone calls between sessions (or other extratherapeutic 
contact when DBT is conducted in other settings; 
e.g., inpatient units) are an integral part of DBT. Telephone 
consultation calls also follow a target hierarchy: 

(1) to provide emergency crisis intervention and simultaneously 
break the link between suicidal behaviors 
and therapist attention; (2) to provide coaching in skills 
and promote skills generalization; and (3) to provide 
a timely context for repairing the therapeutic relationship. 
With respect to calls for skills coaching, the focus 
of a phone call varies depending on the complexity and 
severity of the problem to be solved and the amount of 
time the therapist is willing to spend on the phone. It 
is important to note that these calls are not considered 
therapy sessions and should not be used as such. With 
easy or already clear situations, in which it is reasonably 
easy to determine what the client can or should do 

Borderline Personality Disorder 

in the situation, the focus is on helping the client use 
behavioral skills (rather than dysfunctional behaviors) 
to address the problem. Alternatively, with complex 
problems, or with problems too severe for the client to 
resolve soon, the focus is on ameliorating and tolerating 
distress, and inhibiting dysfunctional problem-solving 
behaviors until the next therapy session. In the latter 
case, resolving the crisis is not the target of telephone 
coaching calls. 

With the exception of taking necessary steps to protect 
the client’s life when he/she has threatened suicide, 
all calls for help are handled as much alike as possible. 
This is done to break the contingency between suicidal 
and NSSI behaviors, and increased phone contact. To 
do this, the therapist can do one of two things: refuse to 
accept any calls (including suicide crisis calls), or insist 
that the client who calls during suicidal crises also call 
during other crises and problem situations. As Linehan 
(1993b) notes, experts on suicidal behaviors uniformly 
say that therapist availability is necessary with 
suicidal clients. Thus, DBT chooses the latter course 
and encourages (and at times insists) on calls during 
nonsuicidal crisis periods. In DBT, calling the therapist 
too infrequently, as well as too frequently, is considered 
therapy-interfering behavior. Through orientation 
to coaching calls during pretreatment the client learns 
what to expect during the calls. For example, a therapist 
may communicate to the client in session what he/she 
will ask during the call: “What’s the problem? What 
skills have you used? Where is your skills book? Go get 
it, and let’s figure out what other skills you can use to 
get through this situation.” It is important to highlight 
that clients and therapists can easily fall into the trap of 
considering the act of calling for phone consultation a 
skill. Although asking for help may be a current target 
of treatment, it is not considered a skill to be used when 
the client is in distress. A therapists wants to reinforce 
the client for effectively reaching out; however, he/she 
does not want to reinforce the client who does not try 
using actual skills to manage the problem at hand prior 
to calling the therapist. 

Additionally, the therapist is balancing the changefocused 
strategies with validation throughout the call. It 
is important that the therapist be aware of contingency 
management principles that may be occurring during 
the phone calls to avoid inadvertently reinforcing crisis 
behaviors and to increase contact between sessions. 

A skills trainer uses phone calls only to keep a client 
in therapy (including, of course, when necessary, 
to keep the client alive). All other problems, including 

suicidal crises, are turned over to the primary therapist 
as soon as possible. We have learned that this can be 
one of the most difficult distinctions for group leaders 
to uphold. Clients may call for a variety of reasons, and 
it is the role of the group leader consistently to refer the 
client back to the individual therapist. 

The final priority for phone calls to individual therapists 
is relationship repair. Clients with BPD often experience 
delayed emotional reactions to interactions 
that have occurred during therapy sessions. From a 
DBT perspective, it is not reasonable to require clients 
to wait up to a whole week before dealing with these 
emotions, and it is appropriate for a client to call for a 
brief “heart-to-heart” talk. In these situations, the role 
of the therapist is to soothe and to reassure. In-depth 
analyses should wait until the next session. 

Consultation Team 

DBT assumes that effective treatment of BPD must pay 
as much attention to the therapist’s behavior and experience 
in therapy as it does to the client’s. Treating clients 
with BPD is enormously stressful, and staying within 
the DBT therapeutic framework can be tremendously 
difficult (function 4). Thus, an integral part of the therapy 
is the treatment of the therapist. Every therapist is 
required to be on a consultation team either with one 
other person or with a group. DBT consultation meetings 
are held weekly and attended by therapists currently 
providing DBT to clients. At times, the clinical 
setting may require that the team be part of an administrative 
meeting due to time and space restraints. When 
this occurs, it is important to set a specific agenda and 
time limitations on each part of the meeting (administration, 
DBT) to ensure that therapist consultation 
issues are addressed. The roles of consultation are to 
hold the therapist within the therapeutic framework and 
to address problems that arise in the course of treatment 
delivery. Thus, the fundamental target is increasing 
adherence to DBT principles for each member of 
the consultation group. The DBT consultation team 
is viewed as an integral component of DBT; that is, it 
is considered peer group therapy for the therapists, in 
which each member is simultaneously a therapist to 
other members and a client. The focus is on applying 
DBT strategies to increase DBT-adherent behaviors 
and decrease non-DBT behaviors. 

There are three primary functions of consultation to 
the therapist in DBT. First, a consultation team helps 
to keep each individual therapist in the therapeutic 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

relationship. The role here is to cheerlead and to support 
the therapist. Second, the supervisor or consultation 
team balances the therapist in his/her interactions 
with the client. In providing balance, consultants may 
move close to the therapist, helping him/her maintain 
a strong position. Or consultants may move back from 
the therapist, requiring the therapist to move closer to 
the client to maintain balance. Third, within programmatic 
applications of DBT, the team provides the context 
for the treatment. 

Joining THe ConsUlTATion TeAM 

Each team comprises therapists who are currently 
treating a DBT client or are available to take on a DBT 
client. The consultation team is a community of therapists 
treating a community of clients. Prior to joining 
the team, it is important that the therapist be completely 
aware of his/her commitment. As with clients during 
the pretreatment phase of DBT, therapists must make 
a commitment to the team (see Table 10.2). The team 
member conducting the commitment session will use 
the same strategies and techniques used in a first session 
with a DBT client (e.g., devil’s advocate, pros and 
cons, troubleshooting). New therapists must commit 
to doing the behaviors listed in Table 10.2), to working 
actively toward increasing their own effectiveness 
and adherence when applying DBT principles and to 
being responsible for treatment and outcomes of all clients 
treated by the team. For example, members of the 
team are agreeing that if a client being treated by any 
member of the team commits suicide, then all members 
will say “Yes” when asked if they have ever had a client 
commit suicide. 

ConsUlTATion MeeTing forMAT 

There are multiple ways to run a DBT team meeting. The 
following is the way we conduct our meetings at the University 
of Washington (although it is important to note 
that even this format could change as needs of members 
change). Each of our DBT teams has an identified team 
leader. This person is typically the most experienced 
DBT therapist on the team, and his/her role is to articulate 
the DBT principles when necessary for overseeing 
the fidelity of the treatment provided. Additionally, a 
team may have an observer who rings a bell whenever 
team members make judgmental comments (in content 
or tone) about themselves, each other, or a client; stay 
polarized without seeking synthesis; fall out of mindful


table 10.2. dbt Consultation team 
Commitment session 

1. To keep the agreements of the team, especially 
remaining compassionate, mindful, and dialectical. 
2. To be available to see a client in whatever role one has 
joined the team for (e.g., individual therapist, group 
skills trainer, clinical supervisor, pharmacotherapist). 
3. To function as a therapist in the group (to the group) and 
not just be a silent observer or a person that only speaks 
about his or her own problems. 
4. To treat team meetings in the same way one treats any 
other group therapy session (i.e., attending the weekly 
meetings [not double scheduling other events or clients], 
on time, until the end, with pagers, PDAs, and phones 
out of sight and off or, if necessarily on, on silent). 
5. To come to team meetings adequately prepared. 
6. To be willing to give clinical advice to people who have 
more experience (especially when it’s hard to imagine 
yourself as being able to offer anything useful). 
7. To have the humility to admit your mistakes/difficulties 
and the willingness to have the group help you solve 
them. 
8. To be nonjudgmental and compassionate of your 
fellow clinicians and clients. To ring the bell of 
nonjudgmentalness to remind yourself to not be 
judgmental or unmindful, but not to ring it as a proxy 
for criticizing someone. The bell is a reminder, not a 
censor. 
9. To properly assess the problem before giving solutions 
(do unto others as you wish they would more often do 
unto you). 
10. To call out “Elephant in the room” when others are 
ignoring or not seeing the elephant. 
11. To be willing to go through a chain analysis even 
though you were only 31 seconds late and you would 
have been there on time if it were not for that traffic 
light that always takes all day to change. 
12. To participate in team by sharing the roles of Leader, 
Observer, Note Taker or other tasks critical to team 
functioning. 
13. If you feel that the consult team is not being useful or 
don’t like the way it is being run, then say something 
about it rather than silently stewing in frustration. 
14. To repair with the team in some way when team 
meetings are missed, because the team is only as strong 
as the weakest link. Therefore, the absence of any team 
member is felt. 
15. To carry on even when feeling burnt out, frustrated, 
tired, overworked, underappreciated, hopeless, 
ineffective (easier committed to than done, of course). 

Borderline Personality Disorder 

ness by doing two things at once; or jump in to solve a 
problem before assessing the problem. The point of these 
observations is not to lay blame but to focus the team’s 
awareness on the behavior and move past it. 

A team may begin with a mindfulness practice. 
There are several functions of mindfulness on a team. 
First, it helps members transition into the team by 
participating fully and focusing on only one thing in 
the moment, using a DBT mind-set. Second, it can 
provide an opportunity for team members to enhance 
their skills in leading and providing feedback about the 
practice with other team members. Consultation team 
agreements (see Table 10.3) have been developed to facilitate 
a DBT frame and help to create a supportive environment 
for managing client–therapist and therapist– 
therapist difficulties. Therefore, a team may elect to 
read one or all of the team agreements during the team 
meeting. Most importantly, an agenda is set by the team 
following the DBT hierarchy of targets, with a specific 
focus on the needs of the therapist rather than the 
problems of the clients. Our agenda uses the following 
format; however, the following items can be prioritized 
differently based on the needs of an individual team: 

(1) the therapists’ need for consultation around clients’ 
suicidal crises or other life-threatening behaviors; (2) 
therapy-interfering behaviors (including client absences 
and dropouts, as well as therapist therapy-interfering 
behaviors); (3) therapist team-interfering behaviors 
and burnout; (4) severe or escalating deterioration in 
quality-of-life behaviors; (5) reportage of good news 
and therapists’ effective behaviors; (6) a summary of 
the work of the previous skills group and graduate 
group by group leaders; and (7) discussion of administrative 
issues (requests to miss team or be out of town, 
new client contacts; changes in skills trainers or group 
time, format of consultation group, etc.). This agenda 
spans the 1-hour consultation meeting. Although the 
agenda may look impossibly long, therapists ordinarily 
manage the time by being explicit about their need for 
help and consultation from the team. 
Ancillary Care 

When problems in the client’s environment interfere 
with functioning or progress, the therapist moves to the 
case management strategies. There are three case management 
strategies: the consultant-to-the-client strategy, 
environmental intervention, and the consultation/ 
supervision team meeting (described earlier). Because 
DBT is grounded in dialectics and avoids becoming 

table 10.3. dbt Consultation team 
agreements 

1. Dialectical agreement: We agree to accept a dialectical 
philosophy: There is no absolute truth. When caught 
between two conflicting opinions, we agree to look for 
the truth in both positions and to search for a synthesis 
by asking questions such as “What is being left out?” 
2. Consultation to the client agreement: We agree that the 
primary goal of this group is to improve our own skills 
as DBT therapists, and not serve as a go-between for 
clients to each other. We agree to not treat clients or each 
other as fragile. We agree to treat other group members 
with the belief that others can speak on their own behalf. 
3. Consistency agreement: Because change is a natural life 
occurrence, we agree to accept diversity and change as 
they naturally come about. This means that we do not 
have to agree with each others’ positions about how to 
respond to specific clients, nor do we have to tailor our 
own behavior to be consistent with everyone else’s. 
4. Observing limits agreement: We agree to observe our 
own limits. As therapists and group members, we agree 
to not judge or criticize other members for having 
different limits from our own (e.g., too broad, too 
narrow, “just right”). 
5. Phenomenological empathy agreement: All things 
being equal, we agree to search for nonpejorative or 
phenomenologically empathic interpretations of our 
clients’, our own, and other members’ behavior. We agree 
to assume that we and our clients are trying our best 
and want to improve. We agree to strive to see the world 
through our clients’ eyes and through one another’s eyes. 
We agree to practice a nonjudgmental stance with our 
clients and with one another. 
6. Fallibility agreement: We agree ahead of time that we 
are each fallible and make mistakes. We agree that we 
have probably either done whatever problematic things 
we’re being accused of, or some part of it, so that we can 
let go of assuming a defensive stance to prove our virtue 
or competence. Because we are fallible, it is agreed that 
we will inevitably violate all of these agreements, and 
when this is done, we will rely on each other to point out 
the polarity and move to a synthesis. 
rigid, a therapist intervenes in the client’s environment 
only under very specific conditions: (1) The client is 
unable to act on his/her own behalf and outcome is extremely 
important; (2) a key person in the environment 
will only speak with someone who is in high power 
(e.g., the therapist instead of the client); (3) when the 
client’s or others’ lives are in imminent danger; (4) 
when it is the humane thing to do and will cause no 
harm; and (5) when the client is a minor. 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

ConsUlTATion‑To‑THe‑ClienT sTrATegy 

The consultation-to-the-client strategy was developed 
with three objectives in mind. First, clients must learn 
how to manage their own lives and care for themselves 
by interacting effectively with other people in the environment, 
including health care professionals. The 
consultation-to-the-client strategy emphasizes clients’ 
capacities and targets their ability to take care of themselves. 
Second, this strategy was designed to decrease 
instances of “splitting” between DBT therapists and 
other people interacting with clients, which occurs 
when different providers in a client’s network hold differing 
opinions on how to treat the client. A fundamental 
tenet of this strategy is that therapists do not tell 
others, including other health care professionals, how 
to treat the client. The therapist may suggest but may 
not demand. What this means in practice is that the 
therapist is not attached to others treating a client in a 
specific way. By remaining in the role of a consultant to 
the client, the therapist stays out of such arguments. Finally, 
the consultation-to-the-client strategy promotes 
respect for clients by imparting the message that they 
are credible and capable of performing interventions on 
their own behalf. 

As mentioned previously, it is the responsibility of 
the individual DBT therapist to coordinate and organize 
care with ancillary treatment providers (function 
5; e.g., case managers, pharmacotherapists). 
The consultation-to-the-client strategy balances the 
consultation-to-the-therapist strategy described earlier, 
primarily by providing direct consultation to the client 
in how to interact with other providers rather than 
consulting with people in the client’s environment on 
how to interact with the client. Except for special circumstances 
listed earlier, DBT therapists do not discuss 
clients with ancillary providers, or other providers 
in the client’s environment, without the client present. 
The therapist works with the client to problem-solve 
difficulties he/she has with his/her network, leaving the 
client to act as the intermediary between the therapist 
and other professionals. 

enVironMenTAl inTerVenTion 

The bias in DBT is toward teaching the client how to 
interact effectively with his/her environment. Thus, the 
consultation-to-the-client strategy is the dominant case 
management strategy and is used whenever possible. 
There are times, however, when intervention by the 

therapist is needed. In general, the environmental intervention 
strategy is used over the consultation-to-theclient 
strategy when substantial harm may befall the 
client if the therapist does not intervene. The general 
rule for environmental intervention is that when clients 
lack abilities that they need to learn or that are impossible 
to obtain, or are not reasonable or necessary, the 
therapist may intervene. 

Client Variables 

DBT was developed to treat the multidiagnostic, 
difficult-to-treat clients. Therefore, there are a number 
of requisite client characteristics for Stage 1 DBT. Of 
these, voluntary participation and a commitment to a 
specified time period (e.g., 16 weeks, 6 months to 1 year) 
are critical. The effective application of DBT requires a 
strong interpersonal relationship between therapist and 
client. The therapist must first work to become a major 
reinforcer in the life of the client, then use the relationship 
to promote change in the client. Continuing the 
relationship can only be used as a positive contingency 
when a client wants to be in treatment; thus, contingency 
management is seriously compromised with 
involuntary clients. Court-ordered treatment is acceptable, 
if clients agree to remain in therapy even if the 
order is rescinded. A client characteristic necessary for 
group therapy is the ability to control overtly aggressive 
behavior toward others. DBT was developed and evaluated 
with perhaps the most severely disturbed portion 
of the population with BPD; all clients accepted into 
treatment had histories of multiple suicidal and NSSI 
behaviors. However, the treatment has been designed 
flexibly and is likely to be effective with less severely 
disturbed clients. 

Therapist Variables 

In comparison to other aspects of therapy, the therapist 
characteristics that facilitate DBT have received little 
attention. However, evidence supports the assumption 
that effective therapy for clients with BPD requires the 
proficient balancing of acceptance and change strategies 
(Shearin & Linehan, 1992). This research also 
found that therapists’ nonpejorative perceptions of clients 
were associated with less suicidal behavior. 

Linehan (1993b) describes requisite therapist characteristics 
in terms of three bipolar dimensions that must 
be balanced in the conduct of therapy. The first dimen



Borderline Personality Disorder 

sion represents the balance of an orientation of acceptance 
with an orientation of change. The therapist must 
be able to inhibit judgmental attitudes (often under very 
trying circumstances) and to practice acceptance of the 
client, of the self, and of the therapeutic process exactly 
as these are in the current moment. Nevertheless, 
the therapist remains cognizant that therapy implies 
necessity to change, and he/she assumes responsibility 
for directing the therapeutic influence. Second, the 
therapist must balance unwavering centeredness with 
compassionate flexibility. “Unwavering centeredness” 
is the quality of believing in oneself, the therapy, and 
the client. “Compassionate flexibility” is the ability 
to take in relevant information about the client and to 
modify one’s position accordingly by letting go of a 
previously held position. In balancing these two dimensions, 
the therapist must be able to observe his/her own 
limits without becoming overly rigid. Finally, the DBT 
therapist must be able to balance a high degree of nurturing 
with benevolent demanding. “Nurturing” refers 
to teaching, coaching, assisting, and strengthening the 
client, whereas “benevolent demanding” requires the 
therapist to recognize existing capabilities, to reinforce 
adaptive behavior, and to refuse to “do” for the client 
when the client can “do” for him/herself. Above all, the 
ability to demand requires willingness to believe in the 
client’s ability to change. 

treatMeNt strateGies 

“Treatment strategies” in DBT refer to the role and 
focus of the therapist, as well as to a coordinated set 
of procedures that function to achieve specific treatment 
goals. Although DBT strategies usually comprise 
a number of steps, use of a strategy does not necessarily 
require the application of every step. It is considerably 
more important that the therapist apply the intent of the 
strategy than that he/she should inflexibly lead the client 
through a series of prescribed maneuvers. 

DBT employs five sets of treatment strategies to 
achieve the previously described behavioral targets: (1) 
dialectical strategies, (2) core strategies, (3) stylistic 
strategies, (4) case management strategies (discussed 
earlier), and (5) integrated strategies. DBT strategies 
are illustrated in Figure 10.2. Within an individual session 
and with a given client, certain strategies may be 
used more than others, and all strategies may not be 
necessary or appropriate. An abbreviated discussion 


figUre 10.2. Treatment strategies in DBT. From Linehan 
(1993b). Copyright 1993 by The Guilford Press. Reprinted 
by permission. 

of the first three types of DBT treatment strategies follows. 


Dialectical Strategies 

Dialectical strategies permeate the entire therapy, and 
their use provides the rationale for adding the term 
“dialectical” to the title of the therapy. There are three 
types of dialectical strategies: those having to do with 
how the therapist structures interactions; those pertaining 
to how the therapist defines and teaches skillful behaviors; 
and certain specific strategies used during the 
conduct of treatment. 

Dialectics of the Relationship: 
Balancing Treatment Strategies 

“Dialectical strategies” in the most general sense of 
the term have to do with how the therapist balances 
the dialectical tensions within the therapy relationship. 
As noted earlier, the fundamental dialectic within any 
psychotherapy, including that with a client who has 
BPD, is that between acceptance of what is and efforts 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

to change what is. A dialectical therapeutic position is 
one of constant attention to combining acceptance and 
change, flexibility and stability, nurturing and challenging, 
and focusing on capabilities and on limitations 
and deficits. The goals are to bring out the opposites, 
both in therapy and in the client’s life, and to provide 
conditions for syntheses. The presumption is that 
change may be facilitated by emphasizing acceptance, 
and acceptance, by emphasizing change. The emphasis 
on opposites sometimes takes place over time (i.e., over 
the whole of an interaction), rather than simultaneously 
or in each part of an interaction. Although many, if not 
all, psychotherapies, including cognitive and behavioral 
treatments, attend to these issues of balance, placing 
the concept of balance at the center of the treatment 
ensures that the therapist remains attentive to its importance. 


Three primary characteristics are needed to maintain 
a dialectical stance in the therapeutic relationship: 
movement, speed, and flow. “Movement” refers to acting 
with certainty, strength, and total commitment on 
the part of the therapist. If the therapist only moves 
halfheartedly, the client will only move halfheartedly. 
“Speed” is of the essence and entails keeping the therapy 
moving, so that it does not become rigid or stuck. 
Finally, “flow” refers to being mindful of the momentto-
moment unfolding of a session and responding 
smoothly, and with apparent effortlessness. 

Teaching Dialectical Behavior Patterns 

Dialectical thinking is emphasized throughout the entire 
treatment. Not only does the therapist maintain a 
dialectical stance in his/her treatment of the client but 
he/she also focuses on teaching and modeling dialectical 
thinking to the client. The therapist helps the client 
move from an “either–or” position to a “both–and” 
position, without invalidating the first idea or its polarity 
when asserting the second. Behavioral extremes 
and rigidity—whether cognitive, emotional, or overtly 
behavioral—are signals that synthesis has not been 
achieved; thus, they can be considered nondialectical. 
Instead, a “middle path” similar to that advocated in 
Buddhism is advocated and modeled. The important 
thing in following the path to Enlightenment is to avoid 
being caught and entangled in any extreme and always 
follow the Middle Way (Kyokai, 1966). This emphasis 
on balance is similar to the approach advocated in relapse 
prevention models (e.g., Marlatt & Gordon, 1985) 
for treating addictive behaviors. 

Specific Dialectical Strategies 

There are eight specific dialectical treatment strategies: 

(1) entering and using paradox, (2) using metaphor, (3) 
playing the devil’s advocate, (4) extending, (5) activating 
the client’s “wise mind,” (6) making lemonade out 
of lemons (turning negatives into positives), (7) allowing 
natural change (and inconsistencies even within 
the therapeutic milieu), and (8) assessing dialectically 
by always asking the question “What is being left out 
here?” Due to space limitations, a selection of these 
strategies is included in the following sections. For a 
complete review, the interested reader is referred to the 
DBT treatment manual (Linehan, 1993a). 
enTering THe PArADox 

Entering the paradox is a powerful technique because 
it contains the element of surprise. The therapist presents 
the paradox without explaining it and highlights 
the paradoxical contradictions within the behavior, the 
therapeutic process, and reality in general. The essence 
of the strategy is the therapist’s refusal to step in with 
rational explanation; the client’s attempts at logic are 
met with silence, a question, or a story designed to shed 
a small amount of light on the puzzle to be solved. The 
client is pushed to achieve understanding, to move toward 
synthesis of the polarities, and to resolve the dilemma 
him/herself. Linehan (1993b) has highlighted 
a number of typical paradoxes and their corresponding 
dialectical tensions encountered over the course of 
therapy. Clients are free to choose their own behavior 
but cannot stay in therapy if they do not work at changing 
their behavior. They are taught to achieve greater 
independence by becoming more skilled at asking for 
help from others. Clients have a right to kill themselves, 
but if they ever convince the therapist that suicide is 
imminent, they may be locked up. Clients are not responsible 
for being the way they are, but they are responsible 
for what they become. In highlighting these 
paradoxical realities, both client and therapist struggle 
with confronting and letting go of rigid patterns of 
thought, emotion, and behavior, so that more spontaneous 
and flexible patterns may emerge. 

Using MeTAPHor: PArABle, MyTH, AnAlogy, 
AnD sToryTelling 

The use of metaphor, stories, parables, and myth is 
extremely important in DBT and provides alterna



Borderline Personality Disorder 

tive means of teaching dialectical thinking. Stories 
are usually more interesting, are easier to remember, 
and encourage the search for other meanings of events 
under scrutiny. Additionally, metaphors allow clients to 
distance themselves from the problem. In general, the 
idea of metaphor is to take something the client does 
understand and use it as an analogy for something the 
client does not understand. Furthermore, metaphors 
and stories can be developed collaboratively over the 
course of treatment. When therapist and client relate 
to a metaphor, it can be a powerful tool to use throughout 
the treatment, reminding the client what he/she is 
working on. For example, changing behavior by learning 
new skills can be compared to building a new hiking 
trail in the woods. At first, the current trail is defined 
and easy to navigate; however, it always leads to 
a dead end (old dysfunctional behavior). To build a new 
trail (skillful behaviors), the hiker must repeatedly go 
through a new, undefined area until it becomes worn in. 
This takes time, and the hiker moves slowly and deliberately, 
clearing away the brush. Additionally, while the 
new path is developing, the old path is slowly becoming 
grown over. The therapist can return to this story each 
time the client begins to struggle between trying new 
skills and returning to old dysfunctional behavior. 

PlAying DeVil’s ADVoCATe 

The devil’s advocate technique is quite similar to the 
argumentative approach used in rational–emotive and 
cognitive restructuring therapies. With this strategy, the 
therapist presents a propositional statement that is an 
extreme version of one of the client’s own dysfunctional 
beliefs, then plays the role of devil’s advocate to counter 
the client’s attempts to disprove the extreme statement 
or rule. For example, a client may state, “Because I’m 
overweight, I’d be better off dead.” The therapist argues 
in favor of the dysfunctional belief, perhaps by suggesting 
that because this is true for the client, it must be true 
for others as well; hence, all overweight people would 
be better off dead. The therapist may continue along 
these lines: “And since the definition of what constitutes 
being overweight varies so much among people, 
there must be an awful lot of people who would be considered 
overweight by someone. That must mean they’d 
all be better off dead!” Or “Gosh, I’m about 5 pounds 
overweight. I guess that means I’d be better off dead, 
too.” Any reservations the client proposes can be countered 
by further exaggeration, until the self-defeating 
nature of the belief becomes apparent. The devil’s ad


vocate technique is often used in the first several sessions 
to elicit a strong commitment from the client and 
in commitment sessions with new therapists joining the 
DBT team. The therapist argues to the client that since 
the therapy will be painful and difficult, it is not clear 
how making such a commitment (and therefore being 
accepted into treatment) could possibly be a good idea. 
This usually has the effect of moving the client to take 
the opposite position in favor of therapeutic change. To 
employ this technique successfully, it is important that 
the therapist’s argument seem reasonable enough to invite 
counterargument, and that the delivery be credible, 
made in a naive but offbeat manner. 

exTenDing 

The term “extending” has been borrowed from aikido, 
a Japanese form of self-defense. In that context, extending 
occurs when the student of aikido waits for a challenger’s 
movements to reach their natural completion, 
then extends a movement’s endpoint slightly further 
than what would naturally occur, leaving the challenger 
vulnerable and off balance. In DBT, extending occurs 
when the therapist takes the severity or gravity of what 
the client is communicating more seriously than the client 
intends. This strategy is the emotional equivalent of 
the devil’s advocate strategy. It is particularly effective 
when the client is threatening dire consequences of an 
event or problem to induce change in the environment. 
Take the interaction with the following client, who 
threatens suicide if an extra appointment time for the 
next day is not scheduled. The following interchange 
occurred after attempts to find a mutually acceptable 
time failed. 

client: I’ve got to see you tomorrow, or I’m sure I will 

end up killing myself. I just can’t keep it together by 

myself any longer. 

tHeraPist: Hmm, I didn’t realize you were so upset! 
We’ve got to do something immediately if you are so 
distressed that you might kill yourself. What about 
hospitalization? Maybe that is needed. 

client: I’m not going to the hospital! Why won’t you 
just give me an appointment? 

tHeraPist: How can we discuss such a mundane topic 

as session scheduling when your life is in danger? 

How are you planning to kill yourself? 

client: You know how. Why can’t you cancel some



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

one or move an appointment around? You could put 
an appointment with one of your students off until 
another time. I can’t stand it anymore! 

tHeraPist: I’m really concerned about you. Do you 
think I should call an ambulance? 

The aspect of the communication that the therapist 
takes seriously (suicide as a possible consequence of 
not getting an appointment) is not the aspect (needing 
an extra appointment the next day) that the client wants 
taken seriously. The therapist takes the consequences 
seriously and extends the seriousness even further. The 
client wants the problem taken seriously, and indeed is 
extending the seriousness of the problem. 

MAking leMonADe oUT of leMons 

Making lemonade out of lemons is similar to the notion 
in psychodynamic therapy of utilizing a client’s resistances; 
therapeutic problems are seen as opportunities 
for the therapist to help the client. The strategy involves 
taking something that is apparently problematic and 
turning it into an asset. Problems become opportunities 
to practice skills; suffering allows others to express 
empathy; weaknesses become one’s strengths. To be 
effective, this strategy requires a strong therapeutic relationship; 
the client must believe that the therapist has 
a deep compassion for his/her suffering. The danger in 
using this strategy is that it is easily confused with the 
invalidating refrain repeatedly heard by clients with 
BPD. The therapist should avoid the tendency to oversimplify 
a client’s problems, and refrain from implying 
that the lemons in the client’s life are really lemonade. 
While recognizing that the cloud is indeed black, the 
therapist assists the client in finding the positive characteristics 
of a situation—thus, the silver lining. 

###CUT###
Core Strategies 

Validation 

Validation and problem-solving strategies, together 
with dialectical strategies, make up the core of DBT and 
form the heart of the treatment. Validation strategies 
are the most obvious acceptance strategies, whereas 
problem-solving strategies are the most obvious change 
strategies. Both strategies are used in every interaction 
with the client, although the relative frequency of each 
depends on the particular client, the current situation, 
and the vulnerabilities of that client. However, through


out an entire session, there should be an overall balance 
between the acceptance and change strategies. We discuss 
validation strategies in this section and problemsolving 
strategies in the next. 

Clients with BPD present themselves clinically as 
people in extreme emotional pain. They plead, and at 
times demand, that their therapists do something to 
change this state of affairs. It is very tempting to focus 
the energy of therapy on changing the client by modifying 
irrational thoughts, assumptions, or schemas; critiquing 
interpersonal behaviors or motives contributing 
to interpersonal problems; giving medication to change 
abnormal biology; and reducing emotional overreactivity 
and intensity; and so on. In many respects, this focus 
recapitulates the invalidating environment by confirming 
the client’s worst fears: The client is the problem 
and indeed cannot trust his/her own reactions to 
events. Mistrust and invalidation of how one responds 
to events, however, are extremely aversive and can elicit 
intense fear, anger, and shame, or a combination of all 
three. Thus, the entire focus of change-based therapy 
can be aversive because the focus by necessity contributes 
to and elicits self-invalidation. However, an entire 
focus of acceptance-based therapy can also be invalidating 
when it appears to the client that the therapist 
does not take his/her problems seriously. Therefore, 
once again, a dialectical stance focuses on a balance 
between the two poles. 

Validation (according to the Oxford English Dictionary; 
Simpson & Weiner, 1989) refers to identifying 
the validity of an object or making something valid. 
It also encompasses activities such as corroborating, 
substantiating, verifying, and authenticating. The act 
of validating includes providing support from an authoritative 
source about the truth or validity of something 
(Merriam-Webster, 2006). Communicating that 
something is valid implies that objective evidence and 
reputable authority support or justify the response 
given (Simpson & Weiner, 1989). These are precisely 
the meanings associated with the term when used in the 
context of psychotherapy in DBT. 

The essence of validation is this: The therapist communicates 
to the client that her [sic] responses make sense 
and are understandable within her [sic] current life context 
or situation. The therapist actively accepts the client 
and communicates this acceptance to the client. The 
therapist takes the client’s responses seriously and does 
not discount or trivialize them. Validation strategies require 
the therapist to search for, recognize, and reflect 


Borderline Personality Disorder 

to the client the validity inherent in her [sic] response 
to events. With unruly children, parents have to catch 
them while they’re good in order to reinforce their behavior; 
similarly, the therapist has to uncover the validity 
within the client’s response, sometimes amplify 
it, and then reinforce it. (Linehan, 1993b, pp. 222–223, 
original emphasis) 

Two things are important to note here. First, “validation” 
means the acknowledgment of that which is valid. 
It does not mean “making” valid. Nor does it mean 
validating that which is invalid. The therapist observes, 
experiences, and affirms, but he/she does not create 
validity. Second, “valid” and “scientific” are not synonyms. 
Science may be one way to determine what 
is valid, logical, sound in principle, and/or generally 
accepted as authority or normative knowledge. However, 
an authentic experience or apprehension of private 
events (at least, when similar to the same experiences 
of others or when in accord with other, more observable 
events) is also a basis for claiming validity. Validation 
can be considered at any one of six levels. Each level is 
correspondingly more complete than the previous one, 
and each depends on the previous levels. They are definitional 
of DBT and are required in every interaction 
with the client. These levels are described most fully in 
Linehan (1997), and the following definitions are taken 
from her discussion. 

lisTening AnD oBserVing (V1) 

Level 1 validation requires listening to and observing 
what the client is saying, feeling, and doing, as well as a 
corresponding active effort to understand what is being 
said and observed. The essence of this step is that the 
therapist is staying awake and interested in the client, 
paying attention to what the client says and does in the 
current moment. The therapist notices the nuances of 
response in the interaction. Validation at Level 1 communicates 
that the client per se, as well as the client’s 
presence, words, and responses in the session have 
“such force as to compel serious attention and [usually] 
acceptance” (see earlier definitions of validation; 
pp. 360–361) 

ACCUrATe refleCTion (V2) 

The second level of validation is the accurate reflection 
back to the client of his/her own feelings, thoughts, 
assumptions, and behaviors. The therapist conveys an 
understanding of the client by hearing what the client 

has said and seeing what the client does, and how he/ 
she responds. Validation at Level 2 sanctions, empowers, 
or authenticates that the individual is who he/she 
actually is (p. 362). 

ArTiCUlATing THe UnVerBAlizeD (V3) 

In Level 3 of validation, the therapist communicates 
understanding of aspects of the client’s experience and 
response to events that have not been communicated 
directly by the client. The therapist “mind-reads” the 
reason for the client’s behavior and figures out how the 
client feels and what he/she is wishing for, thinking, or 
doing just by knowing what has happened to the client. 
The therapist can make the link between precipitating 
event and behavior without being given any information 
about the behavior itself. The therapist can also 
articulate emotions and meanings the client has not expressed 
(p. 364). 

VAliDATing in TerMs of PAsT leArning 
or BiologiCAl DysfUnCTion (V4) 

At Level 4, behavior is validated in terms of its causes. 
Validation here is based on the notion that all behavior 
is caused by events occurring in time; thus, in principle, 
it is understandable. The therapist justifies the 
client’s behavior by showing that it is caused by past 
events. Even though information may not be available 
to determine all the relevant causes, the client’s feelings, 
thoughts, and actions make perfect sense in the 
context of the client’s current experience, physiology, 
and life to date. At a minimum, what “is” can always 
be justified in terms of sufficient causes; that is, what 
is “should be,” in that whatever was necessary for it to 
occur had to have happened (p. 367). 

VAliDATion in TerMs of PresenT ConTexT 
or norMATiVe fUnCTioning (V5) 

At Level 5, the therapist communicates that behavior 
is justifiable, reasonable, well grounded, meaningful, 
and/or efficacious in terms of current events, normative 
biological functioning, and/or the client’s ultimate life 
goals. The therapist looks for and reflects the wisdom 
or validity of the client’s response and communicates 
that the response is understandable. The therapist finds 
the relevant facts in the current environment that support 
the client’s behavior. The therapist is not blinded 
by the dysfunctionality of some of the client’s response 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

patterns to those aspects of a response pattern that may 
be either reasonable or appropriate to the context. Thus, 
the therapist searches the client’s responses for their inherent 
reasonableness (as well as commenting on the 
inherent dysfunctionality of much of the response, if 
necessary) (pp. 370–371). 

rADiCAl genUineness (V6) 

In Level 6, the task is to recognize the client as he/ 
she is, seeing and responding to his/her strengths and 
capacities, while keeping a firm empathic understanding 
of his/her actual difficulties and incapacities. The 
therapist believes in the client and his/her capacity to 
change and move toward ultimate life goals just as the 
therapist may believe in a friend or family member. 
The client is responded to as a person of equal status, 
due equal respect. Validation at the highest level is the 
validation of the individual as “is.” The therapist sees 
more than the role, more than a “client” or “disorder.” 
Level 6 validation is the opposite of treating the client 
in a condescending manner or as overly fragile. It is 
responding to the individual as capable of effective and 
reasonable behavior rather than assuming that he/she 
is an invalid. Whereas Levels 1–5 represent sequential 
steps in validation of a kind, Level 6 represents change 
in both level and kind (p. 377). 

Cheerleading strategies constitute another form of 
validation and are the principal strategies for combating 
the active passivity and tendencies toward hopelessness 
in clients with BPD. In cheerleading, therapists 
communicate the belief that clients are doing 
their best and validate clients’ ability to eventually 
overcome their difficulties (a type of validation that, 
if not handled carefully, can simultaneously invalidate 
clients’ perceptions of their helplessness). In addition, 
therapists express a belief in the therapy relationship, 
offer reassurance, and highlight any evidence of improvement. 
Within DBT, cheerleading is used in every 
therapeutic interaction. Although active cheerleading 
should be reduced as clients learn to trust and to validate 
themselves, cheerleading strategies always remain 
an essential ingredient of a strong therapeutic alliance. 

Finally, functional validation, another form of validation 
used regularly in DBT, is a form of nonverbal 
or behavioral validation that at times may be more effective 
than verbal validation. For example, a therapist 
drops a 50-pound block on the client’s foot. It would 
be considered invalidating for the therapist simply to 

respond verbally, saying, “Wow, I can see that really 
hurts! You must be in a lot of pain.” Functional validation 
would entail the therapist removing the block from 
the client’s foot. 

Problem Solving 

We have previously discussed how clients with BPD 
typically experience therapies with a primary focus on 
change as invalidating. However, therapies that focus 
exclusively on validation can prove equally problematic. 
Exhortations to accept one’s current situation offer 
little solace to an individual who experiences life as 
painfully unendurable. Within DBT, problem-solving 
strategies are the core change strategies, designed to 
foster an active problem-solving style. For clients with 
BPD, however, the application of these strategies is 
fraught with difficulties. The therapist must keep in 
mind that in clients with BPD the process will be more 
difficult than that with many other client populations. 
In work with clients who have BPD, the need for sympathetic 
understanding and interventions aimed at enhancing 
current positive mood can be extremely important. 
The validation strategies just described, as well as 
the irreverent communication strategy described later, 
can be tremendously useful here. Within DBT, problem 
solving is a two-stage process that concentrates first on 
understanding and accepting a selected problem, then 
generating alternative solutions. The first stage involves 

(1) behavioral analysis, (2) insight into recurrent behavioral 
context patterns, and (3) giving the client didactic 
information about principles of behaviors, norms, 
and so on. The second stage specifically targets change 
through (4) analysis of possible solutions to problems, 
(5) orienting the client to therapeutic procedures likely 
to bring about desired changes, and (6) strategies designed 
to elicit and strengthen commitment to these 
procedures. The following sections describe in more 
detail some of these procedures. 
Behavioral Analysis 

Behavioral analysis is one of the most important strategies 
in DBT. It is also the most difficult. The purpose 
of a behavioral analysis is first to select a problem, then 
to determine empirically what is causing it, what is preventing 
its resolution, and what aids are available for 
solving it. Behavioral analysis addresses four primary 
questions: 


Borderline Personality Disorder 

1. Are ineffective behaviors being reinforced, are 
effective behaviors followed by aversive outcomes, 
or are rewarding outcomes delayed? 
2. Does the client have the requisite behavioral 
skills to regulate his/her emotions, respond skillfully 
to conflict, and manage his/her own behavior? 
3. Are there patterns of avoidance, or are effective 
behaviors inhibited by unwarranted fears or 
guilt? 
4. Is the client unaware of the contingencies operating 
in his/her environment, or are effective 
behaviors inhibited by faulty beliefs or assumptions? 
Answers to these questions guide the therapist in the 
selection of appropriate treatment procedures, such as 
contingency management, behavioral skills training, 
exposure, or cognitive modification. Thus, the value 
of an analysis lies in helping the therapist assess and 
understand a problem fully enough to guide effective 
therapeutic response. The first step in conducting a behavioral 
analysis is to help the client identify the problem 
to be analyzed and describe it in behavioral terms. 
Identifying the problem can be the most difficult task 
for the therapist, and if not done accurately and specifically, 
can lead therapist and client astray. Problem definition 
usually evolves from a discussion of the previous 
week’s events, often in the context of reviewing diary 
cards. The assumption of facts not in evidence is perhaps 
the most common mistake at this point. An identified 
problem is further assessed with a chain analysis— 
an exhaustive, blow-by-blow description of the chain of 
events leading up to and following the behavior. In a 
chain analysis, the therapist constructs a general road 
map of how the client arrives at dysfunctional responses, 
including where the road actually starts (highlights 
vulnerability factors and prompting events), and notes 
possible alternative adaptive pathways or junctions 
along the way. Additional goals are to identify events 
that automatically elicit maladaptive behavior, behavioral 
deficits that are instrumental in maintaining problematic 
responses, and environmental and behavioral 
events that may be interfering with more appropriate 
behaviors. The overall goal is to determine the function 
of the behavior (i.e., the problem the behavior was 
instrumental in solving). 

Chain analysis always begins with a specific environmental 
event. Pinpointing such an event may be dif


ficult because clients are frequently unable to identify 
anything in the environment that set off the problematic 
response. Nevertheless, it is important to obtain a 
description of the events co-occurring with the onset 
of the problem. The therapist then attempts to identify 
both environmental and behavioral events for each subsequent 
link in the chain. Here the therapist must play 
the part of a very keen observer, thinking in terms of 
very small chunks of behavior, and repeatedly identifying 
what the client was thinking, feeling, and doing, 
and what was occurring in the environment from moment 
to moment. The therapist asks the client, “What 
happened next?” or “How did you get from there to 
there?” Although, from the client’s point of view, such 
links may be self-evident, the therapist must be careful 
not to make assumptions. For example, a client who 
had attempted suicide once stated that she decided to 
kill herself because her life was too painful for her to 
live any longer. From the client’s point of view, this was 
an adequate explanation for her suicide attempt. For 
the therapist, however, taking one’s life because life is 
too painful was only one solution. One could decide 
life is too painful, then decide to change one’s life. 
Or one could believe that death might be even more 
painful and decide to tolerate life despite its pain. In 
this instance, careful questioning revealed that the client 
actually assumed she would be happier dead than 
alive. Challenging this assumption, then, became a key 
to ending her persistent suicide attempts. It is equally 
important to pinpoint exactly what consequences are 
maintaining the problematic response. Similarly, the 
therapist should also search for consequences that serve 
to weaken the problem behavior. As with antecedent 
events, the therapist probes for both environmental 
and behavioral consequences, obtaining detailed descriptions 
of the client’s emotions, somatic sensations, 
actions, thoughts, and assumptions. A rudimentary 
knowledge of the rules of learning and principles of reinforcement 
is crucial. 

The final step in behavioral analysis is to construct 
and test hypotheses about events that are relevant to 
generating and maintaining the problem behavior. The 
biosocial theory of BPD suggests several factors of 
primary importance. For example, DBT focuses most 
closely on intense or aversive emotional states; the 
amelioration of negative affect is always suspected as 
being among the primary motivational variables for 
dysfunctional behavior in BPD. The theory also suggests 
that typical behavioral patterns, such as deficits 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

in dialectical thinking or behavioral skills, are likely 
to be instrumental in producing and maintaining problematic 
responses. 

Solution Analysis 

Once the problem has been identified and analyzed, 
problem solving proceeds with an active attempt at 
finding and identifying alternative solutions. DBT posits 
that there are five responses to any one problem: (1) 
Solve the problem; (2) change the emotional reaction 
to the problem; (3) tolerate the problem; (4) stay miserable, 
or (5) make things worse. These five options are 
presented as needed prior to problem solving to ensure 
that therapist and client are consistently working toward 
the same goal. 

At times, solutions are discussed throughout the behavioral 
analysis, and pointing to these alternative solutions 
may be all that is required, rather than waiting 
until the behavioral analysis is completed. The therapist 
may ask, “What do you think you could have done differently 
here?” Throughout this process, the therapist is 
actively modeling effective problem solving and solution 
generation, with a heavier emphasis on modeling 
and guiding the client early on in treatment. At other 
times, a more complete solution analysis is necessary. 
Here the task is to “brainstorm” or generate as many alternative 
solutions as possible. Solutions should then be 
evaluated in terms of the various outcomes expected. 
The final step in solution analysis is to choose a solution 
that will somehow be effective. Throughout the 
evaluation, the therapist guides the client in choosing a 
particular behavioral solution. Here, it is preferable that 
the therapist pay particular attention to long-term over 
short-term gain, and that chosen solutions render maximum 
benefit to the client rather than benefit to others. 

Problem‑Solving Procedures 

DBT employs four problem-solving procedures taken 
directly from the cognitive and behavioral treatment 
literature. These four—skills training, contingency 
procedures, exposure, and cognitive modification—are 
viewed as primary vehicles of change throughout DBT, 
since they influence the direction that client changes 
take from session to session. Although they are discussed 
as distinct procedures by Linehan (1993b), it 
is not clear that they can in fact be differentiated in 
every case in clinical practice. The same therapeutic 
sequence may be effective because it teaches the client 

new skills (skills training), provides a consequence that 
influences the probability of preceding client behaviors 
occurring again (contingency procedures), provides 
nonreinforced exposure to cues associated previously 
but not currently with threat (exposure procedures), or 
changes the client’s dysfunctional assumptions or schematic 
processing of events (cognitive modification). In 
contrast to many cognitive and behavioral treatment 
programs in the literature, these procedures (with some 
exceptions noted below) are employed in an unstructured 
manner, interwoven throughout all therapeutic 
dialogue. Thus, the therapist must be well aware of the 
principles governing the effectiveness of each procedure 
in order to use it strategically. The exceptions are 
in skills training, where skills training procedures predominate. 


Skills Training 

An emphasis on skills building is pervasive throughout 
DBT. In both individual and group therapy, the therapist 
insists at every opportunity that the client actively 
engage in the acquisition and practice of behavioral 
skills. The term “skills” is used synonymously with 
“ability” and includes, in its broadest sense, cognitive, 
emotional, and overt behavioral skills, as well as their 
integration, which is necessary for effective performance. 
Skills training is called for when a solution requires 
skills not currently in the individual’s behavioral 
repertoire, or when the individual has the component 
behaviors but cannot integrate and use them effectively. 
Skills training in DBT incorporates three types of procedures: 
(1) skills acquisition (modeling, instructing, 
advising); (2) skills strengthening (encouraging in vivo 
and within-session practice, role playing, feedback); 
and (3) skills generalization (phone calls to work on 
applying skills; taping therapy sessions to listen to between 
sessions; homework assignments). 

Contingency Procedures 

Every response within an interpersonal interaction is 
potentially a reinforcement, a punishment, or a withholding 
or removal of reinforcement. Contingency 
management requires therapists to organize their behavior 
strategically, so client behaviors that represent 
progress are reinforced, while unskillful or maladaptive 
behaviors are extinguished. or punished. Natural 
over arbitrary consequences are preferred. An important 
contingency in DBT is the therapist’s interpersonal 


Borderline Personality Disorder 

behavior with the client, which is contingent on alliance. 


Effective contingency management requires that 
the therapist orient the client to the principles of learning. 
The therapist must attend to the client’s behaviors 
and use the principles of shaping to reinforce those 
behaviors that represent progress toward DBT targets. 
Equally important is that the therapist take care not to 
reinforce behaviors targeted for extinction. In theory, 
this may seem obvious, but in practice, it can be quite 
difficult. The problematic behaviors of clients with 
BPD are often quite effective in obtaining reinforcing 
outcomes or in stopping painful events. Indeed, 
the very behaviors targeted for extinction have been 
intermittently reinforced by mental health professionals, 
family members, and friends. Contingency management 
at times requires the use of aversive consequences, 
similar to “setting limits” in other treatment 
modalities. Three guidelines are important when using 
aversive consequences. First, punishment should “fit 
the crime,” and a client should have some way of terminating 
its application. For example, in DBT, a detailed 
behavioral analysis follows a suicidal or NSSI act; such 
an analysis is an aversive procedure for most clients. 
Once it has been completed, however, a client’s ability 
to pursue other topics is restored. Second, it is crucial 
that therapists use punishment with great care, in low 
doses, and very briefly, and that a positive interpersonal 
atmosphere be restored following any client improvement. 
Third, punishment should be just strong enough 
to work. Although the ultimate punishment is termination 
of therapy, a preferable fallback strategy is putting 
clients on “vacations from therapy.” This approach is 
considered when all other contingencies have failed, or 
when a situation is so serious that a therapist’s therapeutic 
or personal limits have been crossed. When utilizing 
this strategy, the therapist clearly identifies what 
behaviors must be changed and clarifies that once the 
conditions have been met, the client can return. The 
therapist maintains intermittent contact by phone or 
letter, and provides a referral or backup while the client 
is on vacation. (In colloquial terms, the therapist kicks 
the client out, then pines for his/her return.) 

Observing limits constitutes a special case of contingency 
management involving the application of 
problem-solving strategies to client behaviors that 
threaten or cross a therapist’s personal limits. Such 
behaviors interfere with the therapist’s ability or willingness 
to conduct the therapy. Therapists must take 
responsibility for monitoring their own personal limits 

and for clearly communicating them to clients. Therapists 
who do not do this eventually burn out, terminate 
therapy, or otherwise harm their clients. DBT favors 
natural over arbitrary limits. Thus, limits vary among 
therapists, over time and over circumstances. Limits 
should also be presented as for the good of the therapist, 
not for the good of the client. What the client argues 
is in his/her best interests may not ultimately be 
good for the therapists. 

Cognitive Modification 

The fundamental message given to clients in DBT is 
that cognitive distortions are just as likely to be caused 
by emotional arousal as to be the cause of the arousal 
in the first place. The overall message is that, for the 
most part, the source of a client’s distress is extremely 
stressful life events rather than a distortion of benign 
events. Cognitive restructuring procedures, such as 
those advocated by Beck, Brown, Berchick, Stewart, 
and Steer (1990) and Ellis (1973), are used and taught 
in DBT, although they do not hold a dominant place. In 
contrast, contingency clarification strategies described 
earlier are used relentlessly, highlighting contingent relationships 
operating in the here and now. 

Exposure 

All of the change procedures in DBT can be reconceptualized 
as exposure strategies. The principles of exposure 
used in DBT have been developed for anxiety 
disorders (see Foa & Kozak, 1986) and expanded in 
DBT to address all problematic emotions. These strategies 
work by reconditioning dysfunctional associations 
that develop between stimuli (e.g., an aversive stimulus, 
hospitalization, may become associated with a positive 
stimulus, being nurtured; a client may later work to 
be hospitalized) or between a response and a stimulus 
(e.g., an adaptive response, expression of emotions, is 
met with an aversive consequence, rejection by a loved 
one; a client may work to suppress emotions). As noted 
earlier, the DBT therapist conducts a chain analysis of 
the eliciting cue, the problem behavior (including emotions), 
and the consequences of the behavior. Working 
within a behavior therapy framework, the therapist 
operates according to three guidelines for exposure in 
DBT: (1) Exposure to the cue that precedes the problem 
behavior must be nonreinforced (e.g., if a client is fearful 
that discussing suicidal behavior will lead to his/her 
being rejected, the therapist must not reinforce the cli



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

ent’s shame by ostracizing him/her); (2) dysfunctional 
responses are blocked in the order of the primary and 
secondary targets of treatment (e.g., suicidal or NSSI 
behavior related to shame is blocked by getting the client’s 
cooperation in throwing away hoarded medications); 
and (3) actions opposite to the dysfunctional behavior 
are reinforced (e.g., the therapist reinforces the 
client for talking about painful, shame-related suicidal 
behavior). 

Formal and informal exposure procedures involve 
first orienting the client to the techniques and to the 
fact that exposure to cues is often experienced as painful 
or frightening. Thus, the therapist does not remove 
the cue to emotional arousal, and at the same time he/ 
she blocks both the action tendencies (including escape 
responses) and the expressive tendencies associated 
with the problem emotion. In addition, a crucial step of 
exposure procedures is teaching the client some means 
of titrating or ending exposure when emotions become 
unendurable. The therapist and client collaborate in developing 
positive, adaptive ways for the client to end 
exposure voluntarily, preferably after some reduction in 
the problem emotion has occurred. 

Stylistic Strategies 

DBT balances two quite different styles of communication 
that refer to how the therapist executes other treatment 
strategies. The first, reciprocal communication, is 
similar to the communication style advocated in CCT. 
The second, irreverent communication, is quite similar 
to the style advocated by Whitaker (1975) in his writings 
on strategic therapy. Reciprocal communication 
strategies are designed to reduce a perceived power 
differential by making the therapist more vulnerable to 
the client. In addition, they serve as a model for appropriate 
but equal interactions within an important 
interpersonal relationship. Irreverent communication is 
usually riskier than reciprocity. However, it can facilitate 
problem solving or produce a breakthrough after 
long periods when progress has seemed thwarted. To 
be used effectively, irreverent communication must balance 
reciprocal communication, and the two must be 
woven into a single stylistic fabric. Without such balancing, 
neither strategy represents DBT. 

Reciprocal Communication 

Responsiveness, self-disclosure, warm engagement, 
and genuineness are the basic guidelines of reciprocal 

communication. Responsiveness requires attending to 
the client in a mindful (attentive) manner and taking 
the client’s agenda and wishes seriously. However, this 
does not mean that the therapist gives priority to the 
client’s agenda over the treatment hierarchy. It refers to 
the therapist validating the importance of the client’s 
agenda openly. It is a friendly, affectionate style reflecting 
warmth and engagement in the therapeutic interaction. 
Self-involving self-disclosure is the therapist’s 
immediate, personal reactions to the client and his/her 
behavior. This strategy is used frequently throughout 
DBT. For example, a therapist whose client complained 
about his coolness said, “When you demand warmth 
from me, it pushes me away and makes it harder to be 
warm.” Similarly, when a client repeatedly failed to fill 
out diary cards but nevertheless pleaded with her therapist 
to help her, the therapist responded, “You keep asking 
me for help, but you won’t do the things I believe 
are necessary to help you. I feel frustrated because I 
want to help you, but I feel that you won’t let me.” Such 
statements serve both to validate and to challenge. They 
constitute both an instance of contingency management 
because therapist statements about the client are typically 
experienced as either reinforcing or punishing, 
and an instance of contingency clarification because 
the client’s attention is directed to the consequences of 
his/her interpersonal behavior. 

Self-disclosure of professional or personal information 
is used to validate and model coping and normative 
responses. The key point here is that a therapist should 
only use personal examples in which he/she has successfully 
mastered the problem at hand. This may seem 
like an obvious point, but it is very easy to fall into this 
pit by trying actively to validate the client’s dilemma. 
For example, when working with a client whose goal is 
to wake up early each morning to exercise, but who is 
having difficulty getting out of bed, the therapist may 
attempt to validate the behavior as normative by stating, 
“Yeah, I struggle with getting up every morning, too, 
even though I tell myself every night that I am going to 
exercise in the morning.” However, this self-disclosure 
is only useful to the client if the therapist continues by 
stating what skillful behavior he/she uses to get up each 
morning and exercise successfully. 

Irreverent Communication 

Irreverent communication is used to push the client 
“off balance,” get the client’s attention, present an alternative 
viewpoint, or shift affective response. It is a 


Borderline Personality Disorder 

highly useful strategy when the client is immovable, or 
when therapist and client are “stuck.” It has an “offbeat” 
flavor and uses logic to weave a web the client 
cannot escape. Although it is responsive to the client, 
irreverent communication is almost never the response 
the client expects. For irreverence to be effective it must 
be both genuine (vs. sarcastic or judgmental) and come 
from a place of compassion and warmth toward the client. 
Otherwise, the client may become even more rigid. 
When using irreverence the therapist highlights some 
unintended aspect of the client’s communication or “reframes” 
it in an unorthodox manner. For example, if 
the client says, “I am going to kill myself,” the therapist 
might say, “I thought you agreed not to drop out of therapy.” 
Irreverent communication has a matter-of-fact, almost 
deadpan style that is in sharp contrast to the warm 
responsiveness of reciprocal communication. Humor, a 
certain naiveté, and guilelessness are also characteristic 
of the style. A confrontational tone is also irreverent, 
communicating “bullshit” to responses other than the 
targeted adaptive response. For example, the therapist 
might say, “Are you out of your mind?” or “You weren’t 
for a minute actually believing I would think that was 
a good idea, were you?” The irreverent therapist also 
calls the client’s bluff. For the client who says, “I’m 
quitting therapy,” the therapist might respond, “Would 
you like a referral?” The trick here is to time the bluff 
carefully, with the simultaneous provision of a safety 
net; it is important to leave the client a way out. 

case stuDy 

Background 

At the initial meeting, “Cindy,” a 30-year-old, white, 
married woman with no children, was living in a 
middle-class suburban area with her husband. She had 
a college education and had successfully completed almost 
2 years of medical school. Cindy was referred to 
one of us (M. M. L.) by her psychiatrist of 1½ years, 
who was no longer willing to provide more than pharmacotherapy 
following a recent hospitalization for a 
near-lethal suicide attempt. In the 2 years prior to referral, 
Cindy had been hospitalized at least 10 times (once 
for 6 months) for psychiatric treatment of suicidal ideation; 
had engaged in numerous instances of both NSSI 
behavior and suicide attempts, including at least 10 instances 
of drinking Clorox bleach, multiple deep cuts, 
and burns; and had had three medically severe or near


ly lethal suicide attempts, including cutting an artery in 
her neck. At the time of referral, Cindy met DSM-III-R 
(American Psychiatric Association, 1987) and Gunderson’s 
(1984) criteria for BPD. She was also taking a variety 
of psychotropic drugs. Until age 27, Cindy was 
able to function well in work and school settings, and 
the marriage was reasonably satisfactory to both partners, 
although her husband complained about Cindy’s 
excessive anger. When Cindy was in the second year 
of medical school, a classmate she knew only slightly 
committed suicide. Cindy stated that when she heard 
about the suicide, she immediately decided to kill herself 
also, but had very little insight into what about the 
situation actually elicited her inclination to kill herself. 
Within weeks she left medical school and became severely 
depressed and actively suicidal. Although Cindy 
self-presented as a person with few psychological 
problems before the classmate’s suicide, further questioning 
revealed a history of severe anorexia nervosa, 
bulimia nervosa, and alcohol and prescription medication 
abuse, originating at the age of 14 years. Indeed, 
she had met her husband at an Alcoholics Anonymous 
(AA) meeting while attending college. Nevertheless, 
until the student’s suicide in medical school, Cindy had 
been successful at maintaining an overall appearance 
of relative competence. 

Treatment 

At the initial meeting, Cindy was accompanied by her 
husband, who stated that he and Cindy’s family considered 
his wife too lethally suicidal to be out of a hospital 
setting. Consequently, he and Cindy’s family were seriously 
contemplating the viability of finding long-term 
outpatient care. However, Cindy stated a strong preference 
for inpatient treatment, although no therapist in 
the local area other than M. M. L. appeared willing to 
take her into outpatient treatment. The therapist agreed 
to accept Cindy into therapy, contingent on the client’s 
stated commitment to work toward behavioral change 
and to stay in treatment for at least 1 year. (It was later 
pointed out repeatedly that this also meant the client 
had agreed not to commit suicide.) Thus, the therapist 
began the crucial first step of establishing a strong 
therapeutic alliance by agreeing to accept the client despite 
the fact that no one else was willing to do so. She 
pointed out, however, that acceptance into therapy did 
not come without a cost. In this manner, the therapist 
communicated acceptance of the client exactly as she 
was in the current moment, while concomitantly mak



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

ing clear that Cindy’s commitment toward change was 
the foundation of the therapeutic alliance. At the fourth 
therapy session, Cindy reported that she felt she could 
no longer keep herself alive. When reminded of her previous 
commitment to stay alive for 1 year of therapy, 
Cindy replied that things had changed and she could 
not help herself. Subsequent to this session, almost 
every individual session for the next 6 months revolved 
around the topic of whether (and how) to stay alive 
versus committing suicide. Cindy began coming to sessions 
wearing mirrored sunglasses and would slump in 
her chair or ask to sit on the floor. Questions from the 
therapist were often met with a minimal comment or 
long silences. In response to the therapist’s attempts to 
discuss prior self-injurious behavior, Cindy would become 
angry and withdraw (slowing down the pace of 
therapy considerably). The client also presented with 
marked dissociative reactions, which would often occur 
during therapy sessions. During these reactions, Cindy 
would appear unable to concentrate or hear much of 
what was being said. When queried by the therapist, 
Cindy would describe her experience as feeling “spacey” 
and distant. The client stated that she felt she could 
no longer engage in many activities, such as driving, 
working, or attending school. Overall, the client viewed 
herself as incompetent in all areas. 

The use of diary cards, which Cindy filled out weekly 
(or at the beginning of the session, if she forgot), 
assisted the therapist in carefully monitoring Cindy’s 
daily experiences of suicidal ideation, misery, and 
urges to harm herself, as well as actual suicide attempts 
and NSSI behaviors. Behavioral analyses that attempted 
to identify the sequence of events leading up to and 
following Cindy’s suicidal behavior soon became an 
important focus of therapy. At every point the therapist 
conceptualized self-injurious behavior as to be expected, 
given the strength of the urge (but considered 
it ultimately beatable), and pointed out repeatedly that 
if the client committed suicide, therapy would be over, 
so they had better work really hard now, while Cindy 
was alive. 

Over the course of several months, the behavioral 
analyses began to identify a frequently recurring behavioral 
pattern that preceded suicidal behaviors. For 
Cindy, the chain of events would often begin with an 
interpersonal encounter (almost always with her husband), 
which culminated in her feeling threatened, 
criticized, or unloved. These feelings were often followed 
by urges either to self-mutilate or to kill herself, 
depending somewhat on the covarying levels of hope


lessness, anger, and sadness. Decisions to self-mutilate 
and/or to attempt suicide were often accompanied by 
the thought, “I’ll show you.” At other times, hopelessness 
and a desire to end the pain permanently seemed 
predominant. Both are examples of emotional vulnerability. 
Following the conscious decision to self-mutilate 
or to attempt suicide, Cindy would then immediately 
dissociate and at some later point cut or burn herself, 
usually while in a state of “automatic pilot.” Consequently, 
Cindy often had difficulty remembering specifics 
of the actual acts. At one point, Cindy burned her 
leg so badly (and then injected it with dirt to convince 
the doctor that he should give her more attention) that 
reconstructive surgery was required. Behavioral analyses 
also revealed that dissociation during sessions usually 
occurred following Cindy’s perception of the therapist’s 
disapproval or invalidation, especially when the 
therapist appeared to suggest that change was possible. 
The therapist targeted in-session dissociation by immediately 
addressing it as it occurred. 

By several months into therapy, an apparently longstanding 
pattern of suicidal behaviors leading to inpatient 
admission was apparent. Cindy would report intense 
suicidal ideation, express doubts that she could 
resist the urge to kill herself, and request admission to 
her preferred hospital; or, without warning, she would 
cut or burn herself severely and require hospitalization 
for medical treatment. Attempts to induce Cindy 
to stay out of the hospital or to leave the hospital before 
she was ready typically resulted in an escalation of 
suicidality, followed by her pharmacotherapist’s (a psychiatrist) 
insistence on her admission or the hospital’s 
agreement to extend her stay. Observation of this behavioral 
pattern led the therapist to hypothesize that the 
hospitalization itself was reinforcing suicidal behavior; 
consequently, she attempted to change the contingencies 
for suicidal behaviors. Using didactic and contingency 
clarification strategies, the therapist attempted 
to help Cindy understand how hospitalization might 
be strengthening the very behavior they were working 
to eliminate. This issue became a focal point of disagreement 
within the therapy, with Cindy viewing the 
therapist’s position as unsympathetic and lacking understanding 
of her phenomenal experience. In Cindy’s 
opinion, the intensity of her emotional pain rendered 
the probability of suicide so high that hospitalization 
was necessary to guarantee her safety. She would buttress 
her position by citing frequently her difficulties 
with dissociative reactions, which she reported as extremely 
aversive and which, in her opinion, made her 


Borderline Personality Disorder 

unable to function much of the time. From the therapist’s 
perspective, the deleterious long-term risk of suicide 
created by repeated hospitalization in response to 
suicidal behavior was greater than the short-term risk 
of suicide if hospitalization stays were reduced. These 
differences in opinion led to frequent disagreements 
within sessions. It gradually became clear that Cindy 
viewed any explanations of her behavior as influenced 
by reinforcement as a direct attack; she implied that 
if hospitalization was reinforcing her suicidal behavior, 
then the therapist must believe that the purpose 
of her suicidality was for admission into the hospital. 
This was obviously not the case (at least some of the 
time), but all attempts to explain reinforcement theory 
in any other terms failed. The therapist compensated 
somewhat for insisting on the possibility that she (the 
therapist) was correct by doing three things. First, she 
repeatedly validated the client’s experience of almost 
unendurable pain. Second, she made certain to address 
the client’s dissociative behavior repeatedly, explaining 
it as an automatic reaction to intensely painful affect 
(or the threat of it). Third, she frequently addressed 
the quality of the relationship between Cindy and herself 
to strengthen the relationship and maintain Cindy 
in therapy, even though to do so was a source of even 
more emotional pain. By the fifth month, the therapist 
became concerned that the current treatment regimen 
was going to have the unintended consequence of killing 
the client (via suicide). At this point, the therapist’s 
limits for effective treatment were crossed; therefore, 
she decided to employ the consultation-to-the-client 
strategy to address Cindy’s hospitalizations. The firstchoice 
strategy would have been to get Cindy to negotiate 
a new treatment plan with her preferred hospital 
and admitting psychiatrist. Cindy refused to go along, 
however, because she disagreed with the wisdom of 
changing her current unlimited access to the inpatient 
unit. The therapist was able to get Cindy to agree to 
a consultation meeting with all of her treatment providers, 
and, with some tenacity, the therapist actually 
got Cindy to make all the calls to set up the meeting 
(including inviting her insurance monitor, who was coordinating 
payment for treatment). 

At the case conference, the therapist presented her 
hypothesis that contingent hospitalization was reinforcing 
Cindy’s suicidal behavior. She also assisted Cindy 
in making the case that she (the therapist) was wrong. 
Using reciprocal communication and contingency 
management, the therapist stated that she simply could 
not conduct a therapy she thought might kill the client 

(and she had to go along with what she thought was 
best even if she were wrong—“to do otherwise would 
be unethical”), and she requested that a new system of 
contingencies be agreed upon to disrupt the functional 
relationship between Cindy’s suicidal behavior and hospitalization. 
Therefore, a plan was developed wherein 
the client was not required to be suicidal to gain hospital 
admittance. Under this new set of contingencies, 
Cindy could elect, at will, to enter the hospital for a 
stay of up to 3 days, at the end of which time she would 
always be discharged. If she convinced people that she 
was too suicidal for discharge, she would be transferred 
to her least-preferred hospital for safety. Suicidal and 
NSSI behaviors would no longer be grounds for admission 
except to a medical unit, when required. Although 
there was some disagreement as to the functional relationship 
between suicidal behavior and hospitalization, 
this system was agreed upon. Following this meeting, 
Cindy’s husband announced that he was no longer able 
to live with or tolerate his wife’s suicidal behavior, and 
that the constant threat of finding her dead had led to 
his decision to file for divorce. The focus of therapy 
then shifted to helping Cindy grieve over this event and 
find a suitable living arrangement. Cindy alternated between 
fury that her husband would desert her in her 
hour of need (or “illness,” as she put it) and despair that 
she could ever cope alone. She decided that “getting 
her feelings out” was the only useful therapy. This led 
to many tearful sessions, with the therapist simultaneously 
validating the pain; focusing on Cindy’s experiencing 
the affect in the moment, without escalating or 
blocking it; and cheerleading Cindy’s ability to manage 
without going back into the hospital. Due to Cindy’s 
high level of dysfunctionality, she and her therapist decided 
that she would enter a residential treatment facility 
for a 3-month period. The facility had a coping skills 
orientation and provided group but not individual therapy. 
Cindy saw her therapist once a week and talked to 
her several times a week during this period. With some 
coaching, Cindy looked for and found a roommate to 
live with and returned to her own home at the end of 3 
months (the ninth month of therapy). Over the course 
of treatment, the therapist used a number of strategies 
to treat Cindy’s suicidal, NSSI, and therapy-interfering 
behaviors. In-depth behavioral chain and solution 
analysis helped the therapist (and sometimes the client) 
gain insight into the factors influencing current suicidal 
behavior. For Cindy, as for most clients, performing 
these analyses was quite difficult because the process 
usually generated intense feelings of shame, guilt, or 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

anger. Thus, behavioral analysis also functioned as an 
exposure strategy, encouraging the client to observe 
and experience painful affect. It additionally served as 
a cognitive strategy in helping to change Cindy’s expectancies 
concerning the advantages and disadvantages 
of suicidal behavior, especially as the therapist repeatedly 
made statements such as “How do you think you 
would feel if I got angry at you and then threatened suicide 
if you didn’t change?” Finally, behavioral analysis 
served as contingency management, in that the client’s 
ability to pursue topics of interest in therapy sessions 
was made contingent on the successful completion of 
chain and solution analysis. 

Cindy presented early in therapy with exceedingly 
strong perceptions as to her needs and desires, and with 
a concomitant willingness to engage in extremely lethal 
suicidal behavior. As previously mentioned, several of 
these acts were serious attempts to end her life, whereas 
others functioned as attempts to gain attention and care 
from significant others. This client also presented with 
an extreme sensitivity to any attempts at obvious change 
procedures, which she typically interpreted as communicating 
a message about her incompetence and unworthiness. 
Although Cindy initially committed herself to 
attending weekly group skills training for the first year 
of therapy, her attendance at group meetings was quite 
erratic, and she generally tended either to miss entire 
sessions (but never more than three in a row) or to leave 
during the break. Cindy answered the therapist’s attempts 
to address this issue by stating that she could 
not drive at night due to night blindness. Although considered 
a therapy-interfering behavior and frequently 
addressed over the course of therapy, missing skills 
training was not a major focus of treatment due to the 
continuing presence of higher-priority suicidal behavior. 
The therapist’s efforts to engage the client in active 
skills acquisition during individual therapy sessions 
were also somewhat limited and were always preceded 
by obtaining Cindy’s verbal commitment to problem 
solving. The stylistic strategy of irreverent communication 
was of value to the therapeutic process. The therapist’s 
irreverence often served to “shake up” the client, 
resulting in a loosening of dichotomous thinking and 
maladaptive cognitions. The result of this was Cindy’s 
increased willingness to explore new and adaptive behavioral 
solutions. Finally, relationship strategies were 
heavily employed as tools to strengthen the therapeutic 
alliance and to keep it noncontingent on suicidal and/ 
or dissociative behaviors. Included here were betweensession 
therapist-initiated telephone calls to check in, 

the therapist routinely giving out phone numbers when 
she was traveling, and sending the client postcards 
when she was out of town. 

By the 12th month of therapy, Cindy’s suicidal and 
self-injurious behavior, as well as urges to engage in 
such behavior, receded. In addition, her hospital stays 
were reduced markedly, with none occurring after the 
eighth month. While living at home with a roommate, 
Cindy was readmitted to medical school. Part of the reason 
for returning to school was to turn her life around, 
so that she could try to regain her husband’s love and attention, 
or at least his friendship. As the therapy continued 
to focus on changing the contingencies of suicidal 
behavior, reducing both emotional pain and inhibition, 
and tolerating distress, a further focus on maintaining 
sobriety and reasonable food intake was added. During 
the first months of living in her home without her husband, 
Cindy had several alcoholic binges, and her food 
intake dropped precipitously. These behaviors became 
immediate targets. The therapist’s strong attention to 
these behaviors also communicated to Cindy that the 
therapist would take her problems seriously even if she 
were not suicidal. Therapy focused as well on expanding 
her social network. As with suicidal behaviors, attention 
to these targets served as a pathway to treating 
associated problems. As crisis situations decreased 
in frequency, greater attention was paid to analyzing 
family patterns, including experiences of neglect and 
invalidation, that might have led to Cindy’s problems 
in later life. Cindy did not report a history of sexual or 
physical abuse. Thus, the explicit goal of Stage 2 was 
to understand Cindy’s history and its relationship to her 
current problems. 

In other cases, especially when there has been sexual 
and/or physical abuse in childhood, movement to Stage 
2 before Stage 1 targets have been mastered is likely 
to result in retrogression to previously problematic behaviors. 
For example, Terry, another client treated by 
the same therapist (M. M. L.), had been quite seriously 
abused physically by her mother throughout childhood 
and sexually abused by her father, beginning at age 5. 
The sexual advances were nonviolent at first but became 
physically abusive at approximately age 12. Prior 
to this therapy, Terry had not disclosed the incidents of 
abuse to anyone. 

After successful negotiation of Stage 1 targets, the 
therapist proceeded to expose Terry to trauma-related 
cues by simply having her begin to disclose details of 
the abuse. These exposure sessions were intertwined 
with work on current problems in Terry’s life. Follow



Borderline Personality Disorder 

ing one exposure session focused on the sexual abuse, 
Terry reverted to some of her previously problematic 
behaviors, evidenced by withdrawal and silence in 
sessions, suicidal ideation, and medication noncompliance. 
The appearance of such behavior marked the 
necessity of stopping Stage 2 discussions of previous 
sexual abuse to address Stage 1 targets recursively. 
Three sessions were devoted to a behavioral analysis 
of Terry’s current suicidal, therapy-interfering, and 
quality-of-life–interfering behaviors; these were eventually 
linked both to fears about how the therapist would 
view her childhood emotional responses to her father, 
and to holiday visits with her father that precipitated 
conflicts over how Terry should be feeling about him in 
the present. This two-steps-forward, one-step-back approach 
is common to therapy for clients with BPD, and 
in particular may mark the transition between Stage 1 
and Stage 2. 

As previously mentioned, Stage 3 targets the client’s 
self-respect, regardless of the opinions of others. Betty, 
who was also in treatment with the same therapist (M. 

M. L.), had successfully negotiated Stages 1 and 2, and 
had become a highly competent nurse with training 
and supervisory responsibilities. Therapy with Betty 
was then focused on maintaining her self-esteem in the 
face of very powerful significant others (e.g., her supervisor) 
who constantly invalidated her. Components of 
the treatment included the therapist’s noting and highlighting 
Betty’s tendency to modify her self-opinion in 
accordance with that of others, persistent attempts to 
extract from Betty self-validation and self-soothing, 
and imagery exercises wherein Betty imagined and 
verbalized herself standing up to powerful others. 
Much of the therapy focus was on Betty’s interpersonal 
behavior within the therapy session, with attention to 
relating this behavior to her interactions with other important 
people. Thus, treatment at that point was very 
similar to the functional-analytic psychotherapy regimen 
developed by Kohlenberg and Tsai (1991). Overall, 
this third stage of therapy involved the movement to a 
more egalitarian relationship between the client and the 
therapist, in which emphasis was placed on the client’s 
standing up for her own opinions and defending her 
own actions. This approach required that the therapist 
both reinforce the client’s assertions, and step back and 
refrain from validating and nurturing the client in the 
manner characteristic of Stages 1 and 2. In addition, 
therapy sessions were reduced to every other week, and 
issues surrounding eventual termination were periodically 
discussed. 
Stage 4 of DBT targets the sense of incompleteness 
that can preclude the experience of joy and freedom. 
Sally started Stage 1 treatment with the same therapist 

(M. M. L.) 15 years ago. Stage 1 lasted 2 years; this was 
followed by a break of 1 year, after which treatment 
resumed for several years of bimonthly sessions leading 
to monthly sessions, and currently comprising four 
or five sessions a year. Sally has been married for 30 
years to an irregularly employed husband who, though 
devoted and loyal, is quite invalidating of her. Although 
apparently brilliant, he is usually dismissed from jobs 
for his interpersonal insensitivity. She has been employed 
full-time at the same place for years, working 
with children. The son Sally felt closest to died in a 
plane accident 2 years ago; her mother died last year, 
and her father is very ill. Despite having a stable marriage, 
working in a stable and quite fulfilling job, having 
raised two well-adjusted sons, and still being athletic, 
life feels meaningless to Sally. In the past she was 
very active in spiritual activities; following meditation 
retreats or extended periods of daily meditation, she 
would report contentment and some sense of joy. Since 
her son died, Sally has let go of most of her spiritual 
activities. Following a 2-year focus on grieving, she is 
now ready for Stage 4. Treatment planning is focused 
on actively practicing and keeping track of progress in 
radical acceptance (or “letting go of ego,” in Zen terminology), 
either alone or with group support. 
traNscriPts 

The following (composite) transcripts represent actual 
examples of the process of therapy occurring over several 
sessions with different clients. These particular dialogues 
between therapist and client have been chosen 
to provide the reader with comprehensive examples of 
the application of a wide range of DBT treatment strategies. 
The session targets in the following transcript 
were orienting and commitment. The strategies used 
were validation, problem solving (insight, orienting, 
and commitment), dialectical (devil’s advocate), and 
integrated (relationship enhancement). 

Obtaining the client’s commitment is a crucial first 
step in beginning therapy with clients who have BPD. 
As illustrated in the following transcript, the dialectical 
technique of devil’s advocate can be highly effective 
when used as a commitment strategy. In this first therapy 
session, the therapist’s ultimate goal was to obtain 
the client’s commitment to therapy, as well as a com



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

mitment to eliminate suicidal behavior. She began by 
orienting the client to the purpose of this initial session. 

tHeraPist: So are you a little nervous about me? 
client: Yeah, I guess I am. 
tHeraPist: Well, that’s understandable. For the next 

50 minutes or so, we have this opportunity to get to 
know each other and see if we want to work together. 
So what I’d like to do is talk a little bit about the 
program and how you got here. So tell me, what do 
you want out of therapy with me, and what are you 
doing here? 

client: I want to get better. 

tHeraPist: Well, what’s wrong with you? 

client: I’m a mess. (Laughs.) 

tHeraPist: How so? 

client: Umm, I don’t know. I just can’t even cope with 

everyday life right now. And I can’t even .. . I’m just a 
mess. I don’t know how to deal with anything. 

tHeraPist: So what does that mean exactly? 

client: Umm, well, everything I try these days just 
seems overwhelming. I couldn’t keep up on my job, 
and now I’m on medical leave. Plus everyone’s sick 
of me being in the hospital so much. And I think my 
psychiatrist wants to send me away because of all my 
self-harming. 

tHeraPist: How often do you self-harm? 

client: Maybe once or twice a month. I use my lighter 

or cigarettes, sometimes a razor blade. 

tHeraPist: Do you have scars all over? 

client: (Nods yes.) 

tHeraPist: Your psychiatrist tells me you’ve also 

drunk Clorox. Why didn’t you mention that? 

client: I guess it didn’t enter my mind. 

tHeraPist: Do things just not enter your mind very 

often? 

client: I don’t really know. Maybe. 

tHeraPist: So maybe with you I’m going to have to be 

a very good guesser. 

client: Hmm. 

tHeraPist: Unfortunately, though, I’m not the greatest 
guesser. So we’ll have to teach you how to have 
things come to mind. So what is it exactly that you 
want out of therapy with me? To quit harming yourself, 
quit trying to kill yourself, or both? 

client: Both. I’m sick of it. 

tHeraPist: And is there anything else you want help 
with? 

client: Um, well, I don’t know how to handle money, 
and I don’t know how to handle relationships. I don’t 
have friends; they don’t connect with me very often. 
I’m a former alcoholic and a recovering anorexic/bulimic. 
I still have a tendency toward that. 

tHeraPist: Do you think maybe some of what is going 
on with you is that you’ve replaced your alcoholic 
and anorexic behaviors with self-harm behaviors? 

client: I don’t know. I haven’t thought about it that 
way. I just feel that I don’t know how to handle 
myself, and—you know, and I guess work through 
stuff, and that is obviously getting to me because if it 
wasn’t, I wouldn’t be trying to kill myself. 

tHeraPist: So from your perspective, one problem is 
that you don’t know how to do things. A lot of things. 

client: Yeah, and a lot of it is, I do know how, but for 
some reason I don’t do it anyway. 

tHeraPist: Um hmm. 

client: You know, I mean I know I need to save 
money, and I know that I need to budget myself, and 
I do every single month, but every single month I get 
in debt. But, um, you know, it’s really hard for me. 
You know, it’s like sometimes I know it, or I know I 
shouldn’t eat something and I do it anyway. 

tHeraPist: So it sounds like part of the problem is you 
actually know how to do things; you just don’t know 
how to get yourself to do the things you know how 
to do. 

client: Exactly. 

tHeraPist: Does it seem like maybe your emotions are 
in control—that you are a person who does things 
when you’re in the mood? 

client: Yes. Everything’s done by the mood. 

tHeraPist: So you’re a moody person. 

client: Yes. I won’t clean the house for 2 months, and 
then I’ll get in the mood to clean. Then I’ll clean it 
immaculately and keep it that way for 3 weeks—I 
mean, just immaculate—and then when I’m in the 
mood I go back to being a mess again. 

tHeraPist: So one of the tasks for you and me would 
be to figure out a way to get your behavior and what 
you do less hooked up with how you feel? 

client: Right. 


Borderline Personality Disorder 

The therapist used insight to highlight for the client 
the observed interrelationship between the client’s 
emotions and her behavior. She then began the process 
of shaping a commitment through the dialectical strategy 
of devil’s advocate. 

tHeraPist: That, of course, is going to be hell to do, 
don’t you think? Why would you want to do that? It 
sounds so painful. 

client: Well, I want to do it because it’s so inconsistent. 
It’s worse, you know, because when I’m .. . I 
know that, like with budgeting money or whatever, 
I know I need to do it, and then when I don’t do it, it 
makes me even more upset. 

tHeraPist: Why would you ever want to do something 
you’re not in the mood for? 

client: Because I’ve got to. Because I can’t survive 
that way if I don’t. 

tHeraPist: Sounds like a pretty easy life to me. 

client: Yeah, but I can’t afford to live if I just spend 
my money on fun and stupid, frivolous things that 

I ... 
tHeraPist: Well, I guess maybe you should have some 
limits and not be too off the wall, but in general, I 
mean, why clean the house if you’re not in the mood? 

client: Because it pisses me off when it’s a mess. And 
I can’t find things, like I’ve lost bills before and then I 
end up not paying them. And now I’ve got collection 
agencies on my back. I can’t deal with all this, and I 
end up self-harming and going into the hospital. And 
then I just want to end it all. But it still doesn’t seem 
to matter because if I’m not in the mood to clean it, 
I won’t. 

tHeraPist: So the fact that it makes horrible things 
happen in your life so far hasn’t been enough of a 
motivation to get you to do things against your 
mood, right? 

client: Well, obviously not (laughs) because it’s not 
happening. 

tHeraPist: Doesn’t that tell you, though? This is going 
to be a big problem, don’t you think? This isn’t going 
to be something simple. It’s not like you’re going 
to walk in here and I’m going to say, “OK, magic 
wand,” and then all of a sudden you’re going to want 
to do things that you’re not in the mood for. 

client: Yeah. 

tHeraPist: Yeah, so it seems to me that if you’re not 

in the mood for things, if you’re kind of mooddependent, 
that’s a very tough thing to crack. As a 
matter of fact, I think it’s one of the hardest problems 
there is to deal with. 

client: Yeah, great. 

tHeraPist: I think we could deal with it, but I think it’s 
going to be hell. The real question is whether you’re 
willing to go through hell to get where you want to 
get or not. Now I figure that’s the question. 

client: Well, if it’s going to make me happier, yeah. 

tHeraPist: Are you sure? 

client: Yeah, I’ve been going through this since I was 
11 years old. I’m sick of this shit. I mean, excuse my 
language, but I really am, and I’m backed up against 
the wall. Either I need to do this or I need to die. 
Those are my two choices. 

tHeraPist: Well, why not die? 

client: Well, if it comes down to it, I will. 

tHeraPist: Um hmm, but why not now? 

client: Because, this is my last hope. Because if I’ve 
got one last hope left, why not take it? 

tHeraPist: So, in other words, all things being equal, 
you’d rather live than die, if you can pull this off. 

client: If I can pull it off, yeah. 

tHeraPist: OK, that’s good; that’s going to be your 
strength. We’re going to play to that. You’re going to 
have to remember that when it gets tough. But now 
I want to tell you about this program and how I feel 
about you harming yourself, and then we’ll see if you 
still want to do this. 

As illustrated by the foregoing segment, the therapist’s 
relentless use of the devil’s advocate strategy successfully 
“got a foot in the door” and achieved an initial 
client commitment. The therapist then “upped the ante” 
with a brief explanation of the program and its goals. 

tHeraPist: Now the most important thing to understand 
is that we are not a suicide prevention program; 
that’s not our job. But we are a life enhancement program. 
The way we look at it, living a miserable life 
is no achievement. If we decide to work together, I’m 
going to help you try to improve your life, so that it’s 
so good that you don’t want to die or hurt yourself. 
You should also know that I look at suicidal behavior, 
including drinking Clorox, as problem-solving behavior. 
I think of alcoholism the same way. The only 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

difference is that cutting, burning, unfortunately—it 
works. If it didn’t work, nobody would do it more 
than once. But it only works in the short term, not the 
long term. So to quit cutting, trying to hurt yourself, 
is going to be exactly like quitting alcohol. Do you 
think this is going to be hard? 

client: Stopping drinking wasn’t all that hard. 

tHeraPist: Well, in my experience, giving up selfharm 
behavior is usually very hard. It will require 
both of us working, but you will have to work harder. 
And like I told you when we talked briefly, if you 
commit to this, it’s for 1 year—individual therapy 
with me once a week, and group skills training once 
a week. So the question is, are you willing to commit 
for 1 year? 

client: I said I’m sick of this stuff. That’s why I’m 
here. 

tHeraPist: So you’ve agreed to not drop out of therapy 
for a year, right? 

client: Right. 

tHeraPist: And do you realize that if you don’t drop 
out for a year, that really does, if you think about it, 
rule out suicide for a year? 

client: Logically, yeah. 

tHeraPist: So we need to be absolutely clear about 
this because this therapy won’t work if you knock 
yourself off. The most fundamental mood-related 
goal we have to work on is that, no matter what your 
mood is, you won’t kill yourself or try to. 

client: All right. 

tHeraPist: So that’s what I see as number one 
priority—not our only one but number one—that 
we will work on that. And getting you to agree— 
meaningfully, of course—and actually follow 
through on staying alive and not harming yourself 
and not attempting suicide, no matter what your 
mood is. Now the question is whether you agree to 
that. 

client: Yes, I agree to that. 

The therapist, having successfully obtained the client’s 
commitment to work on suicidal behavior again 
employed the strategy of devil’s advocate to reinforce 
the strength of the commitment. 

tHeraPist: Why would you agree to that? 

client: I don’t know. (Laughs.) 

tHeraPist: I mean, wouldn’t you rather be in a therapy 
where, if you wanted to kill yourself, you could? 
client: I don’t know. I mean, I never really thought 
about it that way. 

tHeraPist: Hmm. 

client: I don’t want to .. . I want to be able to get to 
the point where I could feel like I’m not being forced 
into living. 

tHeraPist: So are you agreeing with me because 
you’re feeling forced into agreeing? 
client: You keep asking me all these questions. 

tHeraPist: What do you think? 

client: I don’t know what I think right now, honestly. 

A necessary and important skill for the DBT therapist 
is the ability to sense when a client has been pushed 
to his/her limits, as well as the concomitant skill of 
being willing and able to step back and at least temporarily 
refrain from further pressuring the client. In 
these instances, continued pressure from the therapist 
is likely to boomerang and have the opposite effect of 
what the therapist intends. Here the therapist noticed 
the client’s confusion and sensed that further pushing 
was likely to result in the client’s reducing the strength 
of her commitment. Consequently, the therapist stepped 
back and moved in with validation. 

tHeraPist: So you’re feeling pushed up against the 
wall a little bit, by me? 
client: No, not really. (Starts to cry.) 

tHeraPist: What just happened just now? 

client: (pause) I don’t know. I mean, I don’t think I 
really want to kill myself. I think I just feel like I 
have to. I don’t think it’s really even a mood thing. I 
just think it’s when I feel like there’s no other choice. 
I just say, “Well, you know there’s no other choice, 
so do it.” You know. And so right now, I don’t see 
any ray of hope. I’m going to therapy, which I guess 
is good. I mean, I know it’s good, but I don’t see anything 
any better than it was the day I tried to kill 
myself. 

tHeraPist: Well, that’s probably true. Maybe it isn’t 
any better. I mean, trying to kill yourself doesn’t 
usually solve problems. Although it actually did do 
one thing for you. 

client: It got me in therapy. 

tHeraPist: Yeah. So my asking you all these questions 


Borderline Personality Disorder 

makes you start to cry. You look like you must be 
feeling pretty bad. 
client: Just overwhelmed, I guess the word is. 

tHeraPist: That’s part of the reason we’re having this 
conversation, to try to structure our relationship so 
that it’s very clear for both of us. And that way, at 
least, we’ll cut down on how much you get overwhelmed 
by not knowing what’s going on with me. 
OK? 

client: Um hmm. 

tHeraPist: And so I just want to be clear on what our 
number one goal is, and how hard this is because if 
you want to back out, now’s the time. Because I’m 
going to take you seriously if you say, “Yes, I want 
to do it.” 

client: I don’t want to back out. 

tHeraPist: OK. Good. Now I just want to say that this 
seems like a good idea right now. You’re in kind of 
an energized mood today, getting started on a new 
program. But in 5 hours, it might not seem like such 
a good idea. It’s kind of like it’s easy to commit to 
a diet after a big meal, but it’s much harder when 
you’re hungry. But we’re going to work on how to 
make it keep sounding like a good idea. It’ll be hell, 
but I have confidence. I think we can be successful 
working together. 

Note how the therapist ended the session by preparing 
the client for the difficulties she was likely to 
experience in keeping her commitment and working 
in therapy. Cheerleading and relationship enhancement 
laid the foundation for a strong therapeutic alliance. 
The following session occurred approximately 4 
months into therapy. The session target was suicidal behavior. 
The therapist used validation, problem solving 
(contingency clarification, didactic information, behavioral 
analysis, and solution analysis), stylistic (irreverent 
communication), dialectical (metaphor, making 
lemonade out of lemons), and skills training (distress 
tolerance) strategies. 

The therapist reviewed the client’s diary card and 
noted a recent, intentional self-injury, in which the client 
opened up a previously self-inflicted wound following 
her physician’s refusal to provide pain medication. 
The therapist began by proceeding with a behavioral 
analysis. 

tHeraPist: OK. Now you were in here last week telling 
me you were never going to hurt yourself again 

because this was so ridiculous, you couldn’t stand it, 
you couldn’t hurt yourself any more. So let’s figure 
out how that broke down on Sunday, so we can learn 
something from it. OK. So when did you start having 
urges to hurt yourself? 

client: My foot began to hurt on Wednesday. I started 
to have a lot of pain. 

tHeraPist: It hadn’t hurt before that? 

client: No. 

tHeraPist: So the nerves were dead before that or 
something, huh? So you started having a lot of pain. 
Now when did you start having the pain, and when 
did the urge to harm yourself come? 

client: At the same time. 

tHeraPist: They just come at the identical moment? 

client: Just about. 

The specification of an initial prompting environmental 
event is always the first step in conducting a 
behavioral chain analysis. Here the therapist began by 
directly inquiring when the urges toward suicide and 
NSSI began. Note also the therapist’s use of irreverent 
communication early in the session. 

tHeraPist: So how is it that feeling pain sets off an 
urge to self-harm? Do you know how that goes? How 
you get from one to the other? 

client: I don’t know. Maybe it wasn’t until Thursday, 
but I asked my nurse. I go, “Look, I’m in a lot of 
pain, you know. I’m throwing up my food because 
the pain is so bad.” And the nurse tried. She called 
the doctor and told him I was in a lot of pain, and 
asked if he’d give me some painkillers. But no! So I 
kept asking, and the answer kept being no, and I got 
madder and madder and madder. So I felt like I had 
to show somebody that it hurt because they didn’t 
believe me. 

tHeraPist: So let’s figure this out. So is it that you’re 
assuming that if someone believed it hurt as bad as 
you said it does, they would actually give you the 
painkillers? 

client: Yes. 

tHeraPist: OK. That’s where the faulty thinking is. 
That’s the problem. You see, it’s entirely possible 
that people know how bad the pain is but still aren’t 
giving you medication. 

client: I believe firmly, and I even wrote it in my 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

journal, that if I’d gotten pain medication when I really 
needed it, I wouldn’t have even thought of selfharming. 


The therapist proceeded by obtaining a description 
of the events co-occurring with the onset of the problem. 
It was not completely clear what about not getting 
pain medication set off self-harm. In the following 
segment, the therapist used the dialectical strategy 
of metaphor to analyze what factors might have been 
important. Notice that the example is presented as an 
experiment in which different scenarios are given and 
responses elicited. 

tHeraPist: Now let me ask you something—you’ve 
got to imagine this, OK? Let’s imagine that you and 
I are on a raft together out in the middle of the ocean. 
Our boat has sunk and we’re on the raft. And when 
the boat sank, your leg got cut really badly. And together 
we’ve wrapped it up as well as we can. But we 
don’t have any pain medicine. And we’re on this raft 
together and your leg really hurts, and you ask me 
for pain medicine, and I say no. Do you think you 
would then have an urge to hurt yourself and make 
it worse? 

client: No, it would be a different situation. 

tHeraPist: OK, but if I did have the pain medication 
and I said no because we had to save it, what do you 
think? 

client: If that were logical to me, I’d go along with it 
and wouldn’t want to hurt myself. 
tHeraPist: What if I said no because I didn’t want you 
to be a drug addict? 

client: I’d want to hurt myself. 

tHeraPist: OK. So we’ve got this clear. The pain is not 
what’s setting off the desire to self-harm. It’s someone 
not giving you something to help, when you feel 
they could if they wanted to. 

client: Yes. 

The therapist used contingency clarification to point 
out the effects of others’ responses on the client’s own 
behavior. In the following segment, the therapist again 
employed contingency clarification in a continued effort 
to highlight for the client the communication function 
of NSSI. 

tHeraPist: So, in other words, hurting yourself is 
communication behavior, OK? So what we have to 

do is figure out a way for the communication behavior 
to quit working. 

client: Why? 

tHeraPist: Because you’re not going to stop doing it 
until it quits working. It’s like trying to talk to someone; 
if there’s no one in the room, you eventually quit 
trying to talk to them. It’s like when a phone goes 
dead, you quit talking. 

client: I tried three nights in a row in a perfectly assertive 
way and just clearly stated I was in a lot of 
pain. 

tHeraPist: You know, I think I’ll switch chairs with 
you. You’re not hearing what I’m saying. 

client: And they kept saying, “No,” and then some 
little light came on in my head. 

tHeraPist: I’m considering switching chairs with you. 

client: And it was like, “Here, now can you tell that 
it hurts a lot?” 

tHeraPist: I’m thinking of switching chairs with you. 

client: Why? 

tHeraPist: Because if you were sitting over here, I 
think you would see that no matter how bad the pain 
is, hurting yourself to get pain medication is not a 
reasonable response. The hospital staff may not have 
been reasonable either. It may be that they should 
have given you pain medicine. But we don’t have 
to say they were wrong in order to say that hurting 
yourself was not the appropriate response. 

client: No, I don’t think it was the appropriate response. 


tHeraPist: Good. So what we’ve got to do is figure 
out a way to get it so that the response doesn’t come 
in, even if you don’t get pain medicine. So far, it has 
worked very effectively as communication. And the 
only way to stop it is to get it to not work anymore. 
Of course, it would be good to get other things to 
work. What you’re arguing is “Well, OK, if I’m not 
going to get it this way, then I should get it another 
way.” 

client: I tried this time! 

tHeraPist: Yes, I know you did, I know you did. 

client: A lady down the hallway from me was getting 
treatment for her diabetes, and it got real bad, and 
they gave her pain medication. 

tHeraPist: Now we’re not on the same wavelength in 
this conversation. 


Borderline Personality Disorder 

client: Yes, we are. What wavelength are you on? 

tHeraPist: I’m on the wavelength that it may have 
been reasonable for you to get pain medicine, 
and I certainly understand your wanting it. But 
I’m also saying that no matter what’s going on, 
hurting yourself is something we don’t want to 
happen. You’re functioning like if I agreed with 
you that you should get pain medication, I would 
think this was OK. 

client: Hmm? 

tHeraPist: You’re talking about whether they should 
have given you pain medication or not. I’m not talking 
about that. Even if they should have, we’ve got to 
figure out how you could have gotten through without 
hurting yourself. 

As illustrated by the foregoing exchange, a client 
with BPD often wants to remain focused on the crisis at 
hand. This poses a formidable challenge for the therapist, 
who must necessarily engage in a back-and-forth 
dance between validating the client’s pain and pushing 
for behavioral change. This segment also illustrates 
how validation does not necessarily imply agreement. 
Although the therapist validated the client’s perception 
that the nurse’s refusal to provide pain medication 
may have been unreasonable, she remained steadfast 
in maintaining the inappropriateness of the client’s response. 


client: I tried some of those distress tolerance things 
and they didn’t work. 

tHeraPist: OK. Don’t worry, we’ll figure out a way. I 
want to know everything you tried. But first I want 
to be sure I have the picture clear. Did the urges start 
building after Wednesday and get worse over time? 

client: Yeah. They started growing with the pain. 

tHeraPist: With the pain. OK. But also they started 
growing with their continued refusal to give you pain 
medicine. So you were thinking that if you hurt yourself, 
they would somehow give you pain medicine? 

client: Yeah. ’Cause if they wouldn’t listen to me, 
then I could show them. 

tHeraPist: OK, so you were thinking, “If they won’t 
listen to me, I’ll show them.” And when did that idea 
first hit? Was that on Wednesday? 

client: Yeah. 

tHeraPist: OK. Well, we’ve got to figure out a way 
for you to tolerate bad things without harming your


self. So let’s figure out all the things you tried, and 
then we have to figure out some other things because 
those didn’t work. So what was the first thing you 
tried? 

At this juncture the behavioral analysis remained 
incomplete, and it would normally have been premature 
to move to the stage of solution analysis. However, 
in the therapist’s judgment, it was more critical at this 
point to reinforce the client’s attempts at distress tolerance 
by responding to the client’s communication that 
she had attempted behavioral skills. 

client: I thought that if I just continued to be assertive 
about it that the appropriate measures would be 
taken. 

tHeraPist: OK, but that didn’t work. So why didn’t 
you harm yourself right then? 
client: I didn’t want to. 

tHeraPist: Why didn’t you want to? 

client: I didn’t want to make it worse. 

tHeraPist: So you were thinking about pros and 
cons—that if I make it worse, I’ll feel worse? 

client: Yeah. 

One aspect of DBT skills training stresses the usefulness 
of evaluating the pros and cons of tolerating 
distress as a crisis survival strategy. Here the therapist 
employed the dialectical strategy of turning lemons 
into lemonade by highlighting for the client how she 
did, in fact, use behavioral skills. Note in the following 
response how the therapist immediately reinforced the 
client’s efforts with praise. 

tHeraPist: That’s good thinking. That’s when you’re 
thinking about the advantages and disadvantages of 
doing it. OK, so at that point the advantages of making 
it worse were outweighed by the disadvantages. 
OK. So you keep up the good fight here. Now what 
else did you try? 

client: I tried talking about it with other clients. 

tHeraPist: And what did they have to say? 

client: They said I should get pain medication. 

tHeraPist: Right. But did they say you should cut 
yourself or hurt yourself if you didn’t get it? 

client: No. And I tried to get my mind off my pain by 
playing music and using mindfulness. I tried to read 
and do crossword puzzles. 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

tHeraPist: Um hmm. Did you ever try radical acceptance? 


client: What’s that? 

tHeraPist: It’s where you sort of let go and accept the 
fact that you’re not going to get the pain medication. 
And you just give yourself up to that situation. You 
just accept that it ain’t going to happen, that you’re 
going to have to cope in some other way. 

client: Which I did yesterday. I needed a little Ativan 
to get me there, but I got there. 

tHeraPist: Yesterday? 

client: Yeah. I took a nap. When I woke up I basically 
said, “Hey, they’re not going to change, so you’ve 
just got to deal with this the best that you can.” 

tHeraPist: And did that acceptance help some? 

client: I’m still quite angry about what I believe is 
discrimination against borderline personalities. I’m 
still very angry about that. 

tHeraPist: OK. That’s fine. Did it help, though, to ac


cept? 

client: Um hmm. 

tHeraPist: That’s good. That’s great. That’s a great 
skill, a great thing to practice. When push comes 
to shove, when you’re really at the limit, when it’s 
the worst it can be, radical acceptance is the skill to 
practice. 

client: That’s AA. 

During a solution analysis, it is often necessary that 
the therapist facilitate the process by helping the client 
“brainstorm,” or by making direct suggestions for 
handling future crises. Here the therapist suggested a 
solution that is also taught in the DBT skills training 
module on distress tolerance. The notion of radical acceptance 
stresses the idea that acceptance of one’s pain 
is a necessary prerequisite for ending emotional suffering. 


tHeraPist: OK. Now let’s go back to how you gave in 
to the urge. Because you really managed to battle all 
the way till then, right? OK. Usually, with you, we 
can assume that something else happened. So let’s 
figure out Sunday and see if there wasn’t an interpersonal 
situation that day that made you feel criticized, 
unloved, or unacceptable. 

client: Well, on Saturday I was so pissed off and I 

went to an AA meeting. And it got on my brain how 
alcohol would steal away my pain. I went looking 
all around the neighborhood for an open store. I was 
going to go get drunk. That’s how much my pain was 
influencing me. But I couldn’t find a store that was 
open, so I went back to the hospital. 

tHeraPist: So you got the idea of getting alcohol to 
cure it, and you couldn’t find any, so you went back 
to the hospital. You were in a lot of pain, and then 
what happened? 

client: I told the nurse, “I’ve been sober almost 10 
years and this is the first urge I’ve had to drink; 
that’s how bad my pain is.” And that wasn’t listened 
to. 

tHeraPist: So you figured that should have done it? 

client: Yeah. 

tHeraPist: Yeah. ’Cause that’s a high-level communication, 
that’s like a suicide threat. Very good, 
though. I want you to know, that’s better than a suicide 
threat because that means you had reduced the 
severity of your threats. 

The response above was very irreverent, in that most 
clients would not expect their therapists to view making 
a threat as a sign of therapeutic progress. The therapeutic 
utility of irreverence often lies in its “shock” value, 
which may temporarily loosen a client’s maladaptive 
beliefs and assumptions, and open the client up to the 
possibility of other response solutions. 

client: And I just told her how I was feeling about it, 
and I thought that would do it. And the doctor still 
wouldn’t budge. 

tHeraPist: So what did she do? Did she say she would 
call? 

client: She called. 

tHeraPist: OK. And then what happened? 

client: She came back. She was really sweet, and she 
just said, “I’m really sorry, but the doctor said no.” 

tHeraPist: Then did you feel anger? 

client: I don’t know if I was really angry, but I was 
hurt. 

tHeraPist: Oh, really? Oh, that’s pretty interesting. 
OK. So you were hurt .. . 

client: Because I ended up hugging my teddy bear 
and just crying for a while. 


Borderline Personality Disorder 

tHeraPist: Before or after you decided to hurt yourself? 


client: Before. 

tHeraPist: OK. So you didn’t decide right away to 
hurt yourself. You were thinking about it. But when 
did you decide to do it? 

client: Later on Saturday. 

tHeraPist: When? 

client: After I got sick of crying. 

tHeraPist: So you laid in bed and cried, feeling uncared 
about and hurt, abandoned probably, and unlovable, 
like you weren’t worth helping? 

client: Yes. 

tHeraPist: That’s a really adaptive response. That’s 
what I’m going to try to teach you. Except that 
you’ve already done it without my teaching it to you. 
So how did you get from crying, feeling unloved and 
not cared about, and you cry and sob—how did you 
get from there to deciding to hurt yourself, instead of 
like going to sleep? 

client: Because then I got angry. And I said, “Fuck 
this shit, I’ll show him.” 

tHeraPist: Now did you quit crying before you got 
angry, or did getting angry make you stop crying? 
client: I think getting angry made me stop crying. 

tHeraPist: So you kind of got more energized. So you 
must have been ruminating while you were lying 
there, thinking. What were you thinking about? 

client: For a long time I was just wanting somebody 
to come care about me. 

tHeraPist: Um hmm. Perfectly reasonable feelings. 
Makes complete sense. Now maybe there you could 
have done something different. What would have 
happened if you had asked the nurse to come in and 
talk to you, hold your hand? 

An overall goal of behavioral analysis is the construction 
of a general road map of how the client arrives 
at dysfunctional responses, with notation of possible 
alternative pathways. Here the therapist was searching 
for junctures in the map where possible alternative responses 
were available to the client. 

client: They don’t have time to do that. 

tHeraPist: They don’t? Do you think that would have 
helped? 

client: I don’t know. She couldn’t help me. 

tHeraPist: She could have made you feel cared about. 
That would have been a caring thing to do. 

client: Yeah, but I don’t think it would have helped. 

tHeraPist: What would have helped? 

client: Getting pain medication. 

tHeraPist: I thought you’d say that. You have a onetrack 
mind. Now listen, we’ve got to figure out something 
else to help you because it can’t be that nothing 
else can help. That can’t be the way the world works 
for you. There’s got to be more than one way to get 
everywhere because we all run into boulders on the 
path. Life is like walking on a path, you know, and 
we all run into boulders. It’s got to be that there are 
other paths to places. And for you, it really isn’t the 
pain in your ankle that’s the problem; it’s the feeling 
of not being cared about. And probably a feeling 
that has something to do with anger, or a feeling that 
other people don’t respect you—a feeling of being 
invalidated. 

client: Yes. 

tHeraPist: So I think it’s not actually the pain in your 
ankle that’s the problem. Because if you were out on 
that raft with me, you would have been able to handle 
the pain if I hadn’t had any medicine, right? So it’s 
really not the pain; it’s the sense of being invalidated 
and the sense of not being cared about. That’s my 
guess. Do you think that’s correct? 

client: Yes. 

tHeraPist: See, the question is, is there any other way 
for you to feel validated and cared about, other than 
them giving it to you? 

client: No. 

tHeraPist: Now is this a definite, like “I’m not going 
to let there be any other way,” or is it more open, like 
“I can’t think of another way, but I’m open to the 
possibility?” 

client: I don’t think there’s another way. 

tHeraPist: Does that mean you’re not even open to 
learning another way? 

client: Like what? 

tHeraPist: I don’t know. We have to figure it out. See, 
what I think is happening is that when you’re in a 
lot of pain and you feel either not cared about or not 
taken seriously, invalidated, that’s what sets you up 
to hurt yourself, and also to want to die. The problem 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

that we have to solve is how to be in a situation that 
you feel is unjust without having to harm yourself to 
solve it. Are you open to that? 

client: Yeah. 

As illustrated here, behavioral analysis is often an 
excruciating and laborious process for client and therapist 
alike. The therapist often feels demoralized and is 
tempted to abandon the effort, which may be likened to 
trying to find a pair of footprints hidden beneath layers 
of fallen leaves; the footprints are there, but it may 
take much raking and gathering of leaves before they 
are uncovered. With repeated analyses, however, the 
client learns that the therapist will not “back down.” 
Such persistence on the part of the therapist eventually 
extinguishes a client’s refusal to attempt new and adaptive 
problem-solving behaviors. As clients increasingly 
acquire new behavioral skills, more adaptive attempts 
at problem resolution eventually become discernible. 

In the following session (approximately 10 months 
into therapy), the client arrived wearing mirrored sunglasses 
(again) and was angry because collection agencies 
were persistent in pressuring her for payment on 
delinquent accounts. In addition, her therapist had been 
out of town for a week. The session targets were emotion 
regulation and interpersonal effectiveness. Dialectical 
(metaphor), validation (cheerleading), problem solving 
(contingency clarification, contingency management), 
stylistic (reciprocal communication, irreverent 
communication), and integrated (relationship enhancement) 
strategies were used. In this first segment, the 
therapist used cheerleading, contingency clarification, 
and the contingency management strategy of shaping 
to get the client to remove her sunglasses and work on 
expressing her anger. 

tHeraPist: It’s not a catastrophe that the collector did 
this to you, and it’s not a catastrophe to be mad at 
the collector. It’s made your life a lot harder, but you 
can handle this. You can cope with this. This is not 
more than you can cope with. You’re a really strong 
woman; you’ve got it inside you. But you’ve got to do 
it. You’ve got to use it. I’m willing to help you, but I 
can’t do it alone. You have to work with me. 

client: How? 

tHeraPist: Well, by taking off your sunglasses, for 
starters. 

The therapist began the exchange by attempting to 
normalize the issue (“It’s not a catastrophe”), validat


ing the client (“It’s made your life a lot harder”), and 
cheerleading (“You can handle this. You can cope.. 
..You’re a really strong woman”). The therapist then 
moved to contingency clarification by pointing out that 
provision of the therapist’s assistance was contingent 
on the client’s willingness to work. She immediately 
followed this by requesting a response well within the 
client’s behavioral repertoire. 

client: I knew you’d say that. 

tHeraPist: And I knew you knew I’d say that. 

client: Sunglasses are your biggest bitch, I think. 

tHeraPist: Well, how would you like to look at yourself 
talking to someone else? (long pause) They 
make it difficult for me. And I figure they make it 
harder for you. I think you do better when you’re not 
wearing those sunglasses. It’s like a step; you always 
do better when you go forward. And when you do, 
you feel better. I’ve noticed that. (long pause) So 
that’s what you should do; you should take off your 
sunglasses, and then we should problem-solve on 
how to cope when you can’t get angry. There’s nothing 
freakish about that. Something has happened in 
your life that has made it so that you’re afraid to be 
angry, and we just have to deal with that, you and 
me. It’s just a problem to be solved. It’s not a catastrophe; 
it’s not the worst thing anyone ever did. It’s 
just a problem that you have, and that’s what you and 
I do. We solve problems; we’re a problem-solving 
team. (pause) 

client: (Removes sunglasses.) All right. 

tHeraPist: Thank you. That’s a big step, I know, for 
you. 

The therapist’s use of reciprocal communication 
informed the client of her feelings regarding the sunglasses. 
Note the matter-of-fact attitude taken by the 
therapist and her continued attempt to normalize the 
issue (i.e., “There’s nothing freakish about that .. . it’s 
not the worst thing anyone ever did”). Also note the 
framing of the issue as a problem to be solved, as well 
as the therapist’s use of the relationship strategy to enhance 
the therapeutic alliance. The therapist also made 
a point of validating the client by letting her know that 
she realized this was difficult. 

tHeraPist: Now, c’mon, I want you to find it inside 
yourself. I know you’ve got it; I know you can do it. 
You can’t give up. You can’t let your feet slip. Keep 


Borderline Personality Disorder 

going. Just express directly to me how you feel. That 
you’re angry at yourself, that you’re angry at the collection 
agency, and that you’re damn angry with me. 
(long pause) 

client: (barely audible) I’m angry at you, at myself, 
and the collection agency. 

The therapist continued to rely on cheerleading and 

praise as she continued the shaping process in an at


tempt to get the client to express her anger directly. 

tHeraPist: Good, did that kill you? (long pause) 
That’s great. Is that hard? (long pause) It was, wasn’t 
it? Now say it with a little vigor. Can’t you say it with 
a little energy? 

client: (Shakes her head no.) 

tHeraPist: Yes, you can. I know you’ve got it in you. I 
have a good feel for what your strengths are. I don’t 
know how I’ve got this good feel, but I do. And I 
know you can do it and you need to do it, and you 
need to say it with some energy. Express how angry 
you are. You don’t have to yell and scream or throw 
things. Just say it aloud—“I’m angry!” (long pause) 
You can scream, of course, if you want; you can say, 
“I’m angry!” 

client: That’s it. That’s all I can do. 

tHeraPist: Listen, you have to take the risk. You’re 
not going to get past this or through this. You have to 
take the risk. You are like a person mountain climbing 
and we’ve come to this crevasse and it’s very 
deep, but we can’t go back because there’s an avalanche, 
and the only way to go forward is for you to 
jump over this crevasse. You’ve got to do it. Tell me 
how mad you are, in a way that I can understand how 
you really feel. 

client: (long pause) I can’t do any of it. 

tHeraPist: That is bullshit. 

client: You want me to get angry at you, don’t you? 

tHeraPist: I don’t care who you get angry at. I think 
you already are angry. I just want you to express it. 
I’m not going to ask you to do anything more today, 
by the way. I figure the only thing today you have to 
do is say “I’m angry,” in a voice that sounds angry, 
and I figure you’re capable of that. And I might be 
angry if you don’t do it. I don’t think I will be, but I 
might. That’s OK. I can be angry, you can be angry, 
we can be angry sometimes, and it isn’t going to kill 
either one of us. 

Cheerleading and metaphor were unsuccessful in 
moving the client to express her anger more forcefully. 
Consequently, the therapist switched to irreverent communication 
in an attempt to get the client to “jump 
track.” Also note how the therapist communicated to 
the client the potential negative consequences of her 
continued refusal to express her anger (i.e., “.. . I might 
be angry .. .”). In this manner, the therapist used the relationship 
as a contingency in order to promote change 
in the client. 

tHeraPist: OK, so how angry are you? On a scale of 
1 to 100, how angry would you say you are? At 100, 
you’re ready to kill. You’re so enraged, you’d go to 
war if you could. 

client: (barely audible) Maybe 100. 

tHeraPist: Really? 

client: They know my situation. 

tHeraPist: Um hmm. 

client: They’re persistent. 

tHeraPist: Um hmm. (pause) Who’s the safest to be 
angry at? Yourself, me, or the collection agency? 

client: Collection agency. 

tHeraPist: OK, then, tell me how angry you are. You 

don’t have to make it sound like 100. Try to make it 

sound like 50. 

client: They really pissed me off! (said in a loud, 
angry voice) 

tHeraPist: Well, damn right. They piss me off, too. 

As illustrated by the foregoing exchange, a primary 
difficulty in working with clients who have BPD is 
their not uncommon tendency to refuse to engage in 
behavioral work. Thus, it is absolutely necessary that 
the therapist maintain persistence and not give up in 
the face of a client’s “I can’t” statements. In situations 
like these, the use of irreverent communication often 
succeeds in producing a breakthrough and gaining client 
compliance. 

PostveNtioN By liNehaN 

After completing the writing of Cindy’s case history for 
publication in this Handbook, 14 months into therapy, 
Cindy died of a prescription drug overdose plus alcohol. 
I (M. M. L.) considered dropping the case history 
and replacing it with a more successful case. However, 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

in Cindy’s honor, and because I think much can be 
learned from both failed and successful therapy, I decided 
to leave the case in. The immediate precipitant 
for Cindy’s overdose was a call to her estranged husband, 
during which she discovered that another woman 
was living with him. As Cindy told me during a phone 
call the next morning, her unverbalized hope that they 
might someday get back together, or at least be close 
friends, had been shattered. She phoned again that evening 
in tears, stating that she had just drunk half a fifth 
of liquor. Such drinking incidents had occurred several 
times before, and the phone call was spent “remoralizing” 
Cindy, offering hope, problem-solving how she 
could indeed live without her husband, and using crisis 
intervention techniques to get her through the evening, 
until her appointment the following day. Cindy’s roommate 
was home and agreed to talk with her, watch a TV 
movie together, and go to bed (plans on which the roommate 
did follow through). Cindy stated that although 
she felt suicidal, she would stop drinking and would not 
do anything self-destructive before her appointment. 
She was instructed to call me back later that evening if 
she wanted to talk again. The next day, when Cindy did 
not arrive for her appointment, I called her home, just 
as her roommate discovered Cindy dead, still in bed 
from the night before. At this point, I was faced with 
a number of tasks. I called to inform other therapists 
who had been treating the client, and spoke with a legal 
consultant to review the limits of confidentiality when 
a client has died. Once the family (Cindy’s parents and 
estranged husband) were alerted, I called each to offer 
my condolences. The next day, as the senior therapist 
and supervisor on the treatment team, I called a meeting 
of the treatment team to discuss and process the 
suicide. It was especially important to notify the individual 
therapists of the remaining members of Cindy’s 
skills training group. Group members were notified of 
the suicide by their individual psychotherapists. Within 
minutes of the beginning of the next group session, 
however, two members became seriously suicidal, and 
one of them had to be briefly hospitalized. (By the third 
week following the suicide, however, both had regained 
their forward momentum.) A third group member took 
this occasion to quit DBT and switch to another therapy, 
saying that this proved the treatment did not work. 
In the days and weeks following the suicide, I attended 
the funeral and met with Cindy’s roommate and with 
her parents. 

What can we learn from this suicide? First, it is important 
to note that even when a treatment protocol is 

followed almost to the letter, it may not save a client. 
Even an effective treatment can fail in the end. In this 
case, DBT failed. This does not mean that the progress 
made was unimportant or not real. Had this “slippery 
spot over the abyss” been negotiated safely, perhaps the 
client would have been able to develop, finally, a life of 
quality. Risk is not eliminated, however, just because 
an individual makes substantial progress. In this case, I 
did not believe during the last phone call that the client 
was at higher than ordinary risk for imminent suicide. 
In contrast to many previous phone calls and therapy 
sessions in which the client had cried that she might not 
be able to hold on, during the last call the client made 
plans for the evening, agreed to stop drinking and not 
to do anything suicidal or self-destructive, and seemed 
to me (and to the roommate) to be in better spirits following 
the phone call. Her roommate was home and 
available. Thus, I did not take extraordinary measures 
that evening to prevent suicide. Indeed, the problem behavior 
focused on during the call was the drinking. I 
brought up the topic of suicide while conducting a risk 
assessment. 

Second, could I have known? Only (perhaps) if I 
had paid more attention to the precipitant and less to 
the affect expressed at the end of the phone call. In reviewing 
notes about the client, I saw that each previous 
nonlethal self-injury was a result of intense anger 
at her husband. Each previous near-lethal attempt was 
a result of the client’s belief that the relationship with 
her husband had irrevocably ended. Although the client 
could tolerate losing her husband, she could not tolerate 
losing all hope for a reconciliation at some point, even 
many years hence. Had I linked these two ideas (complete 
loss of hope and suicide attempt), I might have 
been able to work out a better plan for a reemergence 
of the crisis later in the evening. I definitely would have 
handled the situation differently. “Oh that woman’s obviously 
a floozy, we will figure out a way to get him 
back! I’m sure of it,” I would have said. The value of 
both conducting thorough behavioral assessments and 
organizing them into a coherent pattern is highlighted 
in this case. In this sense, I provided DBT almost to the 
letter but not all the way. 

Third, when all is said and done, an individual with 
BPD must ultimately be able and willing to tolerate 
the almost unimaginable pain of his/her life until the 
therapy has a chance to make a permanent difference. 
Ultimately, the therapist cannot save the client; only the 
client can do that. Even if mistakes are made, the client 
must nonetheless persevere. In this case, the DBT 


Borderline Personality Disorder 

protocol of “no lethal drugs for lethal people” was violated, 
even though the client had a past history of nearlethal 
overdoses. Why was the protocol not enforced? 
There were two primary reasons. First, the client came 
into therapy with a strong belief that the medication 
regimen she was on was essential to her survival. Any 
attempt on my part to manage her medications would 
have been met by very strong resistance. Although the 
drugs were dispensed in small doses, the only safe alternative 
would have been to have the person living 
with her (her husband at first, then her roommate) manage 
her medications, which the client also resisted. In 
addition, some professionals disagree with the “no lethal 
drugs” protocol of DBT because they believe that 
psychotropic medications are a treatment of choice for 
suicidal clients. In the face of professional and client 
resistance I relented. The second reason was that behavioral 
analyses indicated that her preferred lethal behavior 
was cutting; thus, I allowed myself a false sense 
of safety in thinking that her use of drugs to commit 
suicide was not likely. 

Fourth, a group member’s suicide is extraordinarily 
stressful for clients with BPD who are in group therapy. 
Although it is easy to believe that alliances are not 
strong in a psychoeducational behavioral skills group, 
this has universally not been our experience. The suicide 
of one member is a catastrophic event and can lead 
to contagious suicide and NSSI behavior, and therapy 
dropouts. Thus, extreme care is needed in the conduct 
of group meetings for some time following a suicide. 
Similar care is needed with the treatment team, where 
the thread of hope that maintains therapists in the face 
of a daunting task is also strained. It is important that 
the personal reactions of therapists, as well as a period 
of mourning and grieving, be shared and accepted. 
Fears of legal responsibility, never far from the surface, 
must be confronted directly; legal counsel should be 
sought as necessary; and, in time, a careful review of 
the case and the therapy must be conducted, if only to 
improve treatment in the future. 

aCknowledgMents 

The writing of this chapter was supported by National Institute 
of Mental Health Grant No. MH34486 to Marsha 

M. Linehan. Parts of this chapter are drawn from Linehan 
(1993b), Linehan and Koerner (1992), Koerner and Linehan 
(1992), and Linehan (1997). The quotations from Linehan 
(1997) in the section on validation are reprinted with the permission 
of the American Psychological Association. Finally, 
this chapter is a revision of the same chapter in the previous 
edition of this book, with contributions made by previous 
authors Bryan M. Cochran, Constance A. Kehrer, and Liz 
Dexter Mazza. 

referenCes 

Adler, G. (1981). The borderline–narcissistic personality disorder 
continuum. American Journal of Psychiatry, 138, 
46–50. 

Adler, G. (1993). The psychotherapy of core borderline psychopathology. 
American Journal of Psychotherapy, 47, 
194–206. 

Adler, G., & Buie, D. H. (1979). Aloneness and borderline 
psychopathology: The possible relevance of child development 
issues. International Journal of Psychoanalytic 
Psychotherapy, 60, 83–96. 

American Psychiatric Association. (1987). Diagnostic and 
statistical manual of mental disorders (3rd ed., text 
rev.).Washington, DC: Author. 

American Psychiatric Association. (2000). Diagnostic and 
statistical manual of mental disorders (4th ed., text rev.). 
Washington, DC: Author. 

American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and 
statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.). Arlington, 
VA: Author. 

Aviram, R. B., Brodsky, B. S., & Stanley, B. (2006). Borderline 
personality disorder, stigma, and treatment implications. 
Harvard Review of Psychiatry, 14, 249–256. 

Barlow, D. H. (1988). Anxiety and its disorders: The nature 
and treatment of anxiety and panic. New York: Guilford 
Press. 

Barlow, D. H., Allen, L. B., & Choate, M. L. (2004). Toward a 
unified treatment for emotional disorders. Behavior Therapy, 
35, 205–230. 

Barnoski, R. (2002). Preliminary findings for the Juvenile 
Rehabilitation Administration’s Dialectic Behavior 
Therapy Program (Document No. 02-07-1203). Olympia: 
Washington State Institute for Public Policy. 

Bateman, A., & Fonagy, P. (1999). Effectiveness of partial 
hospitalization in the treatment of borderline personality 
disorder: A randomized controlled trial. American Journal 
of Psychiatry, 156, 1563–1569. 

Bateman, A., & Fonagy, P. (2001). Treatment of borderline 
personality disorder with psychoanalytically oriented partial 
hospitalization: An 18-month follow-up. American 
Journal of Psychiatry, 158, 36–42. 

Bateman, A. W., & Fonagy, P. (2004). Mentalization-based 
treatment of BPD. Journal of Personality Disorders, 18, 
36–51. 

Bateman, A., & Fonagy, P. (2008). Eight-year follow-up 
of patients treated for borderline personality disorder: 
Mentalization-based treatment versus treatment as usual. 
American Journal of Psychiatry, 165(5), 631–638. 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

Bateman, A., & Fonagy, P (2009). Randomized controlled 
trial of outpatient mentalization-based treatment versus 
structured clinical management for borderline personality 
disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 166(12), 
1355–1364. 

Beck, A. T., Brown, G., Berchick, R. J., Stewart, B. L., & 
Steer, R. A. (1990). Relationship between hopelessness 
and ultimate suicide: A replication with psychiatric outpatients. 
American Journal of Psychiatry, 147, 190–195. 

Beck, A. T., & Freeman, A. (1990). Cognitive therapy of personality 
disorders. New York: Guilford Press. 

Bedics, J. D., Atkins, D. C., Comtois, K. A., & Linehan, M. 

M. (2012). Treatment differences in the therapeutic relationship 
and introject during a 2-year randomized controlled 
trial of dialectical behavior therapy versus nonbehavioral 
psychotherapy experts for borderline personality 
disorder. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 
80(1), 66–77. 
Benjamin, L. S. (1996). Interpersonal diagnosis and treatment 
of personality disorders (2nd ed.). New York: Guilford 
Press. 

Blum, N., Pfohl, B., St. John, D., Monahan, P., & Black, D. W. 
(2002). STEPPS: A cognitive-behavioral systems-based 
group treatment for outpatients with borderline personality 
disorder—a preliminary report. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 
43, 301–310. 

Blum, N., John, D. S., Pfohl, B., Stuart, S., McCormick, B., 
Allen, J., et al. (2008). Systems Training for Emotional 
Predictability and Problem Solving (STEPPS) for outpatients 
with borderline personality disorder: A randomized 
controlled trial and 1-year follow-up. American Journal of 
Psychiatry, 165(4), 468–478. 

Bohus, M., Haaf, B., Simms, T., Limberger, M. F., Schmahl, 
C., Unckel, C., et al. (2004). Effectiveness of inpatient dialectical 
behavioral therapy for borderline personality disorder: 
a controlled trial. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 
42, 487–499. 

Bohus, M., Limberger, M. F., Chapman, A. L., Kuhler, T., 
Stieglitz, R., & Frank, U. (2007). Psychometric properties 
of the Borderline Symptom List (BSL). Psychopathology, 
40, 126–132. 

Bohus, M., Limberger, M. F., Frank, U., Sender, I., Gratwohl, 
T., & Stieglitz, R. D. (2001). Development of the borderline 
symptom list. Psychotherapies, Psychosomatik, Medizinische 
Psychologie, 51, 201–211. 

Bohus, M., Dyer, A. S., Priebe, K., Krüger, A., Kleindienst, 
N., Schmahl, C., et al. (2013). Dialectical behaviour therapy 
for post-traumatic stress disorder after childhood sexual 
abuse in patients with and without borderline personality 
disorder: a randomised controlled trial. Psychotherapy 
and Psychosomatics, 82(4), 221–233. 

Bos, E. H., van Wel, E. B., Appelo, M. T., & Verbraak, M. J. 
(2010). A randomized controlled trial of a Dutch version 
of systems training for emotional predictability and prob


lem solving for borderline personality disorder. Journal of 
Nervous and Mental Disorders, 198(4), 299–304. 

Bos, E. H., van Wel, E. B., Appelo, M. T., & Verbraak, M. 

J. (2011). Effectiveness of Systems Training for Emotional 
Predictability and Problem Solving (STEPPS) for 
borderline personality problems in a “real-world” sample: 
Moderation by diagnosis or severity? Psychotherapy and 
Psychosomatics, 80, 173–181. 
Bradley, R. G., & Follingstad, D. (2003).Group therapy for 
incarcerated women who experienced interpersonal violence: 
A pilot study. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 16(4), 
337–340. 

Bradley, R., Zittel, C. C., & Westen, D. (2005). The borderline 
personality diagnosis in adolescents: Gender differences 
and subtypes. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 
46, 1006–1019. 

Brent, D. A., Johnson, B. A., Perper, J., Connolly, J., Bridge, 
J., Bartle, S., et al. (1994). Personality disorder, personality 
traits, impulsive violence, and completed suicide in 
adolescents. Journal of the American Academy of Child 
and Adolescent Psychiatry, 33, 1080–1086. 

Brown, G. K., Newman, C. F., Charlesworth, S. E., Crits-
Christoph, P., & Beck, A. T. (2004). An open clinical trial 
of cognitive therapy for borderline personality disorder. 
Journal of Personality Disorders, 18, 257–271. 

Buie, D. H., & Adler, G. (1982). Definitive treatment of the 
borderline personality. International Journal of Psychoanalytic 
Psychotherapy, 9, 51–87. 

Carter, G. L., Willcox, C. H., Lewin, T. J., Conrad, A. M., 
& Bendit, N. (2010). Hunter DBT project: A randomized 
controlled trial of dialectical behaviour therapy in women 
with borderline personality disorder. Australian and New 
Zealand Journal of Psychiatry, 44, 162–173. 

Cavanaugh, M. M., Solomon, P. L., & Gelles, R. J. (2011). 
The dialectical psychoeducational workshop (DPEW) for 
males at risk for intimate partner violence: A pilot randomized 
controlled trial. Journal of Experimental Criminology, 
7(3), 275–291. 

Chesin, M. S., Jeglic, E. L., & Stanley, B. (2010). Pathways 
to high-lethality suicide attempts in individuals with borderline 
personality disorder. Archives of Suicide Research, 
14, 342–362. 

Cisler, J. M., Olatunji, B. O., Feldner, M. T., & Forsyth, J. P. 
(2010). Emotion regulation and the anxiety disorders: An 
integrative review. Journal of Psychopathology and Behavioral 
Assessment, 32, 68–82. 

Clarkin, J. F., Levy, K. N., Lenzenweger, M. F., & Kernberg, 

O. F. (2007). Evaluating three treatments for borderline 
personality disorder: A multiwave study. American Journal 
of Psychiatry, 164, 922–928. 
Conklin, C. Z., & Westen, D. (2005). Borderline personality 
disorder in clinical practice. American Journal of Psychiatry, 
162(5), 867–875. 

Cottraux, J., Note, I. D., Milliery, M., Genouihlac, V., Yao, S. 


Borderline Personality Disorder 

N., Note, B., et al. (2009). Cognitive therapy versus Rogerian 
supportive therapy in borderline personality disorder. 
Psychotheray and Psychosomatics, 78, 307–316. 

Courbasson, C., Nishikawa, Y., & Dixon, L. (2012). Outcome 
of dialectical behaviour therapy for concurrent eating and 
substance use disorders. Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy, 
19(5), 434–449. 

Crowell, S. E., Beauchaine, T. P., & Linehan, M. M. (2009). 
A biosocial developmental model of borderline personality: 
Elaborating and extending Linehan’s theory. Psychological 
Bulletin, 135, 495–510. 

Davison, G. C., & Neale, J. M. (1994). Abnormal psychology 
(6th ed.). New York: Wiley. 

Dimeff, L. A., McDavid, J., & Linehan, M. M. (1999). Pharmacotherapy 
for borderline personality disorder: A review 
of the literature and recommendations for treatment. 
Journal of Clinical Psychology in Medical Settings, 6, 
113–138. 

Doering, S., Horz, .S, Fischer-Kern, M., Schuster, P., Benecke, 
C., Buchheim, A., et al. (2010). Transference-focused psychotherapy 
v. treatment by community psychotherapists 
for borderline personality disorder: Randomised controlled 
trial. British Journal of Psychiatry, 196, 389–395. 

Ellis, A. (1973). Humanistic psychotherapy: The rational– 
emotive approach. New York: Julian Press. 

Etkin, A., & Wager, T. D. (2007). Functional neuroimaging 
of anxiety: A meta-analysis of emotional processing in 
PTSD, social anxiety disorder, and specific phobia. American 
Journal of Psychiatry, 164, 1476–1488. 

Evershed, S., Tennant, A., Boomer, D., Rees, A., Barkham, 
M., & Watson, A. (2003). Practice-based outcomes of 
dialectical behaviour therapy (DBT) targeting anger and 
violence, with male forensic patients: A pragmatic and 
non-contemporaneous comparison. Criminal Behaviour 
and Mental Health, 13(3), 198–213. 

Farrell, J. M., Shaw, I. A., & Webber, M. A. (2009). A 
schema-focused approach to group psychotherapy for outpatients 
with borderline personality disorder: A randomized 
controlled trial. Journal of Behavior Therapy and 
Experimental Psychiatry, 40, 317–328. 

Feigenbaum, J. D., Fonagy, P., Pilling, S., Jones, A., Wildgoose, 
A., & Bebbington, P. E. (2012). A real-world study 
of the effectiveness of DBT in the UK National Health 
Service. British Journal of Clinical Psychology, 51(2), 
121–141. 

Feldman, G., Harley, R., Kerrigan, M., Jacobo, M., & Fava, 

M. (2009). Change in emotional processing during a dialectical 
behavior therapy-based skills group for major depressive 
disorder. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 47 
(4), 316–321. 
Foa, E. B., & Kozak, M. J. (1986). Emotional processing of 
fear: Exposure to corrective information. Psychological 
Bulletin, 99, 20–35. 

Fossati, A., Madeddu, F., & Maffei, C. (1999). Borderline 

personality disorder and childhood sexual abuse: A metaanalytic 
study. Journal of Personality Disorders, 13, 
268–280. 

Giesen-Bloo, J., Van Dyck, R., Spinhoven, P., van Tilburg, 
W., Dirksen, C., van Asselt, T., et al. (2006). Outpatient 
psychotherapy for borderline personality disorder: Randomized 
trial of schema-focused therapy vs. transferencefocused 
psychotherapy. Archives of General Psychiatry, 
63, 649–658. 

Goldberg, C. (1980). The utilization and limitations of paradoxical 
intervention in group psychotherapy. International 
Journal of Group Psychotherapy, 30, 287–297. 

Gunderson, J. G. (1984). Borderline personality disorder. 
Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press. 

Harley, R., Sprich, S., Safren, S., Jacobo, M., & Fava, M. 
(2008). Adaptation of dialectical behavior therapy skills 
training group for treatment-resistant depression. Journal 
of Nervous and Mental Disease, 196(2), 136–143. 

Harned, M. S., Chapman, A. L., Dexter-Mazza, E. T., Murray, 
A., Comtois, K. A., & Linehan, M. M. (2008). Treating 
co-occurring Axis I disorders in recurrently suicidal 
women with borderline personality disorder: A 2-year randomized 
trial of dialectical behavior therapy versus community 
treatment by experts. Journal of Consulting and 
Clinical Psychology, 76(6), 1068–1075. 

Harned, M. S., Rizvi, S. L., & Linehan, M. M. (2010). Impact 
of co-occurring posttraumatic stress disorder on suicidal 
women with borderline personality disorder. American 
Journal of Psychiatry, 167(10), 1210–1217. 

Harned, M. S., Korslund, K. E., Foa, E. B., & Linehan, M. 

M. (2012). Treating PTSD in suicidal and self-injuring 
women with borderline personality disorder: Development 
and preliminary evaluation of a dialectical behavior 
therapy prolonged exposure protocol. Behaviour Research 
and Therapy, 50, 381–386. 
Herman, J. L. (1986). Histories of violence in an outpatient 
population: An exploratory study. American Journal of 
Orthopsychiatry, 56, 137–141. 

Herman, J. L., Perry, J. C., & van der Kolk, B. A. (1989). 
Childhood trauma in borderline personality disorder. 
American Journal of Psychiatry, 146, 490–495. 

Hill, D. M., Craighead, L. W., & Safer, D. L. (2011). Appetitefocused 
dialectical behavior therapy for the treatment of 
binge eating with purging: A preliminary trial. International 
Journal of Eating Disorders, 44(3), 249–261. 

Hirvikoski, T., Waaler, E., Alfredsson, J., Pihlgren, C., Holmström, 
A., Johnson, A., et al. (2011). Reduced ADHD 
symptoms in adults with ADHD after structured skills 
training group: Results from a randomized controlled 
trial. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 49(3), 175–185. 

Hollandsworth, J. G. (1990). The physiology of psychological 
disorders. New York: Plenum Press. 
Isometsa, E. T., Henriksson, M. M., Aro, H. M., Heikkinen, 

M. E., Kuoppasalmi, K. I., & Lonnqvist, J. K. (1994). Sui

CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

cide in major depression. American Journal of Psychiatry, 
151, 530–536. 

Katz, L. Y., Cox, B. J., Gunasekara, S., & Miller, A. L. (2004) 
Feasibility of dialectical behavior therapy for suicidal adolescent 
inpatients. Journal of the American Academy of 
Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 43, 276–282. 

Kegan, R. (1982). The evolving self: Problem and process in 
human development. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press. 

Kellogg, S. H., & Young, J. E. (2006). Schema therapy for 
borderline personality disorder. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 
62, 445–458. 

Kernberg, O. F. (1984). Severe personality disorders: Psychotherapeutic 
strategies. New Haven, CT: Yale University 
Press. 

Kernberg, O. F., Selzer, M. A., Koenigsberg, H. W., Carr, A. 
C., & Appelbaum, A. H. (1989). Psychodynamic psychotherapy 
of borderline patients. New York: Basic Books. 

Keuthen, N. J., Rothbaum, B. O, Fama, J., Altenburger, E., 
Falkenstein, M. J., Sprich, S. E., et al. (2012). DBT-enhanced 
cognitive-behavioral treatment for trichotillomania: 
A randomized controlled trial. Journal of Behavioral 
Addictions, 1(3), 106–114. 

Kleindienst, N., Krumm, B., & Bohus M. (2011). Is 
transference-focused psychotherapy really efficacious for 
borderline personality disorder? British Journal of Psychiatry, 
98(2), 156–157. 

Koerner, K., & Linehan, M. M. (1992). Integrative therapy 
for borderline personality disorder: Dialectical behavior 
therapy. In J. C. Norcross & M. R. Goldfried (Eds.), 
Handbook of psychotherapy integration (pp. 433–459). 
New York: Basic Books. 

Kohlenberg, R. J., & Tsai, M. (1991). Functioned analytic 
psychotherapy: Creating intense and curative therapeutic 
relationships. New York: Plenum Press. 

Koons, C. R., Chapman, A. L., Betts, B. B., O’Rourke, B., 
Morse, N., & Robins, C. J. (2006). Dialectical behavior 
therapy adapted for the vocational rehabilitation of significantly 
disabled mentally ill adults. Cognitive and Behavioral 
Practice, 13, 146–156. 

Koons, C. R., Robins, C. J., Tweed, J. L., Lynch, T. R., Gonzalez, 
A. M., Morse, J. Q., et al. (2001). Efficacy of dialectical 
behavior therapy in women veterans with borderline 
personality disorder. Behavior Therapy, 32, 371–390. 

Kring, A. M., & Bachorowski, J. A. (1999). Emotions and 
psychopathology. Cognition and Emotion, 13, 575–599. 

Kring, A. M. & Sloan, D. M. (2010). Emotion regulation and 
psychopathology: A transdiagnostic approach to etiology 
and treatment. New York: Guilford Press. 

Kring, A. M. & Werner, K. H. (2004). Emotion regulation 
and psychopathology. In P. Philippot & R. S. Feldman 
(Eds.), The regulation of emotion (pp. 359–408). Mahwah, 
NJ: Erlbaum. 

Kyokai, B. D. (1966). The teachings of Buddha. Japan: Bukkyo 
Dendo Kyokai. 

Lequesne, E. R., & Hersh, R. G. (2004). Disclosure of a diagnosis 
of borderline personality disorder. Journal of Psychiatric 
Practice, 10, 170–176. 

Levy, K. N., & Scala, J. W. (2012). Transference, transference 
interpretations, and transference-focused psychotherapies. 
Psychotherapy, 49(3), 391–403. 

Lieb, K., Völlm, B., Rücker, G., Timmer, A., & Stoffers, J. M. 
(2010). Pharmacotherapy for borderline personality disorder: 
Cochrane Systematic Review of randomised trials. 
British Journal of Psychiatry, 196, 4–12. 

Lieb, K., Zanarini, M., Linehan, M. M., & Bohus, M. (2004). 
Seminar section: Borderline personality disorder. Lancet, 
364, 453–461. 

Linehan, M. M. (1987). Dialectical behavior therapy for borderline 
personality disorder: Theory and method. Bulletin 
of the Menninger Clinic, 51, 261–276. 

Linehan, M. M. (1993a). Cognitive-behavioral treatment 
of borderline personality disorder. New York: Guilford 
Press. 

Linehan, M. M. (1993b). Skills training manual for treating 
borderline personality disorder. New York: Guilford 
Press. 

Linehan, M. M. (1997). Validation and psychotherapy. In A. 
Bohank & L. Greenberg (Eds.), Empathy reconsidered: 
New directions in psychotherapy (pp. 353–392). Washington, 
DC: American Psychological Association. 

Linehan, M. M. (in press). Skills training manual for treating 
borderline personality disorder (2nd ed.). New York: 
Guilford Press. 

Linehan, M. M., Armstrong, H. E., Suarez, A., Allmon, D., 
& Heard, H. L. (1991). Cognitive-behavioral treatment of 
chronically parasuicidal borderline patients. Archives of 
General Psychiatry, 48, 1060–1064. 

Linehan, M. M., Bohus, M., & Lynch, T. R. (2007). Dialectical 
behavior therapy for pervasive emotion dysregulation: 
Theoretical and practical underpinnings. In J. J. Gross 
(Ed.), Handbook of emotion regulation (pp. 581–605). 
New York: Guilford Press. 

Linehan, M. M., Comtois, K. A., Murray, A., Brown, M. Z., 
Gallop, R. J., Heard, H. L., et al. (2006). Two-year randomized 
trial + follow-up of dialectical behavior therapy 
vs. therapy by experts for suicidal behaviors and borderline 
personality disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry, 
63, 757–766. 

Linehan, M. M., Dimeff, L. A., Reynolds, S. K., Comtois, 
K., Shaw-Welch, S., Heagerty, P., et al. (2002). Dialectical 
behavior therapy versus comprehensive validation plus 12step 
for the treatment of opioid dependent women meeting 
criteria for borderline personality disorder. Drug and Alcohol 
Dependence, 67, 13–26. 

Linehan, M. M., & Heard, H. L. (1993). Impact of treatment 
accessibility on clinical course of parasuicidal patients: In 
reply to R. E. Hoffman [Letter to the editor]. Archives of 
General Psychiatry, 50, 157–158. 

Linehan, M. M., Heard, H. L., & Armstrong, H. E. (1993). 


Borderline Personality Disorder 

Naturalistic follow-up of a behavioral treatment for chronically 
parasuicidal borderline patients. Archives of General 
Psychiatry, 50, 971–974. 

Linehan, M. M., & Koerner, K. (1992). A behavioral theory 
of borderline personality disorder. In J. Paris (Ed.), Borderline 
personality disorder: Etiology and treatment 
(pp. 103–121). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric 
Association. 

Linehan, M. M., McDavid, J. D., Brown, M. Z., Sayrs, J. H., & 
Gallop, R. J. (2008). Olanzapine plus dialectical behavior 
therapy for women with high irritability who meet criteria 
for borderline personality disorder: A double-blind, 
placebo-controlled pilot study. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 
69(6), 999–1005. 

Linehan, M. M., Rizvi, S. L., Shaw-Welch, S., & Page, B. 
(2000). Psychiatric aspects of suicidal behaviour: Personality 
disorders. In K. Hawton & K. van Heeringen (Eds.), 
International handbook of suicide and attempted suicide 
(147–178). Sussex, UK: Wiley. 

Linehan, M. M., Schmidt, H., III, Dimeff, L. A., Craft, J. C., 
Kanter, J., & Comtois, K. A. (1999). Dialectical behavior 
therapy for patients with borderline personality disorder 
and drug-dependence. American Journal of Addiction, 8, 
279–292. 

Linehan, M. M., Tutek, D. A., Heard, H. L., & Armstrong, 

H. E. (1994). Interpersonal outcome of cognitive behavioral 
treatment for chronically suicidal borderline patients. 
American Journal of Psychiatry, 151, 1771–1776. 
Livesley, J. W., Jang, K. L., & Vernon, P. A. (1998). Phenotypic 
and genetic structure of traits delineating personality 
disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry, 55 , 941–948. 

Loranger, A. W. (1995). International Personality Disorder 
Examination (IPDE) manual. White Plains, NY: Cornell 
Medical Center. 

Lynch, T. R., Cheavens, J. S., Cukrowicz, K. C., Thorp, S. R., 
Bronner, L., & Beyer, J. (2007). Treatment of older adults 
with co-morbid personality disorder and depression: A 
dialectical behavior therapy approach. International Journal 
of Geriatric Psychiatry, 22, 131–143. 

Lynch, T. R., Morse, J. Q., Mendelson, T., & Robins, C. J. 
(2003). Dialectical behavior therapy for depressed older 
adults: A randomized pilot study. American Journal of 
Geriatric Psychiatry, 11, 33–45. 

Marlatt, G. A., & Gordon, J. R. (1985). Relapse prevention: 
Maintenance strategies in the treatment of addictive behaviors. 
New York: Guilford Press. 

McDonell, M. G., Tarantino, J., Dubose, A. P., Matestic, P., 
Steinmetz, K., Galbreath, H., et al. (2010). A pilot evaluation 
of dialectical behavioural therapy in adolescent longterm 
inpatient care. Child and Adolescent Mental Health, 
15(4),193–196. 

McMain, S., Korman, L. M., & Dimeff, L. A. (2001). Dialectical 
behavior therapy and the treatment of emotion dysregulation. 
Journal of Clinical Psychology, 57(2), 183– 
196. 

McMain, S. F., Links, P. S., Gnam, W. H., Guimond, T., 
Cardish, R. J., Korman, L., et al. (2009). A randomized 
clinical trial of dialectical behavior therapy versus general 
psychiatric management for borderline personality disorder. 
American Journal of Psychiatry, 166, 1365–1374. 

Mennin, D. S. (2004). Emotion regulation therapy for generalized 
anxiety disorder. Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy, 
11, 17–29. 

Mennin, D. S., Heimberg, R. G., Turk, C. L., & Fresco, D. 

M. (2005). Preliminary evidence for an emotion dysregulation 
model of generalized anxiety disorder. Behaviour 
Research and Therapy, 43, 1281–1310. 
Merriam-Webster, Inc. (2006). Merriam-Webster online dictionary. 
Available online at www.m-w.com. 
Merriam-Webster’s New Universal Unabridged Dictionary. 
(1983). Cleveland, OH: Dorset & Baber. 
Mintz, R. S. (1968). Psychotherapy of the suicidal patient. In 

H. L. P. Resnick (Ed.), Suicidal behaviors: Diagnoses and 
management (pp. 271–296). Boston: Little, Brown. 
Nadort, M., Arntz, A., Giesen-Bloo, J., Eikelenboom, M., 
Spinhoven, P., van Asselt, T., et al. (2009). Implementation 
of outpatient schema therapy for borderline personality 
disorder with versus without crisis support by the therapist 
outside office hours: A randomized trial. Behaviour 
Research and Therapy, 47, 961–973. 

Neacsiu, A. D., Eberle, J. E., Kramer, R., Weismann, T., & 
Linehan, M. M. (2013). A treatment mechanism for emotion 
dysregulation across mood and anxiety disorders: A 
randomized controlled trial. Manuscript under review. 

Neacsiu, A. D., Rizvi, S. L., & Linehan, M. M. (2010). Dialectical 
behavior therapy skills use as a mediator and outcome 
of treatment for borderline personality disorder. Behaviour 
Research and Therapy, 48(9), 832–839. 

Nisenbaum, R., Links, P. S., Eynan, R., & Heisel, M. J. 
(2010). Variability and predictors of negative mood intensity 
in patients with borderline personality disorder and 
recurrent suicidal behavior: Multilevel analyses applied to 
experience sampling methodology. Journal of Abnormal 
Psychology, 119(2), 433–439. 

Nose, M., Cipriani, A., Biancosino, B., Grassi, L., & Barbui, 

C. (2006). Efficacy of pharmacotherapy against core traits 
of borderline personality disorder: Meta-analysis of randomized 
controlled trials. International Clinical Psychopharmacology, 
21, 345–353. 
Paris, J. (2005). Borderline personality disorder. Canadian 
Medical Association Journal, 172, 1579–1583. 

Peng, K., & Nisbett, R. E. (1999). Culture, dialectics, and 
reasoning about contradiction. American Psychologist, 
54, 741–754. 

Pistorello, J., Fruzzetti, A. E., MacLane, C., Gallop, R., & 
Iverson, K. M. (2012). Dialectical behavior therapy (DBT) 
applied to college students: A randomized clinical trial. 
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 80(6), 
982–984. 

Pretzer, J. (1990). Borderline personality disorder. In A. Free



CLINICAL HANDBOOK OF PSYCHOLOGICAL DISORDERS 

man, L. Pretzer, B. Fleming, & K. M. Simon (Eds.), Clinical 
applications of cognitive therapy (pp. 181–202). New 
York: Plenum Press. 

Rakfeldt, J. (2005). Dialectical behavior therapy with transitional 
youth: Preliminary findings. Best Practices in Mental 
Health, 1(2), 61–76. 

Rathus, J. H., & Miller, A. L. (2002). Dialectical behavior 
therapy adapted for suicidal adolescents. Suicide and Life-
Threatening Behavior, 32, 146–157. 

Reiser, D. E., & Levenson, H. (1984). Abuses of the borderline 
diagnosis: A clinical problem with teaching opportunities. 
American Journal of Psychiatry, 141, 1528–1532. 

Roepke, S., Schröder-Abé, M., Schütz, A., Jacob, G., Dams, 
A., Vater, A., et al. (2011). Dialectic behavioural therapy 
has an impact on self-concept clarity and facets of selfesteem 
in women with borderline personality disorder. 
Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy, 18(2), 148–158. 

Safer, D., Robinson, A., & Jo, B. (2010). Outcome from a randomized 
controlled trial of group therapy for binge eating 
disorder: Comparing dialectical behavior therapy adapted 
for binge eating to an active comparison group therapy. 
Behavior Therapy, 41, 106–120. 

Safer, D. L., & Joyce, E. E. (2011). Does rapid response to 
two group psychotherapies for binge eating disorder predict 
abstinence? Behaviour Research and Therapy,49(5), 
339–345. 

Safer, D. L., Telch, C. F., & Agras, W. S. (2001). Dialectical 
behavior therapy for bulimia nervosa. American Journal 
of Psychiatry, 158, 632–634. 

Salbach-Andrae, H., Bohnekamp, I., Bierbaum, T., Schneider, 
N., Thurn, C., Stiglmayr, C., et al. (2009). Dialektisch 
behaviorale therapie (DBT) und kognitiv behaviorale 
therapie (CBT) für Jugendliche mit Anorexia und Bulimia 
nervosa im Vergleich [Dialectical behavior therapy and 
cognitive behavior therapy for anorexia and bulimia nervosa 
among adolescents: A randomized, controlled trial 
with a waiting control group]. Kindheit und Entwicklung 
[Childhood and Development], 18(3), 180–190. 

Shearin, E. N., & Linehan, M. M. (1992). Patient–therapist 
ratings and relationship to progress in dialectical behavior 
therapy for borderline personality disorder. Behavior 
Therapy, 23, 730–741. 

Siever, L. J., & Davis, K. L. (1991). A psychobiological perspective 
on the personality disorders. American Journal of 
Psychiatry, 148, 1647–1658. 

Silk, K. R., Lee, S., Hill, E. M., & Lohr, N. E. (1995). Borderline 
personality disorder symptoms and severity of sexual 
abuse. American Journal of Psychiatry, 152, 1059–1064. 

Simpson, J. A., & Weiner, E. S. (1989). Oxford English Dictionary 
(2nd ed.) [Online]. Retrieved December 17, 2000, 
from www.oed.com. 

Soler, J., Pascual, J. C., Campins, J., Barrachina, J., Puigdemont, 
D., Alvarez, E., et al. (2005). Double-blind, 
placebo-controlled study of dialectical behavior thera


py plus olanzapine for borderline personality disorder. 
American Journal of Psychiatry, 162(6), 1221–1224. Erratum 
in American Journal of Psychiatry, 165(6), 777. 

Soler, J., Pascual, J. C., Tiana, T., Cebria, A., Barrachina, J., 
Campins, M. J., et al. (2009). Dialectical behaviour therapy 
skills training compared to standard group therapy in 
borderline personality disorder: A 3-month randomised 
controlled clinical trial. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 
47, 353–358. 

Soloff, P. H., & Chiapetta, L. (2012). Subtyping borderline 
personality disorder by suicidal behavior. Journal of Personality 
Disorders, 26(3), 468–480. 

Soloff, P. H., Lis, J. A., Kelly, T., Cornelius, J., & Ulrich, R. 
(1994). Risk factors for suicidal behavior in borderline 
personality disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 151, 
1316–1323. 

Stein, D. J., Simeon, D., Frenkel, M., Islam, M. N., & Hollander, 
E. (1995). An open trial of valproate in borderline 
personality disorder. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 56, 
506–510. 

Telch, C. F., Agras, W. S., & Linehan, M. M. (2001). Dialectical 
behavior therapy for binge eating disorder: A promising 
new treatment. Journal of Consulting and Clinical 
Psychology, 69, 1061–1065. 

Thorberg, F. A., & Lyvers, M. (2006). Negative mood regulation 
(NMR) expectancies, mood, and affect intensity 
among clients in substance disorder treatment facilities. 
Addictive Behaviors, 31(5), 811–820. 

Trupin, E. W., Stewart, D. G., Beach, B., & Boesky, L. (2002). 
Effectiveness of a dialectical behaviour therapy program 
for incarcerated female juvenile offenders. Child and Adolescent 
Mental Health, 7(3), 121–127. 

Turner, R. M. (2000). Naturalistic evaluation of dialectical 
behavioral therapy-oriented treatment for borderline personality 
disorder. Cognitive and Behavioral Practice, 7, 
413–419. 

van Asselt, D. I., Dirksen, C. D., Giesen-Bloo, J. H., van 
Dyck, R., Spinhoven, P., van Tilburg, W., et al. (2008). 
Out-patient psychotherapy for borderline personality disorder: 
Cost-effectiveness of schema-focused therapy v. 
transference-focused psychotherapy. British Journal of 
Psychiatry, 192, 450–457. 

Van den Bosch, L., Verheul, R., Schippers, G. M., & van den 
Brink, W. (2002). Dialectical behavior therapy of borderline 
patients with and without substance use problems: 
Implementation and long-term effects. Addictive Behaviors, 
2, 911–923. 

Van Dijk, S., Jeffrey, J., & Katz, M. R. (2013). A randomized, 
controlled, pilot study of dialectical behavior therapy 
skills in a psychoeducational group for individuals with 
bipolar disorder. Journal of Affective Disorders, 145(3), 
386–393. 

Verheul, R., van den Bosch, L. M. C., Koeter, M. W. J., de 
Ridder, M. A. J., Stijnen, T., & van den Brink, W. (2003). 


Borderline Personality Disorder 

Dialectical behaviour therapy for women with borderline 
personality disorder: 12-month, randomised clinical trial 
in The Netherlands. British Journal of Psychiatry, 182, 
135–140. 

Waltz, J., Dimeff, L. A., Koerner, K., Linehan, M. M., Taylor, 
L., & Miller, C. (2009). Feasibility of using video to 
teach a dialectical behavior therapy skill to clients with 
borderline personality disorder. Cognitive and Behavioral 
Practice, 16(2), 214–222. 

Wasser, T., Tyler, R., McIlhaney, K., Taplin, R., & Henderson, 
L. (2008). Effectiveness of dialectical behavior therapy 
(DBT) versus standard therapeutic milieu (STM) in a 
cohort of adolescents receiving residential treatment. Best 
Practices in Mental Health, 4(2), 114–125. 

Weinberg, I., Gunderson, J. G., Hennen, J., & Cutter, C. J., Jr. 
(2006). Manual assisted cognitive treatment for deliberate 
self-harm in borderline personality disorder patients. 
Journal of Personality Disorders, 20, 482–492. 

Wells, H. (1972). Alienation and dialectical logic. Kansas 
Journal of Sociology, 3, 7–32. 

Whitaker, C. A. (1975). Psychotherapy of the absurd: With 
a special emphasis on the psychotherapy of aggression. 
Family Process, 14, 1–16. 

Wolf, M., Ebner-Priemer, U., Schramm, E., Domsalla, M., 

Hautzinger, M., & Bohus, M. (2011). Maximizing skills 
acquisition in dialectical behavioral therapy with a CDROM-
based self-help program: Results from a pilot study. 
Psychopathology, 44(2), 133–135. 

Young, J. E., Klosko, J. S., & Weishaar, M. E. (2003). Schema 
therapy: A practitioner’s guide. New York: Guilford Press. 

Zanarini, M. C. (2003). Zanarini Rating Scale for Borderline 
Personality Disorder (ZAN-BPD): A continuous measure 
of DSM-IV borderline psychopathology. Journal of Personality 
Disorders, 17, 233–242. 

Zanarini, M. C., Frankenburg, F. R., & Parachini, E. A. 
(2004). A preliminary, randomized trial of fluoxetine, 
olanzapine, and the olanzapine–fluoxetine combination 
in women with borderline personality disorder. Journal of 
Clinical Psychiatry, 65, 903–907. 

Zanarini, M. C., Frankenburg, F. R., Sickel, A. E., & Yong, L. 
(1996). The Diagnostic Interview for DSM-IV Personality 
Disorders. Belmont, MA: McLean Hospital, Laboratory 
for the Study of Adult Development. 

Zanarini, M. C., Vujanovic, A., Parachini, E., Boulanger, J., 
Frankenburg, F., & Hennen, J. (2003). A screening measure 
for BPD: The McLean Screening Instrument for Borderline 
Personality Disorder. Journal of Personality Disorders, 
17, 568–573. 


CHaPter 11 

Bipolar Disorder 

DaviD J. Miklowitz 

our goal in this book is to present creative and important psychological treatments with 
empirical support. This chapter on bipolar disorder by David J. Miklowitz presents his 
innovative approach called family‑focused treatment (ffT), a treatment with substantial 
existing evidence for efficacy. Based on years of systematic research on psychological 
factors contributing to the onset and maintenance of bipolar disorder, this sophisticated 
family therapy approach targets the most important psychosocial factors linked to the 
disorder and associated with poor outcome (e.g., appropriate psychoeducation, communication 
enhancement training, and problem‑solving skills training). This chapter, and 
especially the very useful case study, also illustrates an essential linkage between psychological 
and pharmacological approaches in the successful treatment of this very severe 
form of psychopathology.—D. H. B. 

Bipolar disorder is one of the oldest and most reliably 
recognized psychiatric disorders. Our thinking about 
this disorder has evolved over the last 100 years, but 
the original descriptions (Kraepelin, 1921) of “manic– 
depressive insanity” greatly resemble our current conceptualizations. 
This chapter begins with a review of 
basic information about the disorder, its diagnosis, its 
longitudinal course, and drug treatment. This information 
about the illness is interesting in its own right, 
but it also provides the rationale for using psychosocial 
treatment as an adjunct to pharmacotherapy. The majority 
of the chapter describes a focused, time-limited, 
outpatient psychosocial treatment—family-focused 
treatment (FFT)—that comprises three interrelated 
modules: psychoeducation, communication enhancement 
training (CET), and problem-solving skills training 
(Miklowitz, 2008b; Miklowitz & Goldstein, 1997). 
It is designed for patients who have had a recent episode 
of mania or depression. 

the DiaGNosis of BiPolar DisorDer 

DSM‑5 Criteria 

The core characteristic of bipolar disorder is extreme 
affective dysregulation, or mood states that swing from 
extremely low (depression) to extremely high (mania). 
Patients in a manic episode have euphoric, elevated 
mood or irritable mood; behavioral activation (e.g., increased 
goal-directed activity, excessive involvement in 
high-risk activities, decreased need for sleep, increased 
talkativeness or pressure of speech); and altered cognitive 
functioning (grandiose delusions or inflated selfworth, 
flight of ideas or racing thoughts, distractibility)—
typically for more than 1 week. For the diagnosis 
of a manic episode, there must be evidence that the person’s 
psychosocial functioning (marital, occupational, 
or social) is disrupted, that hospitalization is required, 
or that psychotic features (e.g., grandiose delusions) are 

462 


Bipolar Disorder 

present (see the fifth edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical 
Manual of Mental Disorders [DSM-5; American 
Psychiatric Association, 2013]). 

A patient in a hypomanic episode shows many of the 
same symptoms, but the duration is typically shorter 
(i.e., 4 days or more). Hypomanic symptoms also do not 
bring about severe impairment in social or occupational 
functioning and are not associated with the need for 
hospitalization or with psychosis. However, the symptoms 
must reflect a real change in a person’s ordinary 
behavior—one that is observable by others. The distinction 
between mania and hypomania, which is really 
one of degree rather than type of illness, is difficult for 
clinicians to make reliably. Often the degree to which 
the behavioral activation affects a patient’s functioning 
is underestimated by the patient, who can see nothing 
but good in his/her behavior. A theme of this chapter is 
the value of including significant others (i.e., parents, 
spouses/partners, and siblings) in patients’ assessment 
and treatment. 

In previous editions of the DSM, patients could be 
diagnosed with bipolar I disorder on the basis of a single 
“mixed” episode, in which the criteria for a major 
depressive episode and a manic episode are met nearly 
every day for 1 or more weeks. This definition has 
caused considerable confusion among clinicians, who 
may ignore the requirement that episodes of both poles 
be syndromal and use the mixed designation to describe 
patients with a variety of co-occurring subsyndromal 
depressive and hypomanic or manic symptoms (Frank, 
2011). One large-scale population study found that 
“mixed hypomania” is particularly common among 
women with bipolar I or II disorder (Suppes et al., 
2005). These considerations have relevance for prognosis 
as well as diagnosis. Patients with major depressive 
disorder (MDD) who have two or more co-occurring 
manic symptoms have more similarity to patients with 
bipolar depression than to patients with MDD without 
manic symptoms on features such as age at onset, family 
history of bipolar disorder, functional impairment, 
suicide attempts, and long-term conversion to bipolar 
I disorder (e.g., Sato, Bottlender, Schröter, & Möller, 
2003; Fiedorowicz et al., 2011). 

In DSM-5 the mixed episode criteria are a much 
broader course specifier in manic, depressive, or hypomanic 
episodes. The specifier with mixed features 
is applied when three or more subthreshold symptoms 
from the opposite pole occur during a mood episode. 
However, there are unanswered questions about 
the treatment implications of this definition, such as 

whether depression with subthreshold mixed symptoms 
should be treated with mood stabilizers in conjunction 
with antidepressants (First, 2010). 

DSM-5 proceeds with the diagnosis of bipolar disorder 
somewhat differently than earlier DSM systems. 
First, the diagnostician determines whether the patient 
satisfies the cross-sectional criteria for a manic episode. 
If he/she does meet these criteria, the diagnosis of bipolar 
I disorder is applied. If the patient currently meets 
DSM-5 criteria for a major depressive episode, he/she 
is diagnosed as having bipolar disorder only if there is 
a past history of manic, mixed, or hypomanic episodes; 
otherwise, the diagnosis is likely to be MDD or another 
mood disorder, such as persistent depressive disorder. 
If the patient is in remission, there must be evidence 
of prior manic or mixed episodes. One implication of 
this rather complicated set of diagnostic rules is that 
a single manic (and in DSM-IV, a single mixed) episode, 
even in the absence of documentable depression, 
is enough to warrant the bipolar I diagnosis. The key 
word here is “documentable,” because patients often 
underreport their depression histories and reveal them 
only upon careful questioning. 

How Has the Diagnosis of Bipolar 
Disorder Changed? 

Every version of the DSM has brought changes in the 
way we think about bipolar disorder, and modifications 
are likely to continue as new editions are published. One 
consistent area of controversy has been the proposal to 
use separate criteria for child- and adolescent-onset bipolar 
illness. Manic and hypomanic episodes among 
children appear to be shorter than those in adults, with 
more polarity switches and longer subthreshold mixed 
states (Birmaher et al., 2009). Previously, DSM-IV 
(American Psychiatric Association, 1994) used the 
same criteria to diagnose mania in adults and children, 
despite the clear developmental differences in presentation 
(Leibenluft, Charney, Towbin, Bhangoo, & Pine, 
2003). However, DSM-5 includes a new category, disruptive 
mood dysregulation disorder, to characterize 
children with frequent and explosive temper outbursts 
and persistent irritability. The investigators who proposed 
this category believe it will reduce false-positive 
diagnoses of bipolar disorder in children (e.g., Leibenluft, 
2011), although not all agreed with this new disorder 
(e.g., Axelson, Birmaher, Findling, et al., 2011). 

DSM-5 distinguishes between bipolar I and bipolar 
II disorders. In the former, patients have fully syndro



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

mal manic episodes, but in bipolar II, patients must 
have had at least one major depressive episode and one 
hypomanic episode (in this chapter, the term “bipolar 
disorder” refers either to bipolar I or bipolar II disorder 
as defined in DSM-5, unless otherwise specified). 
DSM-5 also includes a course descriptor, “rapid cycling,” 
which appears to characterize between 13 and 
20% of patients (Calabrese, Fatemi, Kujawa, & Woyshville, 
1996). Rapid cycling is applied when patients 
have had four or more discrete major depressive, manic, 
or hypomanic episodes in a single year. The confusion 
in applying this course descriptor lies in the fact that it 
is difficult to tell when one episode has ended and another 
begins: If a patient quickly switches from mania 
to depression in a 48-hour period (what some refer to 
as “ultrarapid cycling”), is this truly a new episode or 
just a different presentation of the same episode (perhaps 
with mixed features)? Rapid cycling appears to 
be a transient state of the disorder and not a lifelong 
phenomenon (Coryell, Endicott, & Keller, 1992). 

Finally, DSM-5 deals with the thorny problem of 
patients with depression who develop manic or hypomanic 
episodes that are brought on by antidepressants 
or other activating drugs. Because of the effects 
of antidepressants on the serotonin, norepinephrine, 
and dopamine systems, there is the potential for these 
drugs to induce activation, particularly in a patient who 
is already biologically vulnerable to mood swings. If a 
patient has never had a manic episode but then develops 
one after taking an antidepressant, the likely diagnosis 
is a substance-induced mood disorder. The diagnosis 
of bipolar disorder is only then considered if the symptoms 
of mania preceded the antidepressant (a difficult 
historical distinction), or if the mania symptoms continue 
for at least a month after the antidepressant is 
withdrawn. Similar diagnostic considerations apply to 
patients who abuse drugs (e.g., cocaine, amphetamine) 
that are “psychotomimetics” and can induce manic-like 
states. 

Epidemiology, Comorbidity, 
and Differential Diagnosis 

Across studies, cultures, and age groups, bipolar I and 
bipolar II disorders affect at least 2% of the population. 
The National Comorbidity Survey Replication (NCS-
R), an epidemiological study of 9,282 U.S. adults using 
a lay-administrator structured diagnostic interview, reported 
lifetime prevalence rates of 1.0% for bipolar I 
disorder, 1.1% for bipolar II disorder, and 2.4% for sub


threshold bipolar illness (e.g., bipolar disorder not otherwise 
specified or cyclothymic disorder; Merikangas 
et al., 2007). In the international World Health Organization 
World Mental Health Survey Initiative, a study 
of 61,392 adults in 11 countries that used the same diagnostic 
instrument, lower lifetime prevalence rates were 
reported: 0.6% for bipolar I disorder, 0.4% for bipolar 
II disorder, and 1.4% for subthreshold bipolar disorder 
(Merikangas et al., 2011). 

In a community sample of adolescents (ages 13–18), 
2.5% met lifetime DSM-IV criteria for bipolar I or 
II disorder, with the prevalence increasing with age 
(Merikangas et al., 2012). Interestingly, 1.7% of adolescents 
met DSM-IV criteria for a manic episode without 
depression. Finally, in a meta-analysis of 12 studies 
across the world involving a total of 16,222 youth 
between ages 7 and 21, the rate of bipolar disorder was 
1.8%, and did not differ across countries (Van Meter, 
Moreira, & Youngstrom, 2011). 

Bipolar disorder virtually always co-occurs with 
other conditions, some of which become the focus of 
immediate treatment. The disorders with which bipolar 
disorder is comorbid have the common underpinning of 
affective dysregulation. When 1-year prevalence rates 
were considered in the NCS-R, the highest correlations 
were observed between mania/hypomania and anxiety 
disorders (62.9%), followed by behavior disorders 
(attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder [ADHD] and 
oppositional defiant disorder; 44.8%) and substance use 
disorders (36.8%) (Merikangas et al., 2007). 

Some studies have found that patients with pediatric 
onset have more comorbid disorders than patients with 
adult onset patients (Leverich et al., 2007). The comorbidity 
of bipolar disorder and ADHD in children is between 
60 and 90%, even when overlapping symptoms 
are not considered (Kim & Miklowitz, 2002). Risk for 
substance use disorders is five times greater in adolescents 
with bipolar disorder than in healthy adolescents 
(Wilens et al., 2004). Comorbidity with anxiety disorders 
is approximately 44% (Masi et al., 2012; Sala et 
al., 2010). Interestingly, anxiety disorders are often first 
diagnosed in children of parents with bipolar disorder 
and may represent the first signs of major mood illness 
(Henin et al., 2005). 

The distinction between bipolar disorder and personality 
disorders is especially difficult. Notably, the 
hallmark of borderline personality disorder is affective 
instability. Akiskal (1996) has argued that what is 
commonly seen by clinicians as personality pathology 
is actually undertreated subsyndromal mood disorder. 


Bipolar Disorder 

When studies of the overlap of bipolar disorder and 
personality disorders are done, the estimates of comorbidity 
are actually quite conservative. For example, 
George, Miklowitz, Richards, Simoneau, and Taylor 
(2003) found that only 29% of patients with bipolar 
disorder meet the diagnostic criteria for personality 
disorders during a period of remission. Furthermore, 
the comorbid personality disorder diagnosis was not 
always borderline personality disorder and was often 
a disorder from cluster C (e.g., avoidant or dependent 
personality disorder). 

The boundaries between bipolar and unipolar illness 
are sometimes difficult to draw. Depressions in 
bipolar and unipolar disorders may look quite similar, 
but, on average, bipolar depression has a younger 
age of onset, more short-term mood variability, and is 
more treatment-resistant than MDD (Cuellar, Johnson, 
& Winters, 2005). In the National Epidemiologic Survey 
on Alcohol and Related Conditions (N = 13,048), 
patients with bipolar depression endorsed suicidal ideation 
and psychomotor disturbance more often than 
did patients with unipolar depression, and patients 
with unipolar depression were somewhat more likely 
to endorse fatigue (Weinstock, Strong, Uebelacker, & 
Miller, 2009). Thus, the differences between bipolar 
and unipolar depression are not large, and past history 
of mania or hypomania (or family history of mania in a 
patient who has not had a manic episode) may provide 
more information for the differential diagnosis. 

Even more complicated is the distinction between 
agitated depression of the unipolar type and mixed 
mania of the bipolar type; both are characterized by 
sadness and a highly anxious, restless, activated state. 
Goldberg and Kocsis (1999) recommend that clinicians 
attempting to make these distinctions place emphasis 
on attributes such as goal-drivenness and undiminished 
energy (despite lack of sleep), both of which tip 
the scales toward bipolar disorder rather than unipolar 
depressive illness. 

The distinction between bipolar disorder and schizophrenia 
can also be a surprisingly difficult clinical judgment. 
When a patient who has schizophrenia presents 
with a psychotic episode, he/she can appear acutely activated, 
grandiose in thinking and actions, and elated or 
depressed. In conditions once thought to be etiologically 
distinct, more and more studies are finding a significant 
degree of genetic overlap between bipolar disorder 
and schizophrenia or other psychotic conditions (Berrettini, 
2003). For example, a recent genomewide association 
study found significant overlap in gene variants 

among patients with schizophrenia and patients with 
bipolar disorder who had mood-incongruent psychotic 
features (e.g., delusions or hallucinations that have no 
clear content related to sadness or elation) (Goes et al., 
2012). 

DSM-5 makes a distinction between schizoaffective 
disorder and major mood disorders with psychotic 
features. In schizoaffective disorder, delusions and hallucinations 
have been present for at least 2 weeks, in 
the absence of prominent affective symptoms. In major 
mood disorders, psychotic symptoms occur only during 
periods of significant mood disturbance. A 10-year 
follow-up of patients with schizophrenia, schizoaffective 
disorders, and major affective disorders (both 
bipolar and unipolar) found that “mood-incongruent” 
delusions and hallucinations (i.e., those whose content 
does not relate to feelings of grandiosity and elation 
or, alternatively, feelings of worthlessness) are a poor 
prognostic sign across diagnoses (Harrow, Grossman, 
Herbener, & Davies, 2000). Harrow and colleagues 
(2000) argue for a dimensional view of schizoaffective 
disorder, with some patients on the psychotic end and 
others on the mood end of the spectrum. 

DSM-5 also describes a subsyndromal or subaffective 
condition: cyclothymic disorder. Patients with cyclothymic 
disorder alternate between periods of hypomanic 
symptoms and brief periods of depression that 
fall short of the criteria for major depressive illness. 
As soon as the person develops a full manic, mixed, 
or depressive episode, the diagnosis of bipolar I or II 
disorder is given. Again, these distinctions really concern 
the degree and duration of symptoms rather than 
their form. In my own experience, clinicians are prone 
to “push” patients with cyclothymia into the bipolar II 
category, especially if they feel that the patients are 
not reliable in their historical reporting. Sometimes it 
is better to observe the mood lability of a patient over 
time than attempt to distinguish cyclothymic disorder 
and bipolar disorder cross-sectionally. 

DruG treatMeNt aND the course 
of BiPolar DisorDer 

Standard Pharmacotherapy 

The course of bipolar illness (its pattern of relapsing 
and remitting over time) is best considered with reference 
to the drug treatments that help stabilize patients 
and allow most to function in the community. In the 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

prepharmacological era (i.e., prior to 1960), patients 
were hospitalized for years at a time (Cutler & Post, 
1982). Nowadays, the availability of mood stabilizers 
such as lithium carbonate, the anticonvulsants (e.g., divalproex 
sodium [Depakote], lamotrigine [Lamictal], 
and other agents), and the atypical antipsychotics (e.g., 
olanzapine [Zyprexa], quetiapine [Seroquel], risperidone 
[Risperdal], ziprasidone [Geodon], or aripiprazole 
[Abilify]) has done much to ameliorate the course 
of bipolar illness (Goldberg, 2004; Malhi, Adams, & 
Berk, 2009). Some of these drugs not only control the 
acute episodes of the illness but also have “prophylactic 
value,” which means that they help prevent future episodes 
or minimize the duration or severity of episodes 
that do occur. 

Most psychiatrists describe three phases of drug 
treatment: an “acute phase,” in which the goal is to control 
the most severe symptoms of the manic, mixed, or 
depressive disorder; a “stabilization phase,” in which the 
goal is to help the patient recover fully from the acute 
phase, which often means treating residual symptoms 
(e.g., mild depression) or levels of social–occupational 
impairment; and a “maintenance phase,” in which the 
goal is to prevent recurrences and continue to treat residual 
symptoms. The drugs recommended for bipolar 
disorder vary according to the phase of treatment. During 
the acute and stabilization phases, an antipsychotic 
medication may accompany a mood stabilizer. An antidepressant 
may be recommended after a manic episode 
has stabilized if a patient has ongoing, residual depression 
symptoms. These phases of treatment are also relevant 
to the psychosocial–psychotherapeutic treatment 
of bipolar disorder, which I discuss later. 

Symptomatic Outcome 

If drug treatment is so effective, then why do we need 
psychosocial treatment? The problem that consistently 
arises in the drug treatment of bipolar disorder is 
“breakthrough episodes.” With lithium or anticonvulsant 
treatment, the rate of relapse over 1 year is about 
37% (Gitlin, Swendsen, Heller, & Hammen, 1995). In 
1,469 adults with bipolar I and II disorders, 49% had 
recurrences over 1 year; twice as many of these recurrences 
were of depressive (rather than manic or hypomanic) 
episodes. In a 12.8-year follow-up of 146 adult 
patients with bipolar I disorder, patients had syndromal 
or subsyndromal depressive symptoms for about 32% 
of the weeks of their lives, manic or hypomanic symp


toms for 9%, and mixed or cycling symptoms states for 
6%; patients were in remission only about half of the 
time (Judd et al., 2002). 

Keck and colleagues (1998) examined the 12-month 
course of bipolar disorder among 134 patients who 
began in an acute manic or mixed episode. The majority 
of the patients (N = 104) were treated with mood 
stabilizers, with or without accompanying antipsychotics 
or antidepressants. The investigators made a distinction 
among “syndromic recovery,” in which patients no 
longer met the DSM criteria for a manic, mixed, or 
depressive episode for at least 8 weeks; “symptomatic 
recovery,” a tougher criterion by which patients had 
to have minimal or no mood disorder symptoms for 8 
weeks; and “functional recovery,” which required that 
patients regain their premorbid (preillness) level of employment, 
friendships, interests, and independent living 
status. Of the 106 patients who completed the study, 
51 (48%) achieved syndromic recovery by 12-month 
follow-up. Only 28 (26%) achieved symptomatic recovery, 
and 25 (24%) reached functional recovery at 
follow-up. Predictors of poor outcome included low 
socioeconomic status, medication noncompliance, and 
longer duration of illness. 

Social–Occupational Functioning 

Patients with bipolar disorder experience significant 
impairment in work, social, and family functioning, 
and their chances of early illness recurrence increase 
dramatically when they have subsyndromal depressive 
symptoms (Altshuler et al., 2006; Gitlin, Mintz, 
Sokolski, Hammen, & Altshuler, 2011). Additionally, 
patients with persisting depressive symptoms often 
have cognitive impairment, which strongly affects social 
and occupational functioning (Altshuler, Bearden, 
Green, van Gorp, & Mintz, 2008). A study of 253 bipolar 
I and II patients revealed that only about 33% 
of the patients worked full time, and only 9% worked 
part time outside of the home; 57% of patients reported 
being unable to work or able to work only in protected 
settings (Suppes et al., 2001). 

The relationship between mood symptoms and functioning 
appears to be bidirectional: Residual depressive 
symptoms are clearly associated with poorer social and 
occupational functioning (e.g., Gitlin et al., 2011), but 
other studies have shown that poor social functioning 
predicts a shorter time to mood disorder relapse (e.g., 
Weinstock & Miller, 2008). 


Bipolar Disorder 

Medication Nonadherence 

Part of the reason why patients with bipolar disorder 
have so many “breakthrough episodes” is drug nonadherence. 
In one review, Colom, Vieta, Tacchi, Sanchez-
Moreno, and Scott (2005) estimated that at least 60% 
of patients with bipolar disorder discontinue their 
medications at some point in their lives. Between 40 
and 60% are partially or fully nonadherent in the year 
after their first hospitalization for a manic or mixed 
episode (Strakowski et al., 1998). One study of a large 
health maintenance organization found that patients 
took lithium for an average of only 76 days (Johnson 
& McFarland, 1996). Nonadherence has considerable 
implications for the course of the disorder: When patients 
stop their medications suddenly, they are at much 
higher risk for relapse or suicide (Baldessarini, Tondo, 
& Hennen, 2003). 

The reasons that patients stop taking mood stabilizers 
are varied, and include side effects, lack of insight 
into the illness, younger age, lower socioeconomic 
status, lack of information about medications, negative 
feelings about having one’s moods controlled by 
a medication, missing high periods, recent hospitalizations, 
and low family support (Colom, Vieta, Tacchi, et 
al., 2005). Some of these issues are amenable to modification 
through adjusting dosages or substituting one 
agent for another. Other problems related to nonadherence 
can be addressed in adjunctive psychotherapy. 

Why Psychotherapy? 

What is the role of psychosocial treatment in a disorder 
with such a heavy biological and genetic basis? There 
is little doubt that medication is the first-line treatment 
for bipolar disorder. The evidence that lithium, the anticonvulsants, 
and the atypical antipsychotics reduce 
relapse rates and improve functioning is substantial. 
But can we do better? An optimal and perhaps overly 
optimistic view of the outcome of patients with bipolar 
disorder would include symptom stability for extended 
periods, minimal disruptions in social functioning after 
episodes, and having consistent work and family lives. 
Indeed, these outcomes are highly valued by patients, 
who often devise their own self-management strategies 
to cope with the illness (Murray et al., 2011). 

The roles of adjunctive psychotherapy can include 
teaching skills for symptom management, augmenting 
social and occupational role functioning, and keeping 

patients adherent to their drug regimens. Implicit in 
this objective is that the physiology and psychology of 
major psychiatric disorders are not fully separable. We 
know that changes in neural function (e.g., as revealed 
in functional magnetic resonance imaging scans) often 
occur among patients who respond to psychotherapy 
(e.g., Kumari et al., 2011). The time has come to think 
about psychotherapy and medication as working synergistically 
in the major mood disorders. 

The strongest argument for including psychotherapy 
in an outpatient treatment program is to help patients to 
cope with stress triggers. As noted in the next section, 
certain forms of life events and family tensions are risk 
factors in the course of bipolar disorder. Psychotherapy 
can target these factors and teach patients adaptive 
coping mechanisms, which can then be brought to bear 
during periods of wellness to help stave off the likelihood 
of a future relapse. 

a vulNeraBility–stress MoDel 
of recurreNces 

Implicit in the notion that psychotherapy would be 
helpful to a patient with bipolar disorder is the notion 
that stress plays a role in eliciting symptoms of mood 
disorder. What is the evidence for this view? What are 
the targets for psychosocial intervention? 

Life Events and Social Rhythms 

Life events are consistently associated with relapses of 
bipolar depression, and in some studies, of mania as 
well (Johnson, 2005a). Two major pathways have been 
proposed for the association of life events and mood 
relapses. The first of these, the social rhythm stability 
hypothesis (Ehlers, Kupfer, Frank, & Monk, 1993), 
posits that major life events disrupt daily rhythms (i.e., 
when one wakes, eats, exercises, socializes, works, and 
sleeps) in mood disorders. Life events can act as zeitstorers, 
which disrupt established social and circadian 
rhythms (e.g., the production of neuroendocrines as a 
function of the time of day). For example, a previously 
unemployed patient who gets a job with constantly 
shifting work hours is forced to adopt a new pattern 
of daily routines, which may include changes in sleep– 
wake habits. Major events can also result in the loss 
of social zeitgebers—people or events that help maintain 
the stability of rhythms. For example, a spouse or 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

partner helps to maintain a person on predictable sleep 
schedules. A relationship separation, in addition to 
being a significant emotional event, results in the loss 
of this human timekeeper. 

Patients with bipolar disorder are exquisitely sensitive 
to even minor changes in sleep–wake habits. 
Studies by Malkoff-Schwartz and colleagues (1998, 
2000) have revealed that manic episodes are often precipitated 
by life events that change sleep–wake habits 
(e.g., changing time zones due to air travel). However, 
depressive episodes were not differentially associated 
with rhythm-disruptive life events. One of the clinical 
implications of these findings is that if patients can be 
taught to regularize their social rhythms, especially 
in the face of life events that normally disrupt those 
rhythms, then the outcome of bipolar disorder should 
be improved. Thus, variability in the sleep–wake cycle 
is a target for treatment. This is a central tenet of interpersonal 
and social rhythm therapy (IPSRT; Frank, 
2005), as discussed below. 

Life Events, Goal Dysregulation, and Mania 

Across more than 12 studies, people with a history of 
mania and students who are vulnerable to mania have 
described themselves as more likely to react with strong 
emotions to reward (Johnson, Edge, Holmes, & Carver, 
2012). Self-reported reward sensitivity has been found 
to predict a more severe course of mania among those 
with bipolar I disorder (Meyer, Johnson, & Winters, 
2001; Salavert et al., 2007), and of conversion from bipolar 
spectrum disorder to bipolar II or I disorder in 
high-risk college students (Alloy et al., 2012). A related 
construct, heightened ambition, is associated with a 
more severe course of mania among patients with bipolar 
I disorder (Johnson et al., 2012). Impulsive responding, 
in which people pursue rewards without awareness 
of potential negative consequences, becomes elevated 
during the escalation to mania (Swann, Dougherty, 
Pazzaglia, Pham, & Moeller, 2004). 

Sheri Johnson and colleagues (2000) hypothesize 
that excess reward sensitivity may heighten reactivity 
to successes, such that manic symptoms would be more 
likely after life events involving goal attainment (e.g., 
getting a promotion). Goal attainment may increase 
confidence, which then fuels increased goal engagement 
and accelerates the development of manic symptoms 
(Johnson, 2005b). In two longitudinal studies of 
patients with bipolar I disorder, goal-attainment life 
events predicted increases in manic symptoms but not 

depressive symptoms, even after excluding life events 
that could have been caused by manic symptoms (e.g., 
job loss; Johnson et al., 2000, 2008). 

Family Stress 

Family conflicts are also a breeding ground for increased 
cycling of bipolar disorder. One method of 
measuring family stress is to evaluate a family’s level 
of “expressed emotion” (EE). In this procedure, a researcher 
administers the Camberwell Family Interview 
(Vaughn & Leff, 1976) to a family member (parent, 
spouse/partner, or sibling) for approximately 1 hour to 
assess the relative’s reactions to the patient’s psychiatric 
disorder, with particular emphasis on a recent illness 
episode. Later, a trained judge evaluates tapes of these 
interviews on three primary dimensions: critical comments 
(e.g., “When I talk to him, I get upset that he just 
shuts down. It’s like there’s no one there!”); hostility, 
or personal, generalized criticism of the patient (e.g., “I 
like nothing about him”); and emotional overinvolvement, 
or the tendency to be overconcerned, overprotective, 
or to use inordinately self-sacrificing behaviors 
in the patient’s care (e.g., “I don’t invite people to the 
house because Allen [son] doesn’t like it”). Family 
members who score high on one or more of these dimensions 
are called “high-EE”; those who do not are 
called “low-EE.” 

EE is a well-established predictor of the course of 
schizophrenia. In Butzlaff and Hooley’s (1998) metaanalysis 
of 28 longitudinal studies of EE in schizophrenia, 
23 studies replicated the same core finding: 
Patients who return after an illness episode to high-EE 
families are two to three times more likely to relapse 
in 9-month to 1-year prospective follow-ups than those 
returning to low-EE families. Several studies have 
documented a link between high-EE families and relapse 
among patients with bipolar disorder followed either 
prospectively or retrospectively (Honig, Hofman, 
Rozendaal, & Dingemanns, 1997; Miklowitz, Goldstein, 
Nuechterlein, Snyder, & Mintz, 1988; O’Connell, 
Mayo, Flatow, Cuthbertson, & O’Brien, 1991; Priebe, 
Wildgrube, & Muller-Oerlinghausen, 1989; Yan, Hammen, 
Cohen, Daley, & Henry, 2004). A 2-year study of 
family EE among bipolar adolescents undergoing family 
treatment also replicated this longitudinal association 
(Miklowitz, Biuckians, & Richards, 2006). 

On first examination, one might conclude that patients 
with bipolar disorder are sensitive to stress in the 
family milieu, and that levels of EE elicit an underly



Bipolar Disorder 

ing biological vulnerability. But the relationship is far 
from simple. First, it appears that the high-EE relatives 
of patients with bipolar illness, unipolar illness, 
or schizophrenia are more likely than low-EE relatives 
to interpret the patients’ negative problem behaviors as 
controllable by the patients (see, e.g., Hooley & Licht, 
1997; Weisman, Lopez, Karno, & Jenkins, 1993; Wendel, 
Miklowitz, Richards, & George, 2000). Second, 
relatives and patients coping with bipolar disorder are 
often locked into verbally aggressive, negative cycles of 
face-to-face interaction. Simoneau, Miklowitz, and Saleem 
(1998) found that high-EE relatives of patients with 
bipolar disorder were more negative than low-EE relatives 
during face-to-face problem-solving interactions. 
The relatives and patients in high-EE families were also 
more likely to engage in counterproductive “attack– 
counterattack” cycles. Often the patients were provocateurs 
in these interchanges; they were not the “victims” 
of verbally aggressive or punitive relatives (Miklowitz, 
Wendel, & Simoneau, 1998; Simoneau et al., 1998). 

Clearly, a psychosocial treatment program should 
consider aspects of the family’s affective environment—
such as high-EE attitudes in relatives or the 
negative interchanges that characterize relative–patient 
communication—to be targets for intervention. But 
does one attempt to change these attitudes and interaction 
patterns directly, or instead make an “end run” 
around them? Family members coping with a spouse/ 
partner, offspring, or sibling who has bipolar disorder 
are understandably quite angry, and it makes little 
sense to tell them they should not be. Others feel that 
their overprotective behavior is more than warranted 
by the situation. 

In developing FFT, my associates and I concluded 
that at least one component of dealing with these attitudes 
and transaction patterns is psychoeducation, 
which involves the provision of information to patients 
and family members about the disorder and its 
manifestations. As discussed earlier, relatives (parents, 
spouses, or siblings) need to realize that at least some 
proportion of the patient’s aversive behaviors (e.g., irritability, 
aggression, inability to work, or low productivity) 
can be attributed to a biochemically driven illness 
state. This may seem obvious to us as clinicians, but to 
family members who deal with the patient on a day-today 
basis, it is easy to attribute aversive behaviors to 
personality factors or laziness, or to believe that “He/ 
she is doing this to hurt me.” In parallel, patients need 
to become more cognizant of the way they provoke 
anger and resentment in family members. 

Negative face-to-face interactions cannot be eradicated, 
but they can be made more productive through 
the techniques of communication and problem-solving 
skills training. Thus, families or couples can be taught 
to stick with one problem topic rather than trying to 
solve many at a time, or to use listening skills to avoid 
counterproductive attack–counterattack cycles. Later 
in this chapter, I explain these methods with reference 
to a difficult treatment case. 

treatMeNt outcoMe stuDies 

Controlled psychotherapy outcome studies are new 
to the field of bipolar disorder and certainly have not 
kept pace with research on drug treatment. This section 
describes several randomized controlled trials (RCTs) 
of individual and family/marital interventions. More 
thorough reviews of the studies in this area are available 
(Geddes & Miklowitz, 2013; Miklowitz & Scott, 
2009). 

Individual Therapy 

Two models of individual therapy deserve emphasis 
here. Cognitive-behavioral models focus on risk factors 
for relapse, including medication nonadherence, 
excessive risk taking (or reward overestimation) prior 
to mania, and behavioral inactivity during depression. 
Lam, Hayward, Watkins, Wright, and Sham (2005; 
Lam et al., 2003) examined a 6-month, 12- to 18-session 
cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) model with 
drug treatment versus drug treatment alone (N = 103). 
Patients had been in remission for at least 6 months but 
had had at least three episodes in the past 5 years. At a 
1-year follow-up, 44% of patients in CBT had relapsed 
compared with 75% of the patients who received drug 
treatment alone. Twelve to 30 months after treatment, 
CBT did not prevent relapse relative to drug treatment 
alone, but it did continue to show a positive influence on 
mood and days spent in episodes. The effects on depression 
were more significant than the effects on mania. 

A multicenter effectiveness trial of CBT in the United 
Kingdom (N = 253) indicated that not all subpopulations 
of patients with bipolar disorder are equally likely 
to benefit from CBT (Scott et al., 2006). The study 
compared 22 sessions of CBT plus pharmacotherapy to 
treatment as usual (TAU) plus pharmacotherapy. The 
patients had been in a variety of symptomatic states before 
study entry. No effects were found for CBT on time 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

to recurrence. A post hoc analysis revealed that patients 
with less than 12 prior episodes had fewer recurrences 
in CBT than in TAU. However, patients with 12 or more 
episodes were more likely to have recurrences in CBT 
than in TAU. The authors concluded that CBT is most 
applicable to patients in the early stages of their disorder 
or in those whose course is less recurrent. However, 
a “metaregression” of six RCTs concluded that there 
was no evidence that relapses were moderated by number 
of prior episodes (Lam, Burbeck, Wright, & Pilling, 
2009). 

Cognitive rehabilitation, a form of behavioral treatment 
that emphasizes attention, concentration, and 
memory strategies, may be a useful adjunct to pharmacotherapy 
for patients with bipolar disorder who 
have cognitive impairment. In an 18-case open trial, 
Deckersbach and colleagues (2010) found that after 14 
sessions of treatment, patients had improvements in depressive 
symptoms, occupational functioning, and executive 
functioning compared to their baselines. Randomized 
trials of cognitive rehabilitation in patients 
with neuropsychological impairments are warranted. 

Ellen Frank and colleagues (2005) investigated the 
efficacy of IPSRT—a treatment that includes not only 
the core elements of Klerman, Weissman, Rounsaville, 
and Chevron’s (1984) model of interpersonal psychotherapy 
for depression but also a component in which 
patients self-regulate their daily routines and sleep– 
wake cycles. Patients with a recent mood episode were 
randomly assigned to either 45-minute IPSRT sessions 
and mood-stabilizing medications or an active clinical 
management intervention, also with medications. The 
latter comprised 20-minute sessions with a psychotherapist 
who focused on drug side effects and symptom 
management. Randomization was done first during an 
acute phase of treatment, with sessions held weekly; 
and again at the beginning of a preventive, maintenance 
phase of treatment, with sessions held biweekly 
or monthly for up to 2 years. Patients who received 
IPSRT in the acute phase had longer intervals prior 
to recurrences in the maintenance phase than patients 
who received clinical management in the acute phase. 
IPSRT was most effective in delaying recurrences in 
the maintenance phase among patients who succeeded 
in stabilizing their daily routines and sleep–wake cycles 
during the acute phase (Frank et al., 2005). IPSRT 
also had a positive impact on vocational functioning 
(Frank et al., 2008). Thus, consistency of routines may 
protect against a worsening course of the disorder and 
enhance functioning. 

Group Psychoeducation 

The effects of group psychoeducation have been documented 
in several large-scale RCTs, including one at a 
Veterans Administration outpatient clinic (Bauer et al., 
2006) and another at a health maintenance organization 
(Simon, Ludman, Bauer, Unutzer, & Operskalski, 
2006). In both studies, psychoeducation groups were 
embedded in larger systems of care, including patient 
monitoring by a nurse care manager and monitoring 
of the physician’s adherence to treatment guidelines. 
These systematic care models were shown to be highly 
effective in improving illness course and functioning 
compared to usual care for bipolar patients in these settings. 


An RCT focused on the combination of pharmacotherapy 
and group psychoeducation was undertaken 
at the University of Barcelona (Colom et al., 2003). 
A total of 120 remitted patients with bipolar disorder 
who were receiving pharmacological treatment were 
allocated to (1) 21 sessions of structured group psychoeducation 
or (2) 21 sessions of an unstructured support 
group, both administered by psychologists. Psychoeducation 
sessions included lectures, role play, discussions 
of beliefs and attitudes, behavioral interventions and 
between-session homework assignments. Over 2 years, 
individuals who received group psychoeducation were 
significantly more likely than those allocated to the 
unstructured group to show lower relapse and hospitalization 
rates and higher, more stable plasma lithium 
levels (Colom et al., 2003; Colom, Vieta, Sanchez-
Moreno, et al., 2005). Moreover, a 5.5-year follow-up 
of this sample revealed that the gains associated with 
group psychoeducation were sustained (Colom et al., 
2009). Thus, group psychoeducation appears to be a 
cost-effective adjunct to pharmacotherapy for bipolar 
patients who begin in remission. 

Family Therapy 

There are now several studies of family interventions 
as adjuncts to medication for patients with bipolar 
disorder. Here, I focus on trials published after 2000; 
the reader is referred to more comprehensive reviews 
(Miklowitz, 2008a; Miklowitz & Scott, 2009) for coverage 
of earlier family and marital studies. 

Five randomized trials have been completed on FFT. 
Two of these were conducted with adults recruited 
from hospital settings following an acute episode, one 
at the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA; 


Bipolar Disorder 

Rea et al., 2003) and one at the University of Colorado 
(Miklowitz, George, Richards, Simoneau, & Suddath, 
2003). One study was conducted in the context of the 
Systematic Treatment Enhancement Program for Bipolar 
Disorder (STEP-BD; Miklowitz et al., 2007b), 
which examined three intensive psychotherapies (FFT, 
IPSRT or CBT) in comparison with a control condition 
for patients with bipolar depression. Two RCTs have 
been conducted with pediatric-onset patients, one involving 
adolescents with bipolar disorder (Miklowitz et 
al., 2008) and the other with symptomatic children and 
adolescents (ages 9–17) who were genetically at risk for 
bipolar disorder (Miklowitz et al., 2013). These studies 
are examined in detail below. 

The UCLA and Colorado Studies 

These studies each examined a 9-month, 21-session 
FFT intervention that comprised psychoeducation, 
communication enhancement training, and problemsolving 
training. Participants were patients and their 
parents or spouses. Patients were recruited during an 
index episode of bipolar disorder and maintained on 
mood-stabilizing medications, with or without antipsychotic 
or antidepressive agents. However, the studies 
differed in an important respect: At Colorado, the 
comparison “crisis management” group received two 
sessions of family education and individual crisis sessions, 
as needed, over 9 months. In the UCLA study, 
patients in the comparison group received an individual 
case management and problem-solving intervention 
that was of similar intensity (21 sessions) to the FFT 
intervention. 

Despite these design differences, the results that 
emerged from the Colorado and UCLA studies were 
quite similar. In the Colorado study (Miklowitz et al., 
2003), FFT and medication led to lower frequencies 
of relapses and longer delays prior to relapses over a 
2-year period than did crisis management and medication. 
FFT was also associated with more improvement 
in depression and mania symptoms—effects that did 
not appear until the 9- and 12-month follow-ups but 
continued for the full 24 months of follow-up. In the 
UCLA study (Rea et al., 2003), the effects of FFT were 
seen on hospitalization rates over a 2-year follow-up. 
The effects of FFT on time to relapse were not seen in 
the first year but did appear in the second year. Notably, 
rates of rehospitalization in the 1- to 2-year period 
following the 9-month treatment were 12% in the FFT 
group and 60% in the individual therapy group; for re


lapse, the rates were 28% and 60%, respectively. Results 
of both studies suggest that there may be a delayed 
effect of FFT: Patients and family members may need 
to “absorb” the treatment and incorporate the education 
and skills training into their day-to-day lives before it 
has ameliorative effects on the illness. 

This latter point was clarified further by Simoneau, 
Miklowitz, Richards, Saleem, and George (1999), who 
examined family interaction transcripts obtained in the 
Colorado study before and after FFT or crisis management 
treatment. Families (patients with their parents or 
spouses) participated in interactional assessments that 
comprised 10-minute problem-solving discussions that 
were transcribed and coded via the Category System 
for Coding Partner Interactions (Hahlweg et al., 1989). 
Forty-four families returned at 1 year for the same assessment, 
after the FFT or crisis management protocol 
had been completed. Interestingly, at the posttreatment 
(1 year) interactional assessments, patients in FFT and 
those in crisis management could not be distinguished 
on the basis of frequency of negative interactional behaviors 
(e.g., criticisms). But there were clear differences 
at posttreatment in positive interactional behaviors, 
particularly in the nonverbal sphere. After FFT, 
patients and relatives were more likely to smile at each 
other, nod when others were speaking, and lean toward 
each other when speaking. Moreover, the degree to 
which patients improved in their nonverbal interactional 
behavior over the course of psychosocial treatment 
was correlated with their degree of symptom improvement 
over the year of treatment. 

FFT appeared to have ameliorated certain tensions 
within the family environments. Future studies using 
multiple, time-lagged assessments of family interaction 
and patients’ symptoms would help to disentangle 
the directional relationship between improvements in 
family communication and patients’ symptomatic outcomes. 


The STEP-BD Study 

STEP-BD examined the effectiveness of treatment 
with mood stabilizers in combination with psychosocial 
treatments in 15 participating sites in the United 
States (Miklowitz et al., 2007b). Patients with bipolar 
disorder in a depressive episode (N = 293) were randomly 
assigned to mood-stabilizing medications—with 
or without antidepressants—and 30 sessions of FFT, 
IPSRT, CBT, or collaborative care (CC), a three-session 
psychoeducational treatment. Patients assigned to any 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

intensive psychotherapy had higher recovery rates over 
1 year and recovered an average of 110 days faster than 
patients in CC. Patients in intensive therapy were also 
more likely to remain stable in mood over the yearlong 
study. In FFT, 77% of the patients recovered by 1 year; 
in interpersonal therapy, 65%; and in CBT, 60%. In the 
CC condition, 52% recovered. The differences between 
the intensive modalities did not reach statistical significance. 
It is worth noting that in STEP-BD, there was no 
evidence that patients randomly assigned to mood stabilizers 
with adjunctive antidepressants recovered any 
more rapidly from depression than patients assigned to 
mood stabilizers with adjunctive placebo (Sachs et al., 
2007). 

STEP-BD, one of the largest randomized treatment 
studies for bipolar disorder, suggests that psychotherapy 
is an essential component of the effort to stabilize 
patients with bipolar disorder in a depressive episode. 
When clinicians are treating bipolar, depressed patients 
with mood stabilizers or atypical antipsychotics, adding 
an intensive therapy may be associated with more 
rapid recovery than adding an antidepressant (Miklowitz 
et al., 2007a, 2007b). The common ingredients of 
intensive treatments—such as teaching strategies to 
manage mood, identifying and intervening early with 
prodromal symptoms, enhancing patients’ compliance 
with medications, and working toward resolution of key 
interpersonal or family problems—may contribute to 
more rapid recoveries. FFT proved to be a particularly 
potent treatment in this study, although its limitations 
also became apparent: Only 54% of the patients assessed 
for the study had families who were accessible 
and willing to participate in treatment. 

Family Psychoeducation in Early‑Onset 
Bipolar Disorder 

More recent applications of family psychoeducation 
have focused on patients with juvenile-onset bipolar 
disorder, who most frequently live with or are strongly 
connected with their families of origin. FFT for adolescents 
(FFT-A; Miklowitz et al., 2004) uses the same 
21-session structure, adapted to the developmental needs 
of this age group (e.g., the occurrence of more frequent, 
briefer episodes, typically with a mixed presentation). A 
2-year RCT of 58 adolescent patients with bipolar disorder 
revealed that, compared to patients who received 
three sessions of family psychoeducation (enhanced 
care, or EC), patients in FFT-A recovered more rapidly 
from their baseline depressive symptoms, spent less time 

depressed at follow-up, and had greater improvements 
in depressive symptoms over a 2-year follow-up (Miklowitz 
et al., 2008). Furthermore, the effects of FFT-A 
were moderated by the level of EE in families during the 
pretreatment period. Adolescents from high-EE families 
showed greater improvement in both depressive and 
manic symptoms over 2 years in FFT-A than in EC; the 
effects of FFT-A in adolescents from low-EE families 
were not as robust (Miklowitz et al., 2009). 

A version of FFT has been developed for children 
and adolescents who are at risk for developing bipolar 
disorder. These youth have (1) a first-degree relative 
(usually a parent) with bipolar I or II disorder and (2) 
significant mood dysregulation and impairment, in the 
form of major depression or bipolar disorder not otherwise 
specified (BD-NOS). Children with BD-NOS 
have brief (1–3 days) and recurrent periods of mania 
or hypomania that represent a change from baseline. A 
follow-up of children with BD-NOS and a positive family 
history of mania found that up to half “converted” to 
bipolar I or II disorder within 5 years (Axelson, Birmaher, 
Strober, et al., 2011). 

In a 1-year RCT, 40 high-risk children (ages 9–17) 
with MDD or BD-NOS were randomly assigned to 
a high-risk version of FFT (FFT-HR) or to a one- to 
two-session education control (Miklowitz et al., 2013). 
The participants in FFT-HR had more rapid recovery 
from their initial mood symptoms, more weeks in remission 
from mood symptoms, and more improvement 
in hypomania symptoms over 1 year than participants 
in the education control. As was found in the adolescent 
sample, the magnitude of the treatment effect was 
greater among high-risk children in high-EE (vs. low-
EE) families. 

Other models of family intervention for pediatric 
bipolar disorder are showing promise. In a large (N 
= 165) wait-list trial, Fristad Verducci, Walters, and 
Young (2009) found that children with mood disorders 
who were assigned to multifamily groups showed 
greater mood improvement over 6 study months than 
children on a wait list. Moreover, children on the wait 
list who participated in the multifamily groups 1 year 
later showed the same amount of improvement between 
12 and 18 months. 

Finally, a family-focused CBT treatment developed 
for school-age children with bipolar disorder incorporates 
psychoeducation, cognitive restructuring, and affect 
regulation interventions (West & Weinstein, 2012). 
This 12-session treatment has shown positive effects in 
open trials. Results of an RCT are pending. 


Bipolar Disorder 

Summary 

The addition of psychosocial treatment—family, group, 
or individual—to pharmacotherapy leads to more positive 
outcomes of bipolar disorder than can be achieved 
with pharmacotherapy alone. In drawing conclusions, 
we must keep in mind the different clinical conditions 
of patients at the outset of treatment. For example, the 
studies of CBT and group psychoeducation focused on 
patients in remission, whereas those of FFT and IPSRT 
focused on patients who were symptomatic and only 
partially recovered from an acute episode. 

The remainder of this chapter is devoted to the specifics 
of delivering FFT. For whom is it intended? How 
does it proceed? How are families educated about bipolar 
disorder, and how do they learn new styles of communicating 
or solving problems? In reviewing these 
methods, the reader may wish to reflect on the various 
targets of family intervention (i.e., family attitudes or 
expectations, interpersonal conflict, medication nonadherence) 
and the various domains of outcome that are 
presumed to be influenced by family interventions via 
their impact on these targets. 

coNtext of theraPy 

Treatment Objectives and Structure 

FFT has six objectives, all of which concern coping 
with an episode of bipolar disorder. These are summarized 
in Table 11.1. Some of these pertain to dealing 
with the current episode; others are more focused 
on anticipating episodes in the future, and the stress 

table 11.1. the six objectives of familyfocused 
treatment 

Assist the patient and relatives in the following: 
•• 
Integrating the experiences associated with recent 
episodes of bipolar disorder 
•• 
Recognizing and accepting the patient’s vulnerability 
to future episodes 
•• 
Accepting the need for mood-stabilizing medications 
for symptom control 
•• 
Distinguishing between the patient’s personality and 
his/her bipolar symptoms 
•• 
Recognizing and learning to cope with stressful life 
events that trigger recurrences of mania or depression 
•• 
Reestablishing functional family relationships after a 
mood episode 

triggers for these episodes. A strong case is made for 
the protective effects of medications and a stable, nonstressful 
family environment. 

For patients with syndromal bipolar disorder, FFT 
is usually given in 21 outpatient sessions lasting 1 hour 
each. Sessions are given weekly for 3 months, biweekly 
for 3 months, and monthly for 3 months. Although 
the 21-session version is described here, shorter versions 
have been developed for high-risk populations: 
children at risk for bipolar disorder (12 sessions over 
4 months) (Miklowitz et al., 2013) and adolescents/ 
young adults at risk for psychosis (18 sessions over 6 
months) (Schlosser et al., 2012). 

This 9 month, 21-session structure was originally 
proposed by Falloon, Boyd, and McGill (1984) for 
the behavioral treatment of families of patients with 
schizophrenia. The session-by-session plan is more 
a guide for the clinician than a requirement because 
some families require less intensive contact at the beginning, 
others require more intensive contact later, 
and still others simply do not need this much treatment. 
The treatment is designed to parallel stages of recovery 
from a mood episode. During the stabilization phase, 
about seven sessions are devoted to psychoeducation, 
in which patients and their relatives become acquainted 
with the nature, course, and treatment of bipolar disorder. 
At this stage, patients are often still symptomatic 
and usually are functioning socially or occupationally 
at a level lower than their preepisode capabilities (Keck 
et al., 1998). Psychoeducation is an attempt to hasten 
clinical stabilization by reducing the family tensions 
that often accompany the stabilization phase. This 
is done through helping a patient and his/her family 
members make sense of the different events that have 
precipitated the acute episode, come to a common understanding 
of the causes and the treatment of the illness, 
develop plans for how the family will act if there 
are signs of a developing recurrence, and modulate expectations 
for the patient’s and the family’s functioning 
in the recovery period. 

Once the family has begun the communication training 
module (seven to 10 sessions), the patient is usually 
fully stabilized from the acute episode, although 
he/she may still have residual mood symptoms. At this 
point, the patient is usually able to tolerate exercises 
oriented toward resolving family conflict and promoting 
behavior change. For example, he/she can practice 
listening while another family member speaks, and 
family members can do the same for him/her. These 
exercises can be difficult when a patient’s emotions are 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

still dysregulated, but the structure introduced by communication 
training can help the patient modulate how 
he/she expresses emotions. 

During the final phase, problem-solving training 
(four to five sessions), the mood episode is largely remitted 
and the patient has moved into the maintenance 
phase of drug treatment. At this stage, and sometimes 
even earlier, the patient and family are motivated to 
identify and address quality-of-life issues that have 
been disrupted by the illness (e.g., how a married/cohabiting 
patient can find work; how parents can help a 
young adult offspring move out of the home and gradually 
become more independent). The last few sessions 
of FFT, held monthly, help to consolidate gains made 
during the 9-month treatment. 

Setting 

FFT has been done in a variety of outpatient settings, 
such as the Child and Adolescent Mood Disorders Program 
(CHAMP) at the UCLA School of Medicine; the 
Didi Hirsch Community Mental Health Services in 
Culver City, California; the Colorado Family Project 
in Boulder, Colorado; the Pediatric Bipolar Disorders 
program at Stanford University; and the Child and Adolescent 
Bipolar Services program at the University of 
Pittsburgh School of Medicine. 

UCLA-CHAMP specializes in the treatment of adolescents 
and children who are on the bipolar spectrum 
(bipolar I, bipolar II, or BD-NOS). The staff comprises 
faculty members in psychology and psychiatry, psychiatry 
fellows and psychology interns, marriage and family 
therapists, and psychology graduate students. The 
clinic, opened in January 2010, evaluates 10–12 new 
patients and families per month. 

Client Variables 

FFT is conducted with patients with bipolar disorders 
(bipolar I, bipolar II, or BD-NOS) who live with (or in 
close proximity to) their parents, siblings, or, for adults, 
spouses/partners. Patients can be of any age. Family 
participants can also include combinations of parental 
and spousal relatives, or divorced parents of the person 
with bipolar disorder. In the latter case, we may conduct 
some of the sessions with the patient and one parent and 
other sessions with the patient and the other parent. 

Patients with bipolar disorder can present as manic, 
mixed, hypomanic, depressed, or rapid cycling. The 

polarity of the most recent episode, however, is a moving 
target—it may change before the patient is seen 
next. Patients who are manic or hypomanic, particularly 
those who are elated and grandiose, are often in 
denial about whether they are really ill, and may believe 
that the disorder and its treatment are simply ways 
for others to control them. Depressed patients may be 
more motivated for psychosocial treatment but may 
have cognitive difficulty assimilating the educational 
content of sessions. Patients with a mixed episode or 
rapid-cycling bipolar disorder can be candidates for 
FFT. Any of these presentations may require emergency 
interventions such as changes in medications or 
hospitalization during treatment. Although there is no 
contraindication for offering FFT to patients who have 
been symptomatically recovered for lengthy periods, in 
our experience, they and their family members are less 
motivated for treatment than those who have recently 
coped with a mood episode. 

Patients with comorbid alcohol or other substance 
use disorders pose special problems. These patients are 
usually resistant to psychosocial treatment and medication. 
They are also difficult to diagnose; the effects 
of drugs or alcohol can mimic the cycling of a mood 
disorder. Generally, patients with active substance 
use disorders are more successfully treated if they are 
“dry” before FFT commences. It is often necessary to 
supplement FFT with chemical dependency programs 
(e.g., dual-diagnosis Alcoholics Anonymous groups). 
Nonetheless, a protocol for treating adolescents with bipolar 
disorder and substance abuse has been developed 
(Goldstein, Goldstein, & Miklowitz, 2008; Miklowitz, 
2012). 

Concurrent Drug Treatment 

We require that our patients be seen simultaneously by 
a psychiatrist, who monitors the patient’s medications. 
Typically, a regimen includes a primary mood stabilizer, 
usually lithium carbonate, divalproex sodium (Depakote), 
or lamotrigine (Lamictal). The choice of these 
mood stabilizers is at least in part a function of whether 
the patient presents with clear-cut episodes of euphoric 
mania, in which case lithium is often recommended. 
Lamotrigine is increasingly used for bipolar depression. 
More and more, we are seeing patients treated with 
atypical antipsychotics (risperidone [Risperdal], quetiapine 
[Seroquel], aripiprazole [Abilify], ziprasidone 
[Geodon], or olanazapine [Zyprexa]) as either primary 


Bipolar Disorder 

mood stabilizing agents or adjuncts to traditional mood 
stabilizers. There is strong evidence that these agents 
are highly effective in controlling mania (Scherk, Pajonk, 
& Leucht, 2007), and some (notably, quetiapine) 
have antidepressant properties as well (Malhi et al., 
2009). These agents are particularly valuable if the 
patient is highly agitated or psychotic. Antidepressants 
(e.g., paroxetine [Paxil], venlafaxine [Effexor], bupropion 
[Wellbutrin]) are still recommended as adjuncts 
to mood stabilizers or atypical antipsychotics if the 
patient’s depression does not remit, but they are given 
sparingly because of the risk of switching from depression 
into manic, mixed, or rapid-cycling states (Altshuler 
et al., 1995) and, in children, a concern about a 
slightly increased risk of suicidal ideation or behaviors 
(Vitiello & Swedo, 2004). However, there is little evidence 
that antidepressants cause mania among patients 
with bipolar depression who are simultaneously treated 
with mood stabilizers or atypical antipsychotic agents 
(Sachs et al., 2007). 

A core principle of FFT is that the family therapist 
must have regular contact with the patient’s psychiatrist. 
This contact is established early in treatment. A 
close affiliation between the psychosocial and pharmacological 
treatment team enhances the likelihood of 
the patient’s remaining compliant with his/her medications; 
it also decreases the likelihood of “splitting,” or 
the tendency for a patient (or even family members) to 
have a “good doctor” and a “bad doctor.” For example, 
patients frequently complain about their physicians 
and say to their FFT clinicians, “I wish you could just 
monitor my medications.” An FFT clinician who has 
a regular dialogue with a patient’s physician can avoid 
the trap that is being set by encouraging the patient to 
bring up these problems with the physician directly. 

Some patients who refuse all medications assume 
that coming to therapy will be a substitute for drug 
treatment. These patients often have had bad experiences 
with pharmacotherapy and psychiatrists, and may 
also believe that they are not ill, or that the illness they 
do have can be treated using “alternative medicine.” 
We have generally taken a hard line with these patients 
and do not accept them into FFT unless they commit 
to standard pharmacotherapy (usually lithium, anticonvulsants, 
and/or atypical antipsychotics). Patients with 
bipolar disorder who are unmedicated are highly likely 
to have relapses, and it is not in their best interests for 
the clinician to imply that their illness can be managed 
with psychosocial treatment alone. 

Therapist Variables 

In our UCLA and Colorado studies, therapists’ ages 
have ranged from 23 to 55 years, with from 1 to 30 
years of clinical experience. The majority have been 
graduate students in clinical psychology or psychology 
interns, psychiatry fellows, or postdoctoral psychology 
fellows. Few have had extensive background in family 
therapy before learning FFT. The 15-site STEP-BD 
program involved both therapists with doctorates and 
social workers who varied considerably in treatment 
experience. In other words, there is no requirement that 
an FFT therapist has to have a certain amount of clinical 
training at the outset. 

Although there have been no studies of therapist 
variables as predictors of the outcome of FFT, our clinical 
experience has been that two variables influence 
the uptake of this intervention. The first is the ability to 
think of a family or couple as a system in which members 
are interdependent and mutually influence other 
members’ behaviors. Therapists who have trouble with 
FFT often have difficulty making the transition to this 
systemic way of thinking. They tend, for example, to 
conduct family sessions as if they were individual sessions, 
with one patient and several observers. Some of 
these same problems arise in learning other forms of 
family therapy. 

The second positive predictor is the willingness to 
think biopsychosocially—that is, to see bipolar disorder 
as a biologically based illness that requires medications, 
even if its symptoms are partially evoked by concurrent 
stressors. Thus, a therapist often must argue for 
the patient’s drug adherence even when psychosocial 
issues are more interesting and seem more pressing. 

We have found that the following training protocol 
works well for learning FFT. First, therapists attend an 
FFT workshop conducted over 1–2 days. Then, they 
begin attending group supervision sessions in which 
trained FFT therapists discuss their cases, and in which 
they are able to observe sessions (or listen to tapes). 
They read the published treatment manual (Miklowitz, 
2008b) and, when relevant, the adapted manuals for adolescents 
with BD or children at risk for BD. Then they 
serve as cotherapists to trained FFT therapists. After 
treating two cases with close supervision, they are usually 
ready to see families or couples independently, or 
even take on trainees themselves. 

The cotherapy model has several advantages for 
training. It has a long history in the family therapy lit



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

erature (see, e.g., Napier & Whitaker, 1988). Cotherapists 
have a way of keeping their fellow therapists on 
track. Also, if one person appears to be feeling “ganged 
up on” by one clinician and other family members, the 
other therapist can bridge the gap by allying him/herself 
with this family member. In-session dialogue between 
the clinicians can also provide effective modeling 
of communication skills for members of a family 
or couple. 

PretreatMeNt assessMeNts 

Diagnostic Evaluation 

Bipolar disorder is becoming an increasingly common 
diagnosis in inpatient and outpatient community settings. 
Although this is a positive development given 
its underidentification in the past, there is also an element 
of sloppiness in modern diagnostic evaluations. 
Nowhere is this more obvious than in the diagnosis of 
children and adolescents, who are now being called 
“bipolar” with little supporting evidence (Carlson et 
al., 2009). The inadequacy of community diagnostic 
evaluations derives in part from inadequate insurance 
reimbursement for the evaluation phases of patients’ 
treatment. Some of the patients referred to us have been 
more aptly diagnosed as having cyclothymic disorder, 
borderline personality disorder, or even MDD. Many 
adolescents are referred with “rage attacks.” Our colleagues 
in community practice have often noted the 
same problems when patients who presumably have 
bipolar disorder are referred to them. 

Upon seeing a new patient, a clinician often finds it 
useful to determine the reliability of the diagnosis with 
a formal assessment, using all or part of a structured 
diagnostic interview. Within our research protocols, we 
have used the Structured Clinical Interview for DSMIV—
Patient Version (SCID; First, Spitzer, Gibbon, & 
Williams, 1995) as the diagnostic assessment device. 
The SCID is well described elsewhere (Spitzer, Williams, 
Gibbon, & First, 1992). When the patient is 
under age 18, we use the Schedule for Affective Disorders 
and Schizophrenia for School-Age Children— 
Present and Lifetime Version (K-SADS-PL), with the 
accompanying K-SADS Depression and Mania Rating 
Scales (Axelson et al., 2003; Chambers et al., 1985; 
Kaufman et al., 1997). The K-SADS-PL requires separate 
interviews with the child and at least one parent, 
followed by consensus ratings of each symptom item. 

These instruments are being updated for DSM-5 to include 
changes such as the addition of disruptive mood 
dysregulation disorder or the broader definition of autism 
spectrum disorders. 

Some of the factors that can affect the reliability of 
the data obtained from the SCID or K-SADS-PL include 
whether the patient is acutely ill or stable; acutely 
ill patients are less reliable in their symptom reports. 
Typically, patients in a manic state minimize their 
symptoms, whereas depressed patients may do the reverse. 
Patients with bipolar disorder also have trouble 
with retrospective reporting: “I’ve had over 1,000 
episodes” and “I’ve been constantly manic–depressed 
since I was an infant” are common responses to diagnostic 
interviews. 

Whether one uses the structured or an open-ended 
clinical interview, it is often difficult to determine 
whether a patient’s mood dysregulations and associated 
changes in activity are at the subsyndromal or syndromal 
levels. Some patients report brief periods of hypomania 
or irritability that alternate with more severe depressions. 
These brief, activated periods do not always 
reach the DSM duration threshold for hypomania (4 
days or more), especially among children and teens. In 
some cases, the patient is “one symptom short.” Some 
of these patients are better characterized as having cyclothymic 
disorder or MDD. For children with manic 
symptoms who do not meet the duration or symptom 
count criteria, the diagnosis of BD-NOS is often given. 

Hagop Akiskal (1996) has encouraged clinicians to 
consider a broader bipolar spectrum that includes core 
temperamental disturbances, including hyperthymia 
(exuberance, overoptimism, grandiosity, stimulus seeking, 
physical intrusiveness with others) or “sub-bipolar 
dysthymia.” In FFT, the broadening of the bipolar spectrum 
to include these patients introduces a quandary: 
Does the clinician proceed with such patients in the 
same way as with patients with bipolar I or bipolar II 
disorder? How does the clinician educate the patient 
and family about the factors that bring about manic or 
depressive episodes if discrete episodes cannot be identified? 
If a patient has never had a full manic episode, 
should the therapist proceed under the assumption that 
the patient eventually will develop mania spontaneously? 
Do the same self-management techniques (e.g., 
using problem solving to minimize family conflict) 
apply? 

Our general impression has been that patients who 
do not go through clear-cut cycles of mood episodes 
comprise a different population of patients than those 


Bipolar Disorder 

with true bipolar disorder. Therefore, before we recommend 
a course of FFT, we require that there be 
evidence of an episodic course of illness, even if at the 
subthreshold level. Nonetheless, psychosocial interventions 
almost certainly have a role to play in the stabilization 
of patients with these broad spectrum presentations, 
an important direction for future research. 

Mood Chart 

Clarity on the diagnosis, as well as the patient’s progress 
in treatment, is aided by asking the patient to keep 
a daily mood chart. One such instrument, the Social 
Rhythm Metric (Monk, Kupfer, Frank, & Ritenour, 
1991), asks the patient to document daily mood on a 
–5 (Depressed) to +5 (Euphoric/activated) scale, 
along with social routines that may influence these 
moods (e.g., sleep–wake times, times when the patient 
socializes, the intensity of this social stimulation, the 
patient’s exercise habits, and other factors). 

Leverich and Post (1998) have developed a self-rated 
“life chart” that requires the patient to keep track of 
daily mood variations, medications, life stressors, and 
sleep. Data from mood/activity charts help the clinician 
and patient to evaluate collaboratively the type of 
cycling the patient experiences and the degree to which 
social stressors contribute to mood fluctuations. Figure 

11.1 is an example of a mood chart; note the cycling of 
the disorder in relation to specific social stressors and 
sleep patterns reported by the patient. In this example, a 
stressor (a pet’s illness) is associated with sleep disruption 
and the appearance of mixed mood symptoms at 
the subsyndromal level. 
Family Assessments 

FFT begins with a thorough assessment of family attitudes 
and behaviors to identify the targets of intervention. 
The research studies at UCLA have begun with 
the Camberwell Family Interview, the instrument for 
rating EE discussed earlier. This interview, usually 
done when the patient is acutely symptomatic, focuses 
on the prior 3-month period, which usually includes 
the prodromal phases of symptom buildup. The interview 
yields answers to the following questions: What 
is the current level of tension in the household and in 
the relative–patient relationship? Which of the patient’s 
behaviors are eliciting stimuli for family arguments or 
hostility? Do family members understand that the patient 
has bipolar disorder, or are they likely to attribute 
the patient’s negative behaviors to internal or controllable 
factors? 

A problem with the EE/Camberwell Family Interview 
method is its lack of exportability to community 

1/27 1/28 1/29 1/30 1/31 2/1 2/2 2/3 2/4 2/5 2/6 2/7 2/8 2/9 2/10 2/11 2/12 
Hours of sleep 7 6 8 6 6 6 7 10 3 5 6 5 6 4 5 6 
stayed out til3 am 
argumentwith Dad 
rejectingevent withboyfriend 
cat 
got sick 
went to 
hospital 
cat out 
of hospital 
High 

Normal 
mood 

Low 

5 
4 
3 
2 
1 
0 
–1 
–2 
–3 
–4 
–5 

figUre 11.1. Example of a self-rated mood chart. 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

care settings. Interviews with two parents can total 3 
hours, and the coding of interview tapes can add an 
additional 6 person-hours per family. If a clinician’s 
purpose is treatment planning rather than research, he/ 
she may be able to substitute a self-report measure such 
as the Perceived Criticism Scale (Hooley & Teasdale, 
1989). This measure simply asks the patient to rate, on 
a 1- to 10-point scale, the degree to which close relatives 
express critical comments toward him/her, and 
the degree to which he/she expresses critical comments 
toward relatives. We evaluated the predictive validity 
of this scale in a sample of 360 bipolar adults followed 
over 1 year (Miklowitz, Wisniewski, Miyahara, Otto, 
& Sachs, 2005). The degree to which patients reported 
being upset or distressed by criticism from relatives 
was a strong predictor of their levels of depression over 
a 1-year prospective period. Interestingly, the amount 
of criticism they perceived from relatives was not prognostically 
significant. 

In our research protocols, we typically bring the family 
in for an interactional assessment before treatment 
is initiated. First, each member of the family, including 
the patient, identifies one or several family problem 
topics. Then, the family discusses one or more of these 
topics while the clinician observes through a one-way 
mirror. Transcripts of these 10-minute problem-solving 
discussions can then be coded using manuals such as 
the Category System for Coding Partner Interactions 
(Hahlweg et al., 1989) or the Global Assessment of Relational 
Functioning (Dausch, Miklowitz, & Richards, 
1996). 

The clinician can also rely on simple observations 
of the family’s communication and problem-solving 
behavior to inform the skills training modules of FFT. 
To quote Yogi Berra, “You can observe a lot by just 
watching.” First, many family members or patients 
are unable to focus on a single problem, and instead 
“cross-complain” or accuse other family members to 
counteract the accusations directed at them. Some engage 
in attack–counterattack cycles. For any particular 
family, the clinician must first identify the form these 
interchanges take, which dyadic or triadic relationships 
they involve; the content areas that trigger the interchanges 
(e.g., medication-taking habits, independence, 
interpersonal boundaries); and whether members of the 
family are able to stop these cycles before they spiral 
out of control. Who criticizes whom, and how often? 
How does the target person respond? Does the original 
problem ever get solved? How clear (or disorganized) is 
the speech of patients or relatives? 

Process of treatMeNt 

Psychoeducation 

Table 11.2 summarizes the topical domains that are 
covered in FFT. The initiation of the psychoeducation 
module of FFT requires three conditions. First, the patient 
must be seeing a psychiatrist and have begun a 
medication regimen. Second, a diagnostic assessment 
must have been completed. Third, the patient must be 
able to tolerate family sessions. There is no requirement 
that the patient be in remission or recovery. 

table 11.2. family-focused treatment: 
structure and topical outline 

I. Psychoeducation 
The symptoms and course of bipolar disorder 
•• 
The signs and symptoms of (hypo)mania and 

depression 
•• 
The development of the most recent mood episode 
•• 
The role of life events in most recent episode 
•• 
The course of the disorder over time 

The etiology of bipolar disorder 

•• 
The vulnerability–stress model 
||The role of stress 
||Genetic and biological predispositions 

•• 
Risk and protective factors in the course of the 
disorder 

Interventions and self-management 
•• 
Keeping a mood chart 
•• 
Types of medications 
•• 
Types of psychosocial treatments 
•• 
How the family can help 
•• 
Self-management of the disorder 
•• 
The relapse prevention drill 

II. Communication enhancement training 
•• 
Expressing positive feelings 
•• 
Active listening 
•• 
Making positive requests for change 
•• 
Expressing negative feelings 

III. Problem-solving skills training 
•• 
Define problems 
•• 
Generate solutions 
•• 
Evaluate advantages/disadvantages 
•• 
Choose one or a combination of solutions 
•• 
Develop an implementation plan 
•• 
Review the problem’s status 


Bipolar Disorder 

In the seven or more weekly sessions that comprise 
the psychoeducation module, participants (patients and 
their close relatives) become acquainted with the symptoms 
of bipolar disorder; the way episodes develop; the 
roles of genetics, biology, and stress; pharmacological 
treatments; and the role of stress management strategies. 


The Initial Sessions: Providing a Rationale 

As in most other forms of therapy, the clinicians begin 
by explaining the rationale for FFT. Many participants 
ask why family or couple sessions should accompany 
medication for a patient adjusting to a recent episode 
of bipolar disorder. Particularly helpful in orienting 
participants is the “reentry model” (Miklowitz, 2008b, 
p. 104): 

An episode of mood disorder can be quite traumatic to 
all members of the family. . . . In bipolar disorder, when 
the person returns home and begins to recover, there is 
a “getting reacquainted” period in which everyone has 
to get to know everyone else again, and when everyone 
tries to make sense of what happened. This is a tough 
time for any family, and part of our purpose here is to 
make this “reacquaintance period” less disturbing to all 
of you. We’d like during this year to get you, as a family, 
back to where you were before became 
ill. We want to give you some tools to deal with 
this recovery period. 

There are two purposes for this introduction. First, 
it communicates to the family members that their emotional 
reactions to the patient’s illness—even if quite 
negative—are normal and expectable. Second, it implies 
that the therapy will include exploration and clarification 
of participants’ emotional reactions to information 
about the disorder. This feature of the therapy can 
be made even more explicit: 

If feelings come up for you when we’re discussing this 
material, please bring them up. We’re interested in 
knowing how this material applies to you and your own 
experiences. You may or may not agree with some of 
the material we present here. . . . The purpose of focusing 
on this material is to put your experiences into a 
context that will make sense. (p. 110) 

Next, the treatment is previewed: 

We’re going to work with you on two different levels. 
One is on encouraging ’s ongoing 

work with his psychiatrist so that he can get himself 
stabilized on medications. The second is on how you 
as a family can minimize stress. . . . We think there 
are several ways to do this, including acquainting you 
with the facts about bipolar disorder, and working with 
you on improving your communication and problem 
solving with each other. These strategies should increase 
’s chances of making a good recovery 
and help you as a family cope with the disorder. 
How does this sound to you? (p. 107) 

The Symptoms of Bipolar Disorder 

FFT proceeds with a series of handouts that are used 
as stimuli for generating family or couple discussions. 
These contain descriptions of the symptoms of manic, 
hypomanic, or depressive episodes, with illustrations. 
The purpose of these handouts is not for the participants 
to memorize the diagnostic criteria. Rather, they 
provide a starting point for destigmatizing the illness 
and breaking family taboos against talking about it. 
The patient is asked to look at the lists and describe 
to family members the way it feels when one is euphoric, 
irritable, unable to sleep, or activated by racing 
thoughts or grandiose plans. Likewise, family members 
describe the behaviors they observe when the patient 
cycles into mania or hypomania. A similar dialogue is 
undertaken for depression symptoms. Consider the following 
dialogue among a patient, mother, father, and 
therapist. 

Patient: Well, the thing is, there’s the manic and then 
there’s the hypomanic. When I’m manic, I really 
should be hospitalized. I control the weather; I’m famous. 
When I’m hypomanic, well, I just can get into 
that from having too much stress, too much caffeine, 
and being all revved up. . . 

motHer: I can tell when she’s high because I start getting 
real mad at her. She provokes me. 

FatHer: And she gets this look in her eyes. And she 
says we’re not listening to her. . . 

Patient: But you’re not! That’s when you’re most likely 
to tune me out! 

tHeraPist: Let’s hold on that for now, about listening. 
It’s very important, and certainly something we’ll 
want to focus on as we go along, but what else do 
you notice when you get manic or hypomanic? [Redirects 
the focus.] 

Patient: I get sort of, well, reactive. . . I experience 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

everything so intensely, but see, they know this as 
who I am. 

Note the themes that arise in this discussion of 
symptoms, and how these relate to the six objectives of 
FFT outlined in Table 11.1. The patient’s vulnerability 
to recurrences is made explicit by the family’s identification 
of the prodromal signs of her episodes. The 
patient points to the role of disturbed family communication. 
She alludes to questions about whether some 
of her symptoms are really just personality traits (i.e., 
intensity and reactivity). There is a beginning discussion 
of stress factors that may play a role in triggering 
her episodes. 

The Vulnerability–Stress Model and the Life 
Events Survey 

Early in psychoeducation, the family clinicians make 
a strong argument for the conjoint influences of stress, 
biological imbalances of the brain, and genetic vulnerability 
in the course of bipolar illness. A handout 
illustrating these vulnerability–stress interactions is 
provided, and various risk and protective factors are 
reviewed. For example, the patient and family members 
are warned of the impact of “poor sleep hygiene” 
(i.e., keeping irregular hours, having unpredictable 
bedtimes); alcohol and drug use; stressful family interchanges; 
and provocative, overstimulating interpersonal 
interactions. They are encouraged to make use of 
available protective factors (e.g., social supports), and 
help the patient maintain adherence to his/her pharmacotherapy 
regimen. The purposes of the patient’s 
various medications are given, and the role of blood 
level monitoring (where relevant) is reviewed. In outlining 
protective factors, a special emphasis is placed 
on keeping the family environment low in conflict and 
on maintaining reasonable performance expectations 
of the patient during the recovery period. In the following 
vignette, the clinician reminds the patient and his 
mother that depression is not the same as lack of effort, 
and that a period of recovery prior to regaining one’s 
pre-illness occupational status is to be expected. 

tHeraPist: (to Gary, the patient) I think you can’t expect 
too much just yet. You’re still recovering from 
your episode. It may take some time to get back on 
track. 

motHer: How long? He’s been like this now for a 
while. 

tHeraPist: I’m sure that’s frustrating, but you have to 
think of this as a convalescent period. When someone 
has a bad flu, he may need an extra day or two 
in bed to recover completely. For bipolar disorder, 
this period of time can average 3 to 6 months. But, 
Gary, with your medication treatments and our family 
sessions, and the fact that you’ve maintained your 
friendships, I have every expectation that you’ll recover 
and be able to get back to work. 

The clinician here offers hope but does not paint a 
rosy picture of the future. Often the family has been 
through these episodes before, and a clinician who offers 
an excessively optimistic view of the future will be 
dismissed as unrealistic. 

Describing the biology and genetics of the disorder 
is critical to justifying the role of medications. However, 
it is not necessary for the clinician to go into detail 
about the neurophysiology of the disorder. Instead, the 
clinician begins by asking the participants to review 
their family pedigree and discuss any other persons 
in the family who have had episodes of depression or 
mania. In reviewing this history, the family is told that 
the vulnerability to bipolar disorder may take many 
forms, including major depression without mania, alcoholism, 
suicide, and dysthymia. Next, the clinician 
explains the notions behind neural dysregulation in bipolar 
disorder: 

“We know that people with bipolar disorder have 
trouble regulating their emotional states, sleep, and 
arousal, all of which are regulated by the limbic system, 
an important circuit in your brain. In mania, we 
think that the limbic system becomes overactive, and 
the frontal cortex—the ‘executive’ in your brain— 
stops being able to do its job. It’s almost like having 
your foot on the gas pedal when the brakes are not 
working. When a person gets depressed, the system 
shuts down, and the circuits become underactive. 
These changes in brain activity can’t be controlled 
through your conscious efforts, but the medications 
you take can go a long way toward balancing the activity 
in your nervous system.” 

When family members begin to attribute the patient’s 
aversive behaviors to willfulness (the “fundamental 
attributional error”), the clinician can remind 
them of the existence of neural dysregulation. But the 
family and patient should also be discouraged from 
overemphasizing the biological nature of the disorder, 


Bipolar Disorder 

to the point of neglecting stress factors such as longstanding 
family conflicts. In other words, the patient is 
not entirely taken off of the hook: He/she is encouraged 
to self-monitor when getting into arguments with family 
members, and to determine whether his/her reactions 
to these conflicts reflect an unresolved symptom 
state or a reemergence of conflicts that would have been 
troublesome even before he/she became ill. 

Clarifying the stress triggers for the most recent episode 
is aided by a handout describing life changes that 
may have occurred when the episode was developing. 
Some of these changes are quite severe and negative 
(e.g., death of a parent); others are mild but may have 
provoked changes in sleep–wake cycles (e.g., taking a 
vacation). The clinician engages the family or couple 
in a discussion about what stressors may have provoked 
the patient’s current episode, with the caveat that the 
triggers for mania and depression may be quite different. 
It is not critical that the participants agree on 
a singular cause for the most recent episode, but they 
may benefit from the awareness that mood episodes are 
affected by environmental as well as neurobiological 
factors. 

The Relapse Drill 

Toward the end of psychoeducation, the family and patient 
are given their first exposure to problem solving. 
The task is to review the prodromal signs of a developing 
episode and go through the steps that are necessary 
to prevent a full relapse. Participants are asked to 
generate alternative courses of action should the patient 
relapse into mania or depression, which can include arranging 
emergency psychiatric services (e.g., calling 
the patient’s psychiatrist), introducing behavioral activation 
exercises (e.g., assisting the depressed patient in 
scheduling more outdoor activity during the day). Each 
family member is asked to perform a function in the 
relapse prevention plan. For example, in some families 
it may make sense for a parent to undertake contact 
with the physician. In others, the patient may want the 
first opportunity to do so. The family or couple is encouraged 
to leave phone numbers of emergency contact 
people, including the family clinicians, in an easily accessible 
place. 

Dealing with Resistance to the Illness Concept 

Patients with bipolar disorder often have strong reactions 
to the psychoeducational materials, as do their 

family members. These materials require that the participants 
recognize bipolar disorder as an illness that 
will eventually recur. Younger patients are particularly 
likely to reject the notion of a recurrent illness, particularly 
if they are still hypomanic; they feel powerful and 
in control, and the idea of having an illness feels like 
shackles. Moreover, they are particularly attuned to the 
stigma associated with bipolar disorder or any other 
psychiatric diagnosis, and fear that their behavior will 
now be labeled as that of a crazy person. Resistance can 
also originate with family members. Relatives of depressed 
patients are apt to see the disorder as willfully 
caused and not the product of biochemical imbalances. 
Resistance from one member is often associated with 
intense family conflicts. 

Accepting a psychiatric disorder is a painful process 
for patients and relatives. Often the psychoeducational 
materials raise questions, such as “Why me? Why now? 
What kind of life will I have? Will people treat me like 
I’m mentally ill from now on? Will I ever get back to 
normal?” Relatives ask themselves similar painful 
questions, such as “Will I always have to take care of 
him/her? Are my dreams and hopes for him/her gone?” 
Spouses/partners may ask, “Should I leave him/her?” 
When asking themselves these questions, some patients 
respond by “underidentifying,” or denying the reality 
of the disorder, or by acknowledging the illness superficially 
but living their lives as if it were not real. 

Others “overidentify” and unnecessarily limit themselves. 
For example, one woman avoided romantic relationships 
because “No one will ever be able to get close 
to me because of my mood swings.” Likewise, family 
members can deny the realities of the disorder or, in 
contrast, overmonitor the patient’s health status and try 
to limit his/her behavior unnecessarily. Family conflict 
reaches a maximum when there is a mismatch between 
coping styles, such as when patients underidentify and 
relatives overidentify, or the reverse. 

FFT clinicians proceed with a sensitivity to the painful 
emotional issues underlying these reactions to the 
illness. One method for dealing with these reactions is 
to predict that denial will occur, and to reframe it as 
a sign of health. For example, consider a young man 
with hypomania who has accepted taking medications 
but denies being ill, and whose parents overcontrol and 
overmonitor his behavior. To this young man, the clinician 
might say: 

“Although I appreciate that you’re taking medication 
and going along with the treatment plan, I’m going to 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

guess that you’re not always going to want to do this. 
You probably have some questions about whether 
this diagnosis is right for you or whether you’ll have 
more symptoms. I can understand why you’d have 
these questions. Coming to terms with having bipolar 
disorder—or really any illness—is a very painful 
process that can be hard to accept. This is a normal 
and a healthy struggle. So, as we’re going through 
our material, you may find yourself reacting to it and 
feeling that it can’t be relevant to you. But I’d like for 
you to agree that if you have these reactions, you’ll 
bring them up so we can discuss them.” 

Note that this intervention has a paradoxical flavor, 
but that the clinician stops short of actually encouraging 
the patient to remain resistant or to increase his level 
of disagreement with the diagnosis. Instead, the clinician 
reframes this denial as healthy and expectable, and 
connects it with an underlying emotional struggle. 

A second way to intervene is through “spreading the 
affliction.” Being labeled as mentally ill can put a person 
in a one-down position vis-à-vis other family members, 
including siblings with whom he/she may already 
feel competitive. A possible side effect of psychoeducation 
is the exaggeration of these structural family problems. 
The clinician can avoid this trap by encouraging 
other members of the family to discuss their own experiences 
with depression, anxiety, or other problems. 
This process can help normalize mood problems and 
take the patient “off the hot seat.” 

The following vignette involves Josh, a 25-yearold 
with a recent manic episode. He reacted strongly 
because he thought everyone was telling him he was 
“whacked out.” According to Josh, all he had done was 
“party too much.” During one of the psychoeducation 
sessions, his father admitted to having had a depressive 
episode in college. 

tHeraPist: Josh, you seem like you’re reacting to 
something I just said about bipolar disorder. Were 
you offended? 

JosH: I dunno. It wasn’t anything you said; just I get 
tired of being the only one in the family who has 
problems. 

tHeraPist: Is that really true? Has anyone else in the 
family ever had any problems with depression? Or 
what I’ve called mania? 

FatHer: (pause) I did, and I’ve told Josh about this. 
Remember what I told you about college? 

JosH: (sullen) I don’t know. Why don’t you clue us in? 
FatHer: I had that long period when I couldn’t sleep 
and eat, and I couldn’t study. I dropped out for a semester. 


The session then focused on the father and his own 
history of depression. He revealed a history of psychosis 
involving delusional thinking. Although the patient 
was sullen at first, he became more cooperative in the 
discussions that followed, and more willing to talk 
about how the illness label made him feel stigmatized. 

A third method of dealing with resistance involves 
making analogies to medical disorders. The illness will 
feel less stigmatizing to patient and family if they can 
see it within the continuum of other kinds of chronic 
physical illness. Diabetes and hypertension are often 
good comparisons, particularly because the influence 
of stress can also be brought to bear: 

“Bipolar disorder involves biological imbalances 
much like hypertension does, and it’s affected by 
stress in much the same way. Most people have 
changes in blood pressure when something stressful 
happens. But people with hypertension have a vulnerability 
to extreme shifts in their blood pressure. 
In the same way, most people have mood changes 
when something important happens, but people with 
bipolar disorder operate at greater extremes.” 

In making these analogies, the clinician validates the 
patient’s feelings about social stigma: 

“Although there are some similarities with illnesses 
like hypertension, bipolar disorder can be tougher 
to live with because other people tend to be afraid 
of it and don’t know what it means. They can think 
you’re doing it on purpose. You have to take the time 
to educate other people—particularly those people 
who are most important to you—and explain it in a 
way that they won’t be freaked out by it.” 

Communication Enhancement Training 

The second module of FFT, CET, begins at approximately 
Session 8 and lasts for about seven or eight sessions 
(five weekly sessions, followed by two or three 
biweekly sessions). CET is guided by two assumptions. 
First, aversive family communication is a common sequel 
to an episode of a psychiatric illness and to a large 


Bipolar Disorder 

extent reflects distress within the family or couple in 
members’ attempts to deal with the disorder. Second, 
the frequency of aversive communication can be reduced 
through skills training. 

CET uses a role-playing format to teach patients and 
their relatives four communication skills: expressing 
positive feelings, active listening, making positive requests 
for changes in others’ behaviors, and giving negative 
feedback. These skills are central to the behavioral 
family management approach to schizophrenia of 
Falloon and colleagues (1984) and Liberman, Wallace, 
Falloon, and Vaughn (1981). The degree to which each 
of these skills dominates the role-play exercises varies 
according to the family assessments conducted earlier. 
Treatment of a family with much heated conflict 
and high-EE attitudes might focus on adaptive ways in 
which participants could ask for changes in each other’s 
behaviors. Treatment of an emotionally disengaged 
couple might focus on positive feedback and listening 
skills to coax the partners into experimenting with a 
more interdependent relationship. 

The module begins with an explication of the CET 
method for the family: 

A person can be at risk for another relapse of bipolar 
disorder if the home environment is tense. . . . 
Good communication and problem solving can be 
among those “protective factors” against stress that we 
talked about before. For a close relative, learning effective 
communication skills can be a way of decreasing 
tension and improving family relationships. . . . We 
want to help you communicate in the most clear and 
the least stressful way possible. . . . We’ll be asking 
you to turn your chairs to each other and practice new 
ways of talking among yourselves. (Miklowitz, 2008b, 
pp. 208) 

Note that CET is linked with two of the six objectives 
of the larger treatment program: helping participants to 
cope with stress triggers and restoring functional family 
relationships after an illness episode. The first two 
skills, positive feedback and active listening, generally 
foster a feeling of collaboration between members of 
the couple or family. In contrast, making positive requests 
for change and giving negative feedback are 
more conflict-oriented, and are only introduced once 
participants are used to the role-playing and behavioral 
rehearsal format. 

For each skill, the clinician gives participants a 
handout that lists the skill’s components (e.g., for active 
listening: make good eye contact, nod your head, 

ask clarifying questions, paraphrase/check out what 
you heard). Then the clinician models the skill for the 
family. For example, the clinician might compliment 
one member of the family for his/her cooperativeness 
with the treatment, or model effective listening while 
another family member talks about a problem. After 
the skill is introduced and modeled, participants are 
asked to practice the skill with each other, with coaching 
and shaping by the clinician. Typically the therapist 
coaches one participant at a time on appropriate 
ways to use a given skill. The feedback of other family 
members is actively solicited. The speaker or listener 
is then asked to try the skill again, until he/she has approximated 
its use. A homework assignment, in which 
participants keep a written log of their efforts in using 
the skills between sessions, facilitates generalization of 
the learning process to the home and work settings. 

Many times, the skills are harder than they look. 
Consider Jessie, a 38-year-old woman with bipolar disorder 
who had had several episodes of psychotic mania 
and also a borderline level of mental retardation. She 
worked part-time as a gift wrapper in a department 
store. Jessie was trying to move into her own apartment 
and required help finding a moving van. She was instructed 
to learn to make positive requests of her father, 
with whom she and her sister lived. 

tHeraPist: Maybe that’s a good topic to ask your 
dad about. Can you look at this “Positive Requests” 
handout and use these steps to ask your dad to help 
you move? 

FatHer: It won’t help. There won’t be anything to 
move because she still hasn’t packed a single box! 
(Laughs.) 

Jessie: Well, get me the damn boxes and I’ll do it. 

tHeraPist: (derailing this interchange) Do you think 
you could ask your dad for something specific, like 
helping you find a moving company? 

Jessie: (Looks at father, smirking.) Dad, will you help 
me find a moving company? (Giggles.) 

FatHer: (more serious) You’re not. . . you’re not looking 
at this. (Indicates handout.) You’re supposed to 
say, “I’d appreciate it if you would. . . ” 

Jessie: (Shrugs.) All right, I’d appreciate it if you 
would! Get me a phone number. Please. 

tHeraPist: (after a pause) Well, you got part of it that 
time, Jessie. Dad, what did you like about what she 
just said to you? 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

FatHer: (sarcastically) Gee, all the sincerity. 

Jessie: (Laughs nervously.) 

tHeraPist: Well, if you didn’t care for it, can you say 
how she might say it to you? 

FatHer: How about something like “I’d appreciate it if 
you’d get me those phone numbers. It’d make it a lot 
more comfortable for me to plan my move.” 

tHeraPist: Nice job, Dad. Jessie, what did your dad do 
that you liked or didn’t like? 
Jessie: He followed the sheet. He did all the things you 
said. 

tHeraPist: True, but you don’t have to say it exactly 
the way he did. You can put your own spin on it. Do 
you feel you could try doing it one more time? 

Jessie: (Gasps, giggles.) 

tHeraPist: I know it’s hard being in the hot seat. But 
you’re doing fine. Keep trying. 

Jessie: Dad, could you get me those phone numbers of 
the movers? I’d appreciate it. That way I could be. . . 
I wouldn’t have to worry about the move, and, well, 
just thank you for your help. 

tHeraPist: That was very good, Jessie. Dad, how did 
you like it that time? 
FatHer: (a little tentative) That was better. It made a 
lot more sense. 

These kinds of skills are most difficult to learn if 
the patient is highly symptomatic and/or cognitively 
impaired, or if the level of conflict in the family is so 
severe that productive conversations cannot ensue. This 
patient was moderately hypomanic and also had limited 
intellectual resources. Clearly, the skills training taxed 
her and made her nervous. However, with patience and 
practice, Jessie was able to adopt some of the communication 
skills, and her relationship with her father gradually 
improved. Her father, who was often quite critical, 
became more and more convinced that her limited 
functioning was a result of her bipolar disorder rather 
than lack of effort, as he had believed previously. 

The FFT manual (Miklowitz, 2008b) describes 
“short-fuse” families. These families begin with apparently 
innocuous discussions, which quickly escalate 
into angry, back-and-forth volleys of criticism or hostility. 
Our research indicates that these are usually high-
EE families or couples, but not invariably (Simoneau et 
al., 1998). We have been surprised that relatives who, 
on the surface, appear benign and supportive of the pa


tient during the EE/Camberwell Family Interview become 
quite aggressive and confrontational when facing 
the patient in a one-to-one interaction. Not surprisingly, 
the likelihood that this will occur is greatly augmented 
if the patient is hypomanic and irritable. Short-fuse 
families typically have difficulty with communication 
training because the participants’ emotions quickly get 
out of hand (see the case study presented later). But 
much can be accomplished by modifying the skills 
training to the family’s natural styles. For example, the 
therapist can encourage the participants to use active 
listening skills during their arguments. After a negative, 
back-and-forth interchange involving a couple, a 
clinician said: 

“I think this is an important discussion. You’re a 
couple that really likes to get things out in the open. 
But I’m afraid that you’re missing out on each other’s 
viewpoints. So let’s see if we can make it more productive. 
I want you each to paraphrase each other’s 
statements before making your next argument, like 
we did in the active listening exercises. Also, why 
don’t you turn your chairs to each other so that you 
can more easily keep eye contact?” 

Note again the use of reframing. It is better to cast a 
couple’s or family’s ongoing dynamics (unless clearly 
abusive or threatening) as an adaptive way of coping 
that needs modification than to label these dynamics as 
“bad” or “dysfunctional.” 

A short-fuse family may also be able to make good 
use of positive requests for change or negative feedback 
exercises, in which the partners make constructive suggestions 
about specific aspects of each other’s behavior 
(e.g., “I don’t like it when you talk down to me about 
my health habits”) and offer suggestions as to ways 
these behaviors could be improved (e.g., “Could you be 
more aware of your tone of voice?”). These exercises 
often set the stage for problem solving, the final module 
of FFT. 

Problem‑Solving Skills Training 

Families of patients with bipolar disorder often have 
difficulty with problem solving, especially if the patient 
has recently been ill (e.g., Simoneau et al., 1998). 
Family problems in adjusting to the postepisode phases 
of bipolar disorder appear to fall into one of four categories: 
medication nonadherence, difficulty resuming 
prior work and social roles, repairing the financial and 


Bipolar Disorder 

social damage done during manic episodes (“life trashing”), 
and relationship/living situation conflicts. 

In FFT, the purposes of problem solving are threefold: 
(1) to open a dialogue among family members 
about difficult conflict topics; (2) to allow them a context 
in which to share their emotional reactions to these 
problems; and (3) to help them develop a framework for 
defining, generating, evaluating, and implementing effective 
solutions to problems. This module occupies the 
final four to five sessions of FFT, and usually begins by 
the fourth or fifth month, when sessions have been tapered 
to biweekly. Problem solving is positioned last in 
FFT because the patient is usually in remission by this 
point and is more able, both cognitively and emotionally, 
to experiment with new ways of behaving. Furthermore, 
if the psychoeducation and CET have gone 
well, family members are more ready to see their own 
role in generating or maintaining family conflicts and 
are more open to hearing each other’s viewpoints. 

In problem solving, families are taught to break 
broad problems down into smaller units that are more 
amenable to solution. Family members are given a 
problem-solving worksheet in which they are asked to 
take the following steps: define the problem (with each 
participant’s input); “brainstorm” all possible solutions 
without evaluating them; consider each solution individually 
and weigh its advantages and disadvantages; 
choose a best solution or combination of solutions; and 
plan and implement the chosen solutions. Once they 
have had at least a moderately successful experience 
in solving a relatively minor problem, participants are 
given a homework task in which they record their attempts 
to solve a new, larger problem. Assignments 
are sometimes quite modest; some families are simply 
given the task of defining one or more problems to work 
on in the upcoming session. 

The rationale for problem solving is presented as follows: 


Up until now, we’ve been talking mainly about how you 
communicate with each other. Now we’d like to deal 
with some of the concrete problems of living you’ve all 
been alluding to. But rather than our just giving you 
suggestions about what to do about these—which probably 
wouldn’t work that well anyway—we’d like to 
teach you a way of solving problems cooperatively, as a 
family. (Miklowitz, 2008b, pp. 259) 

This rationale is then followed by a review of the 
steps for solving problems and familiarizing the family 

or couple with a problem-solving worksheet. The clinician 
also reviews some of the problems the members 
raised during earlier phases of treatment. 

Consider this case example of the problem-solving 
method. Karla, age 35, moved in with her new boyfriend, 
Taki, shortly after her divorce. She was in poor 
shape financially; she had a tendency to “spend to improve 
my self-esteem.” In fact, most of her spending 
sprees occurred during hypomanic periods, and Karla 
had become hypomanic shortly after meeting Taki, 
who was quite well off. Perhaps due to eagerness to 
make the relationship work, he gave Karla access to 
his credit cards. During their first months together, his 
bills increased hugely. Karla’s own employment was 
inconsistent. She had had trouble for years keeping to 
a budget and maintaining a checking account. They 
had begun to fight heavily about this problem. Karla 
argued that money was his way of controlling women, 
and Taki argued that she was taking advantage of him 
and being inconsiderate. 

First, the clinician returned to the communication 
enhancement exercises. He encouraged the couple to 
expand on these broader issues before zeroing in on 
the more specific problem of spending. Karla voiced 
her opinion about what she felt was the “meat of the 
problem,” while Taki listened. Then Taki described his 
take on the underlying issues, while Karla listened and 
paraphrased. The structure imposed by problem solving 
eventually helped them define the issue more specifically: 
Karla spent more on clothing and “comfort 
items” than either of them thought she should, but it 
was unrealistic for her to try to support herself given 
her unresolved symptomatic state. Various options 
were then considered: Taki doing most of the buying, 
Karla being assigned her own account with an upper 
limit negotiated each month, and the two of them simply 
separating their finances. These and other options 
were evaluated as to their advantages and disadvantages. 
Finally, they agreed on a somewhat complicated but 
clever solution: Karla was to obtain three bank debit 
cards assigned to each of three accounts. Each card was 
labeled with an expense item (e.g., “doctor bills”) and 
had a spending limit posted on it. They were to meet 
weekly to determine whether the solution was working, 
and to practice listening skills with each other when 
they began to disagree. 

In this example, the problem was to some degree generated 
by the patient’s residual symptoms. There were 
also relationship dynamics: Karla tended to become 
overly dependent on men and then to devalue them, and 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

Taki tended to rescue women and then become angry 
about being in the rescuer role. The clinician decided 
to let them first “ventilate” about these larger relationship 
themes. Allowing a certain amount of emotional 
expression about loaded issues often reduces a family’s 
or couple’s resistance to dealing with more specific 
problems (in this case, disagreements about spending). 

When taking families or couples through their first 
problem-solving exercises, FFT clinicians monitor participants’ 
reactions to the method. Reactions can vary 
from “This is just what we need” to “Gee, how superficial.” 
Patients with bipolar disorder and their family 
members seem to crave spontaneity and enjoy fastpaced, 
unpredictable interchanges. They get bored easily. 
The communication and problem-solving exercises 
impose structure and encourage goal-directedness but 
can also generate resistance. Resistance can take the 
form of changing the subject, “cross-complaining,” or 
being unwilling to cooperate with the homework tasks. 

When addressing resistances, a clinician reiterates 
the rationale for problem solving (e.g., “Sometimes you 
have to gain confidence from solving minor problems 
before you move on to bigger ones”). But often he/she 
must determine whether it is really the problem-solving 
method that family members object to or whether there 
are certain costs or painful consequences associated 
with attempting to solve a problem (e.g., a mother’s 
fear that her son with bipolar disorder will be unable to 
handle agreed-upon tasks that require greater independence). 
Family members who fear the consequences 
of solving a problem often approach solutions, then 
quickly abandon the problem-solving process, arguing 
that “this is not really the issue.” The therapist has a 
number of options available. One is to take responsibility 
for the unsolved problem. For example, he/she can 
say, “Perhaps it was wrong of me to encourage you to 
solve this problem. Maybe you have other things you 
want to deal with first. Would you like to table it for 
now?” Alternatively, the clinician may proceed more 
paradoxically, framing the family’s difficulty as due to 
“healthy avoidance”: 

“Solving a problem as a family involves some costs– 
benefits thinking. There are certainly some benefits 
to solving this problem, but there may be some hidden 
costs as well. I think if the costs of solving this 
problem outweigh the benefits, it’s certainly understandable 
that you’d want to avoid putting a solution 
in place. Is that what’s happening here?” 

Both of these interventions give the family members 
“permission” to leave the problem untouched. Later, 
when the pressure is off, they may be able to return 
to the problem and have more success the second time 
around. 

Terminating FFT 

FFT is terminated after 9 months. As termination approaches, 
a therapist reviews with the family members 
the six goals for treatment (discussed earlier) and the 
degree to which those goals were or were not realized. 
The status of the patient’s bipolar disorder is evaluated 
relative to that at the beginning of treatment. In some 
cases, maintenance or “tune-up” FFT sessions are recommended. 


Referrals for subsequent treatment for both the patient 
and other family members are discussed. For 
example, some patients follow up FFT with individual 
therapy or mutual support groups involving other 
persons with bipolar disorder. Family members may 
choose to attend support groups of the Depressive and 
Bipolar Support Alliance (www.dbsalliance.org) or the 
National Alliance on Mental Illness (www.nami.org). 
In our experience, it is unusual for families to request 
additional family or couple therapy after FFT, but referrals 
are made, if requested. 

The clinicians reiterates the importance of continued 
medication adherence and incorporation of communication 
and problem-solving skills into the family’s dayto-
day life. Finally, a review of the relapse drill (see the 
earlier “Psychoeducation” section) is conducted: The 
patient’s prodromal signs are reviewed, and the steps 
the patient and family can take to avert a relapse are 
reiterated. 

case stuDy 

Debra, a 36-year-old European American woman, lived 
with her husband Barry, age 46, and their 8-year-old 
daughter Jill. She had completed 2 years of college and 
worked part time as a sales clerk in a luggage shop. 
She had been married previously. Debra was referred 
for FFT by a university clinic, where she had been diagnosed 
with bipolar II disorder. The initial SCID confirmed 
this diagnosis. Her depression was marked by 
loss of interests and “being bummed” for several weeks 
at a time. She also complained of loss of appetite, wak



Bipolar Disorder 

ing several times each night, fatigue, guilt, and loss of 
concentration. She denied having suicidal thoughts. 
She recounted that her current depression was “a really 
big one” and had lasted on and off for a full year. Debra 
also said, “I’ve had tons of small ones.” She dated the 
first onset of her depression to approximately 8 years 
earlier, following her divorce from her first husband. 

Debra also admitted to having had a hypomanic episode 
in the previous month, including about 5 days of 
elevated and irritable mood. She explained, “My confidence 
level was up.” She admitted to racing thoughts, 
increased activity and talkativeness, and becoming involved 
in many different projects. She had trouble dating 
the onset and offset of these periods, noting, “I’ve 
been this way all my life.” She did admit that Barry had 
commented on these mood phases. Debra complained, 
“He now tells me I’m getting manic every time we get 
in an argument. . . . It’s his newest weapon against me.” 
She denied having delusions or hallucinations. 

Debra had been treated previously with sertraline 
(Zoloft) and bupropion (Wellbutrin). Her psychiatrist 
had recently started her on divalproex sodium (Depakote) 
at 1,500 mg/day, a medication that she said had 
made a difference in stabilizing her mood. 

Barry, an attorney, presented as a “no-nonsense” 
type of man. He responded to the clinicians in a very 
businesslike manner and insisted that he had no problems 
of his own to discuss “except those that relate to 
Debra’s care.” He denied any psychiatric history himself. 
He preferred to talk about FFT as an educational 
course and became defensive if his wife referred to it 
as “therapy.” The FFT clinicians, a male–female cotherapy 
team, did not dissuade him from labeling the 
treatment this way, believing that they would need to 
work on building a rapport with him before addressing 
his defensive style. 

Family Assessment 

Based on the Camberwell Family Interview, Barry met 
the criteria for a high level of EE. He voiced nine criticisms 
during his 1-hour interview. He tended to complain 
at length about Debra’s memory, work habits, 
and disorganization (e.g., “She never remembers about 
parent–teacher meetings,” “She forgets to turn in her 
time sheet at work—it drives me crazy”). Barry admitted 
that he still loved Debra but found her very frustrating. 
He was convinced that she had ADHD as well as 
bipolar disorder. 

Debra and Barry came in for the family interactional 
assessment well dressed and smiling. The clinicians interviewed 
them individually, and arrived at an important 
problem topic for them to discuss: Barry’s claim 
that Debra lied to him. Her response was to apologize 
for her past misdeeds and to argue, “I’m not lying or 
withholding. . . . Those are usually things I’ve forgotten 
or just don’t think are important.” Upon discussing 
this issue, the couple’s dynamics became apparent, 
with Barry speaking in an accusatory, scolding mode 
and Debra apologizing and justifying her behavior. As 
Barry became more accusatory, Debra looked more 
and more depressed. 

Barry: Lying is a way of life for you. You twist the 
truth and say you don’t remember things. 

DeBra: But I really don’t. I’ve been trying to tell you 
everything. Sometimes I just forget. (Starts rocking 
her chair.) 

Barry: (holding Debra’s chair still) Why do you think 
it’s OK to lie to me? 
DeBra: I don’t. I’m being up front with you. Maybe you 
want to believe there’s more, but there’s not. 

Barry: I think you’ll always do this. It’s your bag. How 
would you like it if I lied to you? How would it make 
you feel? Would you want to stay married to me? 

DeBra: (sullen) No, probably not. But I’m trying to be 
open with my feelings, kinda with you as a practice 
case. (Smiles awkwardly.) 

Barry: You’re doing that little smile again. The one 
you do when you’re trying to get away with something. 


DeBra: (defensive) Oh, give me a break. 
Barry: Is it because we’re talking so directly? I don’t 
know if it’s your personality or if it’s the bipolar stuff 
acting up, but you have no tolerance for anything 
these days, especially people. 

The therapists who viewed this assessment were 
struck by Barry’s level of criticism, paired with Debra’s 
tendency to take a one-down position. They also 
learned during the assessment that Barry doled out 
Debra’s medications and made her doctor appointments 
for her, and also usually attended them with her. An 
initial appointment for FFT was set with two clinical 
psychologists, one of whom was a trainee. 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

Psychoeducation (Sessions 1–7) 

During the initial session, the clinicians (Therapist 
1 and Therapist 2 in the dialogues below) described 
the FFT program to Barry and Debra, with particular 
emphasis on the psychoeducational component. 
They previewed the communication enhancement and 
problem-solving modules. The couple listened politely 
but expressed skepticism. 

Barry: We’ve been in and out of therapy for years. I 
haven’t been impressed. 
tHeraPist 1: When you say “We,” do you mean you 
as a couple? 
Barry: As a couple, and she’s had her own therapy. 

DeBra: I thought Dr. Walker was good. 
Barry: Yeah, but you hadn’t had the bipolar diagnosis 
yet. She was just treating you for depression. And she 
got into that whole “You were probably abused as a 
child and forgot about it” thing. 

tHeraPist 1: What was your couple therapy like? 

Barry: A lot of digging into our childhoods and getting 
in touch with our feelings. 

tHeraPist 1: Debra? 

DeBra: It wasn’t that bad. I thought it was pretty useful. 
tHeraPist 1: Well, it sounds like you’ve got different 
opinions on how helpful those sessions were. Let me 
tell you how this will be different. Our treatment is 
going to be focused mainly on the present, and we’ll 
be working on how you as a couple are coping with 
bipolar disorder. Barry, you’re going to be affected 
by the cycling of Debra’s mood disorder, but Debra, 
you’re also going to be affected by the way Barry 
responds to your symptoms. I’m not saying your past 
will be irrelevant, but it’s just not our focus. 
Barry: I need help dealing with all of this. The more 
information I get, the better. 
tHeraPist 1: I’m sure that’s true. But we won’t just 
throw a lot of information at you—we want to individualize 
it to your situation. I think you’ll have 
a much easier time if you come to a common understanding 
of the disorder as a couple and learn to 
communicate about it. 

In this dialogue, the therapist made a distinction between 
FFT and more generic forms of couple therapy. 
At this point, the clinicians already suspected that there 
would be resistance from Barry, especially around 

tasks in which he was asked to look at his own behavior 
and its contribution to Debra’s mood problems. 

The psychoeducation itself began in the second session 
and continued through the seventh. The first task 
was to encourage the couple to come to a shared definition 
of “bipolar disorder.” During the assessments, both 
had mentioned the term “cycling,” but without apparent 
agreement on what it meant. 

tHeraPist 1: I want to be sure we’re all on the same 
page when we talk about the meaning of the term 
“bipolar.” Debra, you did a great job just now of explaining 
what depression feels like. Let’s talk about 
the other side now. (Passes around a handout describing 
the symptoms of mania/hypomania.) Barry, 
which of these have you observed when Debra gets 
hypomanic? 

Barry: (surveying the handout) Well, all of these except 
appetite disturbance. . . . I guess you could say 
she has grandioseness—she thinks one day she’ll be 
wealthy. (Laughs.) 

tHeraPist 2: When was the last time you think she 
was like that? 
Barry: Last time I was working on a case—she always 
gets like that when I’m working on a case. 

DeBra: I agree, but I think it’s because I have a lot 
more to do when he’s working all the time. . . . He 
thinks it’s some “abandonment” thing, but I think he 
forgets the realities I face when he’s gone. (Looks at 
list.) I get more energy, I feel uncomfortable in my 
own body, I jump outta my skin. . . probably a good 
day to go shopping! (Giggles.) I probably get crankier, 
don’t have much tolerance for people in general. 

Barry: Especially me. (Smiles.) 

This was the first time that Debra had defended 
herself, by commenting on how relationship problems 
fed into her mood swings. Interestingly, her assertive 
stance cut through some of her husband’s negativity. 
The therapists soon realized that Barry and Debra 
lacked a consensus about what really constituted a bipolar 
episode. This is a critical point in FFT: The members 
of a couple or family need to come to a shared 
perception of when the patient is getting ill, so that they 
can institute procedures to keep the patient’s episodes 
from spiraling (e.g., visits to the physician, reduction in 
the patient’s workload, learning to deescalate negative 
verbal exchanges). But it was not yet clear that Debra 
had discrete episodes. 

###CUT###
Bipolar Disorder 

tHeraPist 2: Do you think you have what we’re calling 
“episodes”? Like a couple of days of being wired? 

DeBra: There can be, like 2 or 3 days when I can do a 
lot of stuff, my memory gets better, and then 2 or 3 
days when it’s just not gonna work. I can. . . 

Barry: (Interrupts.) It’s that household project thing. 
She starts redoing Jill’s room over and over. She’ll 
sponge-paint it purple and then wipe it out that same 
evening, put in new closets. 

DeBra: I can filter all my energy into housework instead 
of killing somebody. (They both chuckle.) 

tHeraPist 1: Maybe I’m a little slow today, but I’m 
trying to figure out whether you both agree on when 
these high and low periods are. Debra, have you ever 
kept a mood chart? 

The therapist then produced a written assignment in 
which Debra and Barry were asked to track independently, 
on a daily basis, the ups and downs of Debra’s 
mood states, so that agreements and disagreements 
about what constituted the symptoms of the disorder 
(as opposed to personality traits) could be tracked. 

The dynamics of this couple became more evident in 
Sessions 3–5. Debra was inconsistent about keeping her 
mood chart, and Barry felt that his conscientiousness in 
charting her mood was not being rewarded. “She won’t 
take responsibility for her illness,” he argued. Nonetheless, 
Debra had good recall of her mood swings, even 
though she had not written them down. The therapists 
offered the couple much praise for their somewhat halfhearted 
attempt to complete this assignment. Interestingly, 
Barry noted small changes in mood that he called 
her “manic-ness,” which Debra argued were just her reactions 
to everyday annoyances. 

Barry: You were manic as hell on Saturday morning. 
tHeraPist 2: What do you mean, Barry? 
Barry: I went to tell her that Jill needed to get to soc


cer, and she practically bit my head off! 
DeBra: Because you had told me eight times already. 
I wasn’t manic, I was just getting annoyed. Even Jill 
said something about you overdoing it. 

This became a theme throughout the treatment: 
Barry tended to overlabel Debra’s mood swings, to the 
extent that he often called her “manic” when the real 
issue appeared to be her transient irritability. He also 
frequently called her “depressed” when Debra felt that 

she was just “relaxing. . . bored. . . trying to unwind 
and keep to myself for a while.” The therapists were 
careful not to attribute blame or to take sides with either 
of them. Therapist 1 said: 

“I think this is a very hard distinction to make. I wish 
I could give you a simple rule for determining when 
Debra is in and out of an episode. But as you’ve seen, 
it’s not always so clear. I usually suggest that people 
go back to that symptom list and ask, ‘Is there more 
than one of these symptoms? Does irritability go 
with more sleep disturbance? Racing thoughts?’ Just 
being annoyed is not enough to be called ‘manic,’ 
unless it’s ongoing, it cuts across different situations, 
or it goes along with some of these other symptoms 
and impairment in getting through your day.” 

The therapists outlined a vulnerability–stress model 
for understanding Debra’s episodes. Debra recounted 
a family history of her mother’s depression and her 
father’s alcohol abuse: “My mom was probably bipolar, 
but we just didn’t call it that back then.” They also 
discussed eliciting stressors that may have contributed 
to Debra’s prior depressions. Barry became very vocal 
when discussing her risk factors: He noted that crowded 
places (e.g., shopping malls) made her hypomanic, 
and that alcohol, even in small amounts, contributed 
to her sleep disturbance and in turn contributed to her 
hypomanias. The therapists offered a handout on risk 
factors (e.g., substance abuse, sleep irregularity, unpredictable 
daily routines, family conflict) and protective 
factors (e.g., regular medications, good family communication). 
Next, the clinicians helped Barry and Debra 
devise a relapse prevention plan: 

tHeraPist 1: The clients we’ve worked with who’ve 
done best with this illness have been able to rely 
on their spouses and other close family members 
at times of crisis. It’s a fine line you have to walk 
between being able to turn to your spouse and say, 
“I think I’m getting sick again,” and to take some 
of their advice without giving up control altogether. 
Debra, when your moods are going up and down, 
you are going to want more control. Barry, maybe 
you sometimes feel like you’re walking a fine line as 
well: You want to say “Yes, you are getting sick, and 
I’d like to help you,” without rubbing it in, to be able 
to give suggestions without taking over. 

Barry: That’s one thing we have in common. We’re 
both control freaks. I guess likes attract. 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

tHeraPist 1: Well, maybe the fact that you both like 
to be in control of your own fate was part of what attracted 
the two of you in the first place [reframing]. 
But like many things that attract people initially, 
something like not wanting to give up control can 
become a problem in the relationship later. 

The partners came to some agreements about what 
the prodromal signs of Debra’s hypomania looked like 
(e.g., increased interest in household projects, getting 
up extraordinarily early, irritability that occurred in 
multiple situations) and some of her risk factors (e.g., 
alcohol). They conjointly developed a relapse prevention 
plan that involved keeping emergency phone numbers 
handy, avoiding alcohol, and avoiding high-stress 
interpersonal situations (e.g., conflicts between Debra 
and her mother). Barry and Debra also discussed how 
they could communicate if her symptoms started to escalate. 
Barry admitted that he “had to learn not to lash 
out” at such times, and not to “just blurt out everything 
I think.” Interestingly, both showed resistance to the 
suggestion that Debra try to maintain a regular sleep– 
wake cycle, even on weekends, when she had her worst 
mood swings. Barry scoffed, “Maybe we should just 
join the Army,” and both emphasized that they were not 
about to give up their love of late-night partying. 

The psychoeducation module ended with a discussion 
of the effects of the illness label on Debra’s selfesteem. 
She had been alluding throughout the first six 
sessions to her discomfort with the diagnosis of bipolar 
II disorder. 

tHeraPist 1: Sometimes when we go through our 
symptom lists and talk about the causes of bipolar 
disorder, people can feel labeled or picked apart. 
Debra, have you ever felt that way in here? 

DeBra: When I first came in here, I felt picked on. I felt 
like it was “blame Debbie time,” and now there was 
this real biological reason to pin all our problems on. 

tHeraPist 1: I hope you don’t think we’re saying that 
all of your problems as a couple stem from your bipolar 
disorder. 

DeBra: No, I think you guys have been fair about that. 
It was hard for me to talk about, and sometimes I 
think Barry is just objecting to me, as a person. 

tHeraPist 1: In other words, the line between your 
personality and your disorder gets blurred. 
DeBra: Yes, and to me they’re very different. 

tHeraPist 1: I’m glad you’re bringing this up. I think 
that’s very important, to be very clear on when we’re 
just talking about you, your styles of relating to people. 
. . . Not everything you do has to be reduced to 
this illness. 

Barry: And I probably do bring it up [the illness] too 
much. 

DeBra: (becoming activated) Yes, and you bring it up 
in front of other people. . . . That can be a real problem 
for me. We used to have such great conversations! 
I get tired of talking with you about my disorder 
all the time. That’s all you seem to wanna talk 
about. 

Barry: (startled) Why haven’t you told me this? 

DeBra: I probably do need to tell you. . . . I just want 
more of a happy medium, between talking about it 
and not. 

Barry: So what do you want? 

DeBra: (becoming tearful) I’m not sure. 

tHeraPist 1: I think it’s understandable that you 
wouldn’t know. . . . You’re not always sure how much 
help you need from Barry. Maybe you’re trying to 
find a good balance. That may take some time. I 
hope you don’t feel that all we’re interested in is your 
disorder, and not in you as a person [examines apparent 
resistance to the psychoeducational material]. 

DeBra: I usually don’t feel that way, except when I 
try to do that mood chart [acknowledges emotional 
pain underlying resistance to the therapeutic tasks]. 
I just want to have conversations with Barry like I 
have with my girlfriends. I’d like to talk about things 
other than my illness and my doctors. 

Communication Enhancement Training 
(Sessions 8–14) 

During Session 8, the therapists introduced CET to the 
couple. Barry and Debra both described a “demand– 
withdrawal” pattern in their communication. Barry 
would become intrusive in trying to understand Debra’s 
mood state, and Debra would withdraw and become 
noncooperative. Debra admitted that she had a difficult 
time acknowledging being depressed and talking about 
it because “you just didn’t do that in my family.” She 
grew up in a Southern family, where “you didn’t air 
your dirty laundry.” In contrast, Barry was from Los 
Angeles, where “you might spill your guts to whoever 
was stuck in traffic next to you.” 


Bipolar Disorder 

The therapists began by exploring the demand– 
withdrawal pattern: 

tHeraPist 1: This is one of the dynamics we’ve seen 
in couples dealing with bipolar disorder. People with 
a mood disorder can get irritable with their spouses, 
and then their spouses react because they feel under 
attack, and when they react, the arguments can really 
spiral. The person with the disorder feels there’s 
something he/she is legitimately angry about, and 
the spouse sees the anger as evidence of the bipolar 
illness. 

Barry: Well, my problem is that Debra’s not aware of 
her symptoms. 

DeBra: I’m aware of them, but I wanna be left alone. 
You finish my sentences. . . 

Barry: And then you walk out of the room. You don’t 
want to have anything to do with normal communication. 
It’s just like it was with your parents. . . 

DeBra: When I’m in that state [depression], the last 
thing I want is a serious conversation or to have 
someone question what I want to do or why. 

tHeraPist 2: Let’s talk about what happens between 
the two of you [draws couple back to relationship 
focus]. When you try to talk about something, what 
happens? One of you just won’t talk? You do talk, 
but it doesn’t go well? 

Barry: She procrastinates, she won’t deal with things; 
then I yell; then she won’t be around me and she 
withdraws; and then I start thinking about how long 
I can live like this. 

tHeraPist 2: Debra, how would you describe it? 

DeBra: Barry gets frustrated when I don’t give him 
the answers he’s looking for, and then I feel bad that 
I frustrated him, and he feels bad that he got upset 
at me, and then I feel bad that I made him feel bad 
about upsetting me. 

tHeraPist 2: Is that something you’d like to work 
on—your communication as a couple? 

Barry: Yes. There’s been no communication because 
of the bipolar disorder. I don’t know if we’d have 
these problems if she weren’t bipolar. She gets depressed, 
her thoughts don’t get communicated, she 
never even tries. . . and that reminds me of what I 
was gonna ask you: Do you think she might have attention 
deficit disorder as well as being bipolar? 

DeBra: Oh, no, here we go. . . 

tHeraPist 1: Barry, no one can tell for sure, but regardless 
of what the cause is, it sounds like you’re 
ready for us to start focusing more on your relationship 
[redirects discussion but doesn’t directly challenge 
Barry’s definition of the problem]. At least part 
of what you’re describing sounds like the habits you 
have communicating with each other as a couple. 
We’ll be teaching you some fairly straightforward 
skills for talking to each other, like how to praise 
each other for things done well, how to listen, and 
how to ask for changes in each other’s behavior. This 
will help you during these cycles, whether they be 
real mood cycles or just rocky periods in your relationship 
[provides rationale for upcoming communication 
module]. 

DeBra: Yeah, I need to learn how to argue. He’s a lawyer; 
he’s a much better arguer than me. 

Barry: (still angry) But you see, no one ever said a 
damn thing in your family; no one was ever really 
there. So of course you’re going to react to me because 
I’m passionate, and then when I get really 
pissed off, you finally take stock and listen. It’s the 
only way I can get through to you. 

tHeraPist 1: I think there’s a lot for us to work with 
here. Debra, I’d like to take you off the “bipolar 
hook” for a while, and let’s work on how you act and 
react with each other. We don’t have to work on your 
communication just about bipolar disorder—maybe 
also how you talk about finances, friends. . . 

Barry: But that’s all about doing it in here. . . . How 
are you gonna know how we communicate at home? 

tHeraPist 1: We’re gonna bug your house. (Both 
chuckle) We’ll do some exercises in here that involve 
role playing new ways of talking, but you’ll have to 
practice these new ways in between sessions at home. 
I personally think this will benefit you a great deal, 
if you have the time to do it [expresses optimism]. 

The therapists now had a better understanding of 
this couple’s communication patterns. The demand– 
withdrawal pattern in part derived from their different 
family histories, but it was equally true that Barry was 
rewarded for being critical; it got results, even if these 
results were accompanied by Debra’s resentment. They 
disagreed on the extent to which these communication 
patterns were driven by her bipolar disorder. Barry assumed 
that most or all of their problems could be attributed 
to the disorder, but Debra saw this assumption as 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

just an attempt to blame her for everything. The therapists’ 
take was that the marital dynamics existed independently 
of Debra’s mood swings but became magnified 
by her hypomanic and depressive episodes. During 
hypomanic episodes she was more touchy and reactive, 
and when depressed she was more likely to withdraw. 

In Session 9, the therapists began the skills training. 
FFT begins with positive communication skills to increase 
the likelihood that members of a couple or family 
will collaborate when dealing with more difficult 
issues. One therapist began by introducing a handout 
entitled Expressing Positive Feelings, in which each 
partner is directed simply to praise the other for some 
specific behavior the other has performed, and to tell 
the partner how this behavior makes him/her feel. The 
therapists first modeled the skill. One of them praised 
Barry, saying, “I appreciate you taking the long drive 
up here [to the clinic] and making an adjustment to 
your schedule to make this possible. . . . It makes me 
feel like you value what we do here.” Barry expressed 
appreciation for the compliment. The therapist then 
asked Barry and Debra to turn their chairs toward each 
other and select a behavior to praise in each other. Interestingly, 
neither had trouble selecting a topic. The 
problem was in staying with positive emotions and not 
letting negative ones leak in. 

Barry: I appreciated your taking Jill to soccer on 
Wednesday. It made me feel like you. . . like you 
knew I was overwhelmed that day, and that, you 
know, I’m usually the one doing all the parenting 
while you. . . 

tHeraPist 2: (interrupting) Barry, I’d like to stop you 
before we get into that. Debra, can you tell me what 
you liked so far about how Barry said that? Did he 
follow the instructions on this sheet? 

DeBra: Well, like you said, he was starting to get into 
it, but I liked the first part. I’m glad he feels that way. 
Barry: Do you feel I give you enough positive feedback? 
DeBra: (pause) You have your days. 

tHeraPist 2: Barry, I thought you did that pretty well. 
Could you try it without the tail at the end? 

Barry: (Chuckles.) There you go, stealing my thunder. 
OK, um, Deb, thanks again for taking Jill to soccer. 
It made me feel like you. . . like my schedule is important 
to you, and that you’re thinking of me. 

tHeraPist 2: Good. Debra, what’d you think? 

DeBra: Much better. 
Barry: Sometimes I think I was put on this earth to 

learn tact. 

Sessions 10 and 11 of CET focused on active listening 
skills. One member of the couple listened while the 
other spoke, first about issues outside of the marriage 
(i.e., work relationships), then about couple-related 
matters. Both Barry and Debra required restructuring 
of their listening skills. Specifically, Debra tended to 
“space out” when Barry spoke, and required prompting 
to stay with the issues. She acknowledged that she 
sometimes felt she was being tested by Barry when he 
talked to her, to determine whether she could come up 
with thoughtful, intuitive replies. Her “checking out” 
was a way of coping with the performance anxiety that 
she experienced when listening to him. 

Not surprisingly, Barry’s difficulty with listening 
centered on withholding his natural tendency to give 
advice. When Debra began to talk, he would listen reflectively 
for a minute or two, but then he would begin 
to ask questions, such as “Well, when are you gonna 
call that person?” or “Last time we talked you said you 
were going to finish that resumé. Why haven’t you?” 
Repeated practice within sessions—supplemented by 
homework assignments to practice these skills—led 
Barry to become more aware of what he was doing. 
During a particularly poignant moment, he admitted, 
“I don’t like the way I react to her. . . . I don’t like the 
person I’m becoming.” 

As FFT passed the 3-month point and the frequency 
changed to biweekly, the clinicians introduced potentially 
more heated forms of communication, such as the 
partners making requests for changes in each other’s 
behaviors and expressing negative feelings (Sessions 
12–14). At this point, Debra was not as depressed as she 
had been during the assessment phase, although Barry 
continued to complain about her low functioning. He 
argued that she had become unable to tell him what 
she had and had not accomplished during the day, and 
that she often made it appear that she had done things 
that, in reality, she had not. He labeled this her “lack 
of follow-through” problem. In contrast, Debra became 
increasingly assertive about his “micromanagement” of 
her behavior. 

tHeraPist 1: One of the things we’d like to work on 

with you is how you ask each other to change in 

some way. What’s an appropriate way to ask some



Bipolar Disorder 

one to help you? (Gives Barry and Debra the handout 
titled “Making a Positive Request.”) Try looking 
directly at each other; say what you would like the 
other person to do, and how it would make you feel. 
Debra, a minute ago you were talking about how 
Barry micromanages you. Can you turn this into a 
positive—ask him what you would like him to do? 
Phrase it in a way that he can help you? How can he 
ask you to follow through without nagging you? 

DeBra: Uh, Barry, it would really make me happy if 
you. . . in situations where there’s a dilemma, if 
you’d give me a little more freedom. 

Barry: For example? Do you mean you want us to do 
things at your pace? 

tHeraPist 1: Barry, let it come from her. 

DeBra: Um, like, if there’s some shopping to do, it 
would help me out if I could just say, “Yes, this is on 
my list and I’ll do it. . . if you could wait for me to 
get it done in my own time.” That would help ease 
the tension. 

tHeraPist 2: Barry, how did you feel about how Debra 
asked you? Did she follow this sheet? 

Barry: I think she asked me just fine, but my question 
is, will she then do the shopping? 

DeBra: I think it would really help me to have some 
plan—like agreeing that if I do this part of the shopping, 
you’ll do that part. Maybe that would stop me 
from saying, “I’ll show him. He’s not gonna run my 
life; I’m not gonna do it his way.” 

tHeraPist 1: A person who feels one-down often 
reacts by refusing to go along with the plan, even 
though going along with it might be of help to them 
personally. Debra, do you get into that sometimes? 

The therapists were encouraging assertiveness in 
Debra, and at the same time gently confronting what 
Barry had earlier called her “passive–aggressiveness.” 
They then asked Barry to make a positive request of 
Debra. 

tHeraPist 2: Barry, can you think of something you 
could ask Debra to do, to change her behavior? 

Barry: (looking at clinicians) OK, Deb, it’s very important 
to me. . . 

tHeraPist 2: Can you tell this to her? 

Barry: (turns toward Debra) OK, it’s very important 
to me that you not just walk away when we have dis


cussions. That you don’t just withdraw. Especially 
when we talk about Jill and our differences about 
her. That really irritates me. 

The therapists again observed Debra withdraw in 

reaction to Barry’s “high-EE” behavior. They com


mented on her reactions. 

tHeraPist 1: Debra, what’s happening now? You seem 
like you’re checking out. 

DeBra: (Snaps back, smiles.) Yeah, I guess I am. What 
were we talking about? 

Barry: You see, I think that’s part of her attention deficit 
disorder. Do you think she needs Ritalin [medication 
for this condition]? 

tHeraPist 1: Barry, in this case, I don’t think so. I 
think that what happened, Debra, if I can speak for 
you for a moment, is that you withdrew because you 
felt you were under attack. 

DeBra: That’s probably true. He got into his “You do 
this, you do that.” 

Barry: (frustrated) Well, you just asked me to change 
something! Am I supposed to do all the work here? 

tHeraPist 1: Barry, I’m going to encourage you to try 
again. Only this time, I’d like you to be more aware 
of how you phrase things. Notice you said what you 
didn’t want her to do—withdraw when you were 
talking to her. That’s quite important. But what 
would you like her to do instead? 

Barry: I want her to engage with me! To talk it out! 

tHeraPist 1: Can you try again, only this time tell her 
what you want her to do? 

Barry: (Sighs.) Deb, when we talk, I’d really like. . . 
I’d really appreciate it if you’d hang in there and finish 
talking to me, especially about Jill. That would 
make me feel, I don’t know, like we’re partners. 

tHeraPist 2: Barry, that was much better, and I’ll bet 
it was easier to hear. Debra? 

DeBra: Yeah, I liked it. . . that’s easier. We need to do 
more of this. 

Much emphasis was placed throughout CET on 
between-session homework assignments. The couple 
was encouraged to hold weekly meetings and to record 
their efforts to use the skills. Both spouses reported a 
reduction in tension in the relationship by the time the 
problem-solving segment was initiated. 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

Problem Solving (Sessions 15–18) 

FFT sessions were held less frequently (biweekly) in 
the fourth, fifth, and sixth months. At Session 15, problem 
solving was introduced. After explaining the rationale, 
the therapists asked the couple to identify several 
specific problems for discussion, then reviewed the 
problem-solving steps with them. 

The first issue chosen by the couple seemed superficial 
at first. They had two cats, one of which belonged 
to Debra (and had come with her from a previous marriage) 
and the other of which Barry had bought. They 
disagreed on how much the cats should be fed: Debra 
“wanted mine to be fat” and fed it frequently, whereas 
Barry wanted his to be thin. As a result, Barry’s cat was 
waking them up in the middle of the night, needing to 
be fed. The resulting changes in Debra’s sleep–wake 
cycles had resulted in her becoming irritable, restless, 
and possibly hypomanic. Despite a conscientious literature 
search, the therapists were unable to find any 
research on the influence of cat diets on the cycling of 
bipolar disorder. 

The couple considered various alternatives: feeding 
the cats equal amounts, keeping Barry’s cat in the 
garage, giving away Barry’s cat, and feeding both cats 
before the couple went to bed. They eventually settled 
on the last of these. The problem itself generated humor 
and playfulness between them, and they derived some 
satisfaction from being able to deal with it collaboratively. 


A second and potentially more serious source of 
conflict concerned their night life. Both liked going to 
parties, but Barry liked to stay longer than Debra, who 
thought that parties contributed to her mood cycling. 
She tended to become overstimulated by the interactions 
with many people and would quickly become 
fatigued. They considered several alternatives: going 
to the parties in separate cars, Barry agreeing to leave 
earlier, Debra going to the car and sleeping when she 
felt tired, and Debra taking a cab home. They eventually 
decided to discuss and agree upon a departure time 
before going to a party. 

The couple was able to apply the problem-solving 
method successfully to other issues, such as paying 
the bills and helping Jill get to her afterschool activities. 
They continued to have trouble breaking problems 
down into smaller chunks, and tended to “crosscomplain” 
or bring up larger problems in the middle of 
trying to solve smaller ones. Barry often complained, 
“We aren’t dealing with the source of these problems, 

which is her bipolar disorder. We wouldn’t have these 
problems if she weren’t bipolar.” Again, the therapists 
did not challenge his definition of the problem, but continued 
to offer the message that regardless of whether 
the source of the problems lay in Debra, the couple still 
needed to work collaboratively to generate acceptable 
compromises. 

Termination (Sessions 19–21) 

By 7 months, Debra, whose depression had largely 
remitted, had obtained a new job working in sales at 
a clothing store. The therapists began the termination 
phase of treatment, which focused on reviewing what 
the couple had taken away from the psychoeducation, 
CET, and problem-solving skills modules. Both reported 
that their relationship had improved, and that they 
“occasionally” used the communication skills at home. 
The therapists commented on how far they had come 
and encouraged them to pick a time each week to meet 
and rehearse one or more of the skills. 

Barry was not entirely convinced of Debra’s clinical 
improvement, however. In one of the final sessions, he 
returned to the issue of Debra’s symptoms and her “unwillingness” 
to follow through on tasks such as cooking, 
depositing her paycheck, cleaning Jill’s clothes, 
and doing other tasks they had agreed she would perform. 
The following interchange ensued: 

Barry: (Laughs nervously.) I had this dream the other 
night that I was getting married, and I knew that I 
was marrying Debra, but I couldn’t see her face, and 
I wasn’t sure it was really her. And I wasn’t sure if I 
should be there. 

tHeraPist 1: And you were standing in front of everyone 
wearing your pajamas as well. 

Barry: (Laughs.) Yeah, and I was about to take the 
exam that I hadn’t studied for. But really, sometimes 
I feel like she’s not the same person, especially when 
she doesn’t want to follow through on things we’ve 
talked about. 

tHeraPist 1: Let me give you some perspective on 
this. I think a dilemma many spouses face is “Should 
I stick it out with my husband or my wife, or should 
I leave and take care of me?” There are certainly 
people who do that, who leave, and then there are 
many others who hang out and wait for things to get 
better, which in fact they often do. 


Bipolar Disorder 

Barry: And I think things have gotten better. 

DeBra: I think so. I don’t know why you’re being so 
negative. 

Barry: Well, if you. . . 

tHeraPist 1: (Interrupts.) Let me finish this thought. 
Barry, I think it’s critical for you to make a distinction 
in your own mind between what Debra can and 
can’t control. That’s sometimes vague between the 
two of you. When you say she doesn’t want to follow 
through, that certainly sounds like an intentional 
behavior—something she’s doing to hurt you or 
annoy you. Debra, do the problems with following 
through ever feel like they’re about problems with 
your concentration? Your attention or your memory? 

DeBra: (nodding emphatically) Absolutely! If you 
could get him to realize that, we’d be a lot farther 
along. 

Barry: That memory stuff—is that her bipolar disorder 
or her attention deficit disorder? 

tHeraPist 1: I’m not sure that’s really the question. 
That’s just a diagnostic distinction, and I’m not sure 
my answering one way or the other will help you. 
Maybe what you’re really wondering is whether 
these problems are controllable by her or not. If I 
were in your position, the things that would really 
anger me would be those things I thought she was 
doing intentionally. 

Barry: Yeah, and I don’t always think about that. 

tHeraPist 1: If I thought what she was doing was due 
to a biological dysregulation, I might be more patient, 
more sympathetic—in the same way that if someone 
had a broken leg and had trouble walking up stairs, I 
might have more sympathy than if I thought she was 
deliberately trying to hold me up. 

In this segment, the therapist was addressing directly 
what he felt was a major source of Barry’s critical attitudes 
toward Debra: the belief that many of her negative 
behaviors were controllable and intentional (Hooley & 
Licht, 1997; Miklowitz et al., 1998). In some instances, 
Barry may have been right about Debra’s motivations. 
But questioning the controllability of her symptoms 
forced him to consider a different set of causal explanations 
for her behavior. The distinction between controllable 
and uncontrollable behavior is a key point in 
the psychoeducational treatment of families of patients 
with bipolar disorder. 

Barry and Debra’s Progress 

After completing FFT, Debra continued to have mild 
periods of depression despite her adherence to medication. 
Her depressions were unpleasant but not so 
severe that she was unable to keep her job or attend 
to her parenting duties. Her brief hypomanic periods 
sometimes caused arguments between Debra and 
Barry but were not debilitating. Barry and Debra were 
communicating better, and both agreed that Barry 
was more patient and less critical of her. But Debra 
frequently found herself reacting with the line from 
the now famous movie, “What if this is as good as 
it gets?” Although she was functional, she expressed 
chagrin that she could not have the life she had wanted—
a successful career, a more intimate relationship 
with her husband, more friendships, an easier relationship 
with her daughter, and more financial success. 
The reality of her disorder and its psychosocial effects 
were difficult for her to accept. However, Debra felt 
that FFT had been helpful, as had her medication, 
which she showed no inclination to discontinue. The 
therapists offered her a referral for individual or group 
therapy, but Debra decided to forgo further psychosocial 
treatment for the time being. Barry was given the 
name of a local DBSA group for spouses of persons 
with mood disorders. 

coNclusioNs 

Family psychoeducational treatment appears to be a 
useful adjunct to pharmacotherapy. However, not all patients 
with bipolar disorder have families, and individual 
or group treatment approaches are important alternatives 
to consider. The finding that mood-stabilizing 
medications are more powerful in alleviating manic 
than depressive symptoms, whereas the reverse may be 
true for psychotherapy, is an argument for combining 
medical and psychosocial interventions in the outpatient 
maintenance of bipolar disorder. 

There is limited research on which families are the 
best candidates for FFT. In several of our trials, patients 
in high-EE families have shown greater reductions 
in mood severity scores over 1–2 years than those 
in low-EE families. But reductions in relapses have 
been observed in patients from both high- and low-EE 
families treated with FFT. Our clinical observations 
also suggest that there are subgroups of patients who 
do not respond well to FFT. Specifically, patients who 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

are unusually resistant to accepting the diagnosis of 
bipolar disorder often resent the educational focus of 
FFT. These patients usually see their troubles as having 
external origins (i.e., being mistreated by others) 
and resist interventions that require them to take more 
responsibility for their behavior. These patients may 
also reject pharmacotherapy. Sadly, we have seen many 
patients go through several hospitalizations before the 
reality of their disorder sets in. 

A different kind of resistance originates from viewing 
the disorder as biologically based. Some patients 
prefer to limit their mental health contacts to a psychiatrist 
for medication, and regard psychotherapy as irrelevant. 
We see nothing wrong with this position; a subset 
of patients does function well on medication only. 
Future research needs to determine whether this selfselected 
group is different from patients who request 
psychotherapy, in terms of symptomatic, course-ofillness, 
or family/genetic variables. Equally importantly, 
some patients with bipolar II depression may recover 
just as quickly with psychotherapy as with medications 
(Swartz, Frank, & Cheng, 2012). 

Family members are sometimes a major source of 
resistance. Their reasons can include a desire to distance 
themselves from the patient (whom they may 
have tried to help for years without reward), time or 
distance constraints, or the discomfort of talking about 
family or couple issues in front of a stranger. More subtle 
is the fear of being blamed for the disorder (Hatfield, 
Spaniol, & Zipple, 1987). The family therapy movement 
has come a long way, but it still has its roots in a 
culture that faulted parents for causing mental illness. 
The theoretical model underlying FFT does not in any 
way link poor parenting to the onset of bipolar disorder. 
Nonetheless, a clinician often needs to make clear 
early in treatment that he/she does not adhere to this 
antiquated position. 

future DirectioNs 

Important future research will include effectiveness 
studies, which examine the clinical impact of psychotherapy 
as delivered to patients in “real-world” 
(typically community mental health) settings, by the 
clinicians who work in these settings and the time constraints 
within which they work. As explained earlier, 
FFT was found to be effective in stabilizing depression 

and maintaining wellness in the large-scale STEP-BD 
study of community effectiveness, which included therapists 
working in 15 outpatient sites (Miklowitz et al., 
2007b). It remains to be seen whether FFT, along with 
other treatments whose evidence base includes STEP-
BD (CBT, IPSRT), will be taken up by practicing clinicians. 


A related problem is determining the proper structure 
of FFT. In many community settings, insurance 
companies only pay for six to eight sessions. FFT is 
rather time-intensive, and research is needed to determine 
which of its components predict the greatest 
proportion of variance in the clinical outcome of 
participants and the quality of life of family members. 
For example, it is possible that some families will benefit 
from just the psychoeducation module or just the 
communication module. Perhaps these modules could 
be streamlined without a great loss in treatment effect 
size. Ideally, decisions to modify treatments such as 
FFT will be based on clinical outcomes research rather 
than solely on the desire for cost containment. 

A final direction is the applicability of FFT and other 
psychotherapy treatments to child and adolescent patients 
with bipolar disorder, or genetically vulnerable 
children who are showing early prodromal signs. The 
fact that bipolar disorder even exists in school-age or 
early adolescent youth is just now being recognized, 
and factors that predict the onset of the full disorder— 
such as the presence of a family history of mania— 
are being identified (Axelson, Birmaher, Strober, et al., 
2011; Birmaher et al., 2009). Our current research is 
examining whether giving FFT in the earliest stages of 
the disorder reduces the risk of developing the full syndrome 
(Miklowitz et al., 2013). Possibly the negative 
symptomatic and psychosocial outcomes of adult bipolar 
disorder can be mitigated through early detection 
and carefully planned preventive interventions. 

aCknowledgMents 

Preparation of this chapter was supported in part by National 
Institute of Mental Health Grant Nos. MH43931, MH55101, 
MH42556, MH62555, MH073871, MH077856, MH093676, 
and MH097007; a Distinguished Investigator Award from 
the National Association for Research on Schizophrenia and 
Depression; and a Faculty Fellowship from the University of 
Colorado’s Council on Research and Creative Work. 


Bipolar Disorder 

referenCes 

Akiskal, H. S. (1996). The prevalent clinical spectrum of bipolar 
disorders: Beyond DSM-IV. Journal of Clinical Psychopharmacology, 
16(Suppl. 1), 4–14. 

Alloy, L. B., Uroševi, S., Abramson, L. Y., Jager-Hyman, S., 
Nusslock, R., Whitehouse, W. G., et al. (2012). Progression 
along the bipolar spectrum: A longitudinal study of 
predictors of conversion from bipolar spectrum conditions 
to bipolar I and II disorders. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 
121(1), 16–27. 

Altshuler, L. L., Bearden, C., Green, M., van Gorp, W., & 
Mintz, J. (2008). A relationship between neurocognitive 
impairment and functional impairment: A pilot study. Psychiatry 
Research, 157, 289–293. 

Altshuler, L. L., Post, R. M., Black, D. O., Keck, P. E. J., 
Nolen, W. A., Frye, M. A., et al. (2006). Subsyndromal depressive 
symptoms are associated with functional impairment 
in patients with bipolar disorder: Results of a large, 
multisite study. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 67(10), 
1551–1560. 

Altshuler, L. L., Post, R. M., Leverich, G. S., Mikalauskas, 
K., Rosoff, A., & Ackerman, L. (1995). Antidepressant- 
induced mania and cycle acceleration: A controversy revisited. 
American Journal of Psychiatry, 152, 1130–1138. 

American Psychiatric Association. (1994). Diagnostic and 
statistical manual of mental disorders (4th ed.). Washington, 
DC: Author. 

American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and 
statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.). Arlington, 
VA: Author. 

Axelson, D., Birmaher, B. J., Brent, D., Wassick, S., Hoover, 
C., Bridge, J., et al. (2003). A preliminary study of the 
Kiddie Schedule for Affective Disorders and Schizophrenia 
for School-Age Children mania rating scale for children 
and adolescents. Journal of Child and Adolescent 
Psychopharmacology, 13, 463–470. 

Axelson, D. A., Birmaher, B., Findling, R. L., Fristad, M. A., 
Kowatch, R. A., Youngstrom, E. A., et al. (2011). Concerns 
regarding the inclusion of temper dysregulation disorder 
with dysphoria in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of 
Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 
72(9), 1257–1262. 

Axelson, D. A., Birmaher, B., Strober, M. A., Goldstein, B. 
I., Ha, W., Gill, M. K., et al. (2011). Course of subthreshold 
bipolar disorder in youth: Diagnostic progression from 
bipolar disorder not otherwise specified. Journal of the 
American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 
50(10), 1001–1016. 

Baldessarini, R. J., Tondo, L., & Hennen, J. (2003). Lithium 
treatment and suicide risk in major affective disorders: 
Update and new findings. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 
64(Suppl. 5), 44–52. 

Bauer, M. S., McBride, L., Williford, W. O., Glick, H., Kinosian, 
B., Altshuler, L., et al. (2006). Collaborative care for 
bipolar disorder: Part II. Impact on clinical outcome, function, 
and costs Psychiatric Services, 57, 937–945. 

Berrettini, W. (2003). Evidence for shared susceptibility in 
bipolar disorder and schizophrenia. American Journal of 
Medical Genetics, Part C, 123, 59–64. 

Birmaher, B., Axelson, D., Goldstein, B., Strober, M., Gill, 

M. K., Hunt, J., et al. (2009). Four-year longitudinal 
course of children and adolescents with bipolar spectrum 
disorders: The Course and Outcome of Bipolar Youth 
(COBY) study. American Journal of Psychiatry, 166(7), 
795–804. 
Butzlaff, R. L., & Hooley, J. M. (1998). Expressed emotion 
and psychiatric relapse: A meta-analysis. Archives of General 
Psychiatry, 55, 547–552. 

Calabrese, J. R., Fatemi, S. H., Kujawa, M., & Woyshville, 

M. J. (1996). Predictors of response to mood stabilizers. 
Journal of Clinical Psychopharmacology, 16(Suppl. 1), 
24–31. 
Carlson, G. A., Findling, R. L., Post, R. M., Birmaher, B., 
Blumberg, H. P., Correll, C., et al. (2009). AACAP 2006 
Research Forum—Advancing research in early-onset bipolar 
disorder: Barriers and suggestions. Journal of Child 
and Adolescent Psychopharmacology, 19(1), 3–12. 

Chambers, W. J., Puig-Antich, J., Hirsch, M., Paez, P., Ambrosini, 
P. J., Tabrizi, M. A., et al. (1985). The assessment 
of affective disorders in children and adolescents by semistructured 
interview: Test–retest reliability. Archives of 
General Psychiatry, 42, 696–702. 

Colom, F., Vieta, E., Martinez-Aran, A., Reinares, M., 
Goikolea, J. M., Benabarre, A., et al. (2003). A randomized 
trial on the efficacy of group psychoeducation in the 
prophylaxis of recurrences in bipolar patients whose disease 
is in remission. Archives of General Psychiatry, 60, 
402–407. 

Colom, F., Vieta, E., Martinez-Aran, A., Reinares, M., 
Goikolea, A., Benabarre, A., et al. (2009). A randomized 
trial on the efficacy of group psychoeducation in the prophylaxis 
of bipolar disorder: A five year follow-up. British 
Journal of Psychiatry, 194(3), 260–265. 

Colom, F., Vieta, E., Sanchez-Moreno, J., Martinez-Aran, A., 
Reinares, M., Goikolea, J. M., et al. (2005). Stabilizing the 
stabilizer: Group psychoeducation enhances the stability 
of serum lithium levels. Bipolar Disorders, 7(Suppl. 5), 
32–36. 

Colom, F., Vieta, E., Tacchi, M. J., Sanchez-Moreno, J., & 
Scott, J. (2005). Identifying and improving non-adherence 
in bipolar disorders. Bipolar Disorders, 7(5), 24–31. 

Coryell, W., Endicott, J., & Keller, M. (1992). Rapidly cycling 
affective disorder: Demographics, diagnosis, family 
history, and course. Archives of General Psychiatry, 49, 
126–131. 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

Cuellar, A. K., Johnson, S. L., & Winters, R. (2005). Distinctions 
between bipolar and unipolar depression. Clinical 
Psychology Review, 25(3), 307–339. 

Cutler, N. R., & Post, R. M. (1982). Life course of illness in 
untreated manic–depressive patients. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 
23, 101–115. 

Dausch, B. M., Miklowitz, D. J., & Richards, J. A. (1996). A 
Scale for the Global Assessment of Relational Functioning, 
II: Reliability and validity in a sample of families of 
bipolar patients. Family Process, 35, 175–189. 

Deckersbach, T., Nierenberg, A. A., Kessler, R., Lund, H. G., 
Ametrano, R. M., Sachs, G., et al. (2010). Cognitive rehabilitation 
for bipolar disorder: An open trial for employed 
patients with residual depressive symptoms. CNS Neuroscience 
and Therapeutics, 16(5), 298–307. 

Ehlers, C. L., Kupfer, D. J., Frank, E., & Monk, T. H. (1993). 
Biological rhythms and depression: The role of zeitgebers 
and zeitstorers. Depression, 1, 285–293. 

Falloon, I. R. H., Boyd, J. L., & McGill, C. W. (1984). Family 
care of schizophrenia: A problem-solving approach 
to the treatment of mental illness. New York: Guilford 
Press. 

Fiedorowicz, J. G., Endicott, J., Leon, A. C., Solomon, D. 
A., Keller, M. B., & Coryell, W. H. (2011). Subthreshold 
hypomanic symptoms in progression from unipolar major 
depression to bipolar disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 
168(1), 40-48. 

First, M. B. (2010). DSM-5 proposals for mood disorders: 
A cost–benefit analysis. Current Opinion in Psychiatry, 
24(1), 1–9. 

First, M. B., Spitzer, R. L., Gibbon, M., & Williams, J. B. 

W. (1995). Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV Axis 
I disorders. New York: Biometrics Research Department, 
New York State Psychiatric Institute. 
Frank, E. (2005). Treating bipolar disorder: A clinician’s 
guide to interpersonal and social rhythm therapy. New 
York: Guilford Press. 

Frank, E. (2011). Proposed revisions to the concept of mixed 
episodes in DSM-5: The path traveled (abstract). Bipolar 
Disorders, 13(1), 14. 

Frank, E., Kupfer, D. J., Thase, M. E., Mallinger, A. G., 
Swartz, H. A., Fagiolini, A. M., et al. (2005). Two-year 
outcomes for interpersonal and social rhythm therapy in 
individuals with bipolar I disorder. Archives of General 
Psychiatry, 62(9), 996–1004. 

Frank, E., Soreca, I., Swartz, H. A., Fagiolini, A. M., 
Mallinger, A. G., Thase, M. E., et al. (2008). The role of 
interpersonal and social rhythm therapy in improving occupational 
functioning in patients with bipolar I disorder. 
American Journal of Psychiatry, 165(12), 1559–1565. 

Fristad, M. A., Verducci, J. S., Walters, K., & Young, M. E. 
(2009). Impact of multifamily psychoeducational psychotherapy 
in treating children aged 8 to 12 years with 
mood disorders. Archives of General Psychiatry, 66(9), 
1013–1021. 

Geddes, J. R. & Miklowitz, D. J. (2013). Treatment of bipolar 
disorder. Lancet, 381, 1672–1682. 

George, E. L., Miklowitz, D. J., Richards, J. A., Simoneau, 

T. L., & Taylor, D. O. (2003). The comorbidity of bipolar 
disorder and Axis II personality disorders: Prevalence and 
clinical correlates. Bipolar Disorders, 5, 115–122. 
Gitlin, M. J., Mintz, J., Sokolski, K., Hammen, C., & Altshuler, 
L. L. (2011). Subsyndromal depressive symptoms after 
symptomatic recovery from mania are associated with delayed 
functional recovery. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 
72(5), 692–697. 

Gitlin, M. J., Swendsen, J., Heller, T. L., & Hammen, C. 
(1995). Relapse and impairment in bipolar disorder. American 
Journal of Psychiatry, 152(11), 1635–1640. 

Goes, F. S., Hamshere, M. L., Seifuddin, F., Pirooznia, M., 
Belmonte-Mahon, P., Breuer, R., et al. (2012). Genomewide 
association of mood-incongruent psychotic bipolar 
disorder. Translational Psychiatry, 2, e180. 

Goldberg, J. F. (2004). The changing landscape of psychopharmacology. 
In S. L. Johnson & R. L. Leahy (Eds.), Psychological 
treatment of bipolar disorder (pp. 109–138). 
New York: Guilford Press. 

Goldberg, J. F., & Kocsis, J. H. (1999). Depression in the 
course of bipolar disorder. In J. F. Goldberg & M. Harrow 
(Eds.), Bipolar disorders: Clinical course and outcome 
(pp. 129–147). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric 
Press. 

Goldstein, B. I., Goldstein, T. R., & Miklowitz, D. J. (2008). 
Integrating a substance use disorder (SUD) perspective 
into family-focused therapy of adolescents with bipolar 
disorder (FFT-A). Pittsburgh, PA: Western Psychiatric Institute 
and Clinic. 

Hahlweg, K., Goldstein, M. J., Nuechterlein, K. H., Magana, 

A. B., Mintz, J., Doane, J. A., et al. (1989). Expressed emotion 
and patient–relative interaction in families of recentonset 
schizophrenics. Journal of Consulting and Clinical 
Psychology, 57, 11–18. 
Harrow, M., Grossman, L. S., Herbener, E. S., & Davies, 

E. W. (2000). Ten-year outcome: Patients with schizoaffective 
disorders, schizophrenia, affective disorders and 
mood-incongruent psychotic symptoms. British Journal 
of Psychiatry, 177, 421–426. 
Hatfield, A. B., Spaniol, L., & Zipple, A. M. (1987). Expressed 
emotion: A family perspective. Schizophrenia 
Bulletin, 13, 221–226. 

Henin, A., Biederman, J., Mick, E., Sachs, G. S., Hirshfeld-
Becker, D. R., Siegel, R. S., et al. (2005). Psychopathology 
in the offspring of parents with bipolar disorder: A controlled 
study. Biological Psychiatry, 58(7), 554–561. 

Honig, A., Hofman, A., Rozendaal, N., & Dingemanns, P. 
(1997). Psychoeducation in bipolar disorder: Effect on expressed 
emotion. Psychiatry Research, 72, 17–22. 

Hooley, J. M., & Licht, D. M. (1997). Expressed emotion and 
causal attributions in the spouses of depressed patients. 
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 106, 298–306. 


Bipolar Disorder 

Hooley, J. M., & Teasdale, J. D. (1989). Predictors of relapse 
in unipolar depressives: Expressed emotion, marital distress, 
and perceived criticism. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 
98, 229–235. 

Johnson, R. E., & McFarland, B. H. (1996). Lithium use and 
discontinuation in a health maintenance organization. 
American Journal of Psychiatry, 153, 993–1000. 

Johnson, S. L. (2005a). Life events in bipolar disorder: Towards 
more specific models. Clinical Psychology Review, 
25(8), 1008–1027. 

Johnson, S. L. (2005b). Mania and dysregulation in goal pursuit. 
Clinical Psychology Review, 25, 241–262. 

Johnson, S. L., Cuellar, A., Ruggero, C., Perlman, C., Goodnick, 
P., White, R., et al. (2008). Life events as predictors 
of mania and depression in bipolar I disorder. Journal of 
Abnormal Psychology, 117, 268–277. 

Johnson, S. L., Edge, M. D., Holmes, M. K., & Carver, C. S. 
(2012). The behavioral activation system and mania. Annual 
Review of Clinical Psychology, 8, 143–167. 

Johnson, S. L., Sandrow, D., Meyer, B., Winters, R., Miller, I., 
Solomon, D., et al. (2000). Increases in manic symptoms 
following life events involving goal-attainment. Journal of 
Abnormal Psychology, 109, 721–727. 

Judd, L. L., Akiskal, H. S., Schettler, P. J., Endicott, J., Maser, 
J., Solomon, D. A., et al. (2002). The long-term natural 
history of the weekly symptomatic status of bipolar I disorder. 
Archives of General Psychiatry, 59, 530–537. 

Kaufman, J., Birmaher, B., Brent, D., Rao, U., Flynn, C., 
Moreci, P., et al. (1997). Schedule for Affective Disorders 
and Schizophrenia for School-Age Children—Present and 
Lifetime version (K-SADS-PL): Initial reliability and validity 
data. Journal of the American Academy of Child and 
Adolescent Psychiatry, 36, 980–988. 

Keck, P. E., McElroy, S. L., Strakowski, S. M., West, S. A., 
Sax, K. W., Hawkins, J. M., et al. (1998). 12-month outcome 
of patients with bipolar disorder following hospitalization 
for a manic or mixed episode. American Journal of 
Psychiatry, 155, 646–652. 

Kim, E. Y., & Miklowitz, D. J. (2002). Childhood mania, 
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, and conduct disorder: 
A critical review of diagnostic dilemmas. Bipolar 
Disorders, 4, 215–225. 

Klerman, G. L., Weissman, M. M., Rounsaville, B. J., & 
Chevron, R. S. (1984). Interpersonal psychotherapy of depression. 
New York: Basic Books. 

Kraepelin, É. (1921). Manic–depressive insanity and paranoia. 
Edinburgh, UK: Livingstone. 

Kumari, V., Fannon, D., Peters, E. R., Ffytche, D. H., Sumich, 

A. L., Premkumar, P., et al. (2011). Neural changes following 
cognitive behaviour therapy for psychosis: A longitudinal 
study. Brain, 134(8), 2396–2407. 
Lam, D. H., Burbeck, R., Wright, K., & Pilling, S. (2009). 
Psychological therapies in bipolar disorder: The effect of 
illness history on relapse prevention—a systematic review. 
Bipolar Disorders, 11(5), 474–482. 

Lam, D. H., Hayward, P., Watkins, E. R., Wright, K., & Sham, 

P. (2005). Relapse prevention in patients with bipolar disorder: 
Cognitive therapy outcome after 2 years. American 
Journal of Psychiatry, 162, 324–329. 
Lam, D. H., Watkins, E. R., Hayward, P., Bright, J., Wright, 
K., Kerr, N., et al. (2003). A randomized controlled study 
of cognitive therapy of relapse prevention for bipolar affective 
disorder: Outcome of the first year. Archives of 
General Psychiatry, 60, 145–152. 

Leibenluft, E. (2011). Severe mood dysregulation, irritability, 
and the diagnostic boundaries of bipolar disorder in 
youths. American Journal of Psychiatry, 168(2), 129–142. 

Leibenluft, E., Charney, D. S., Towbin, K. E., Bhangoo, R. 
K., & Pine, D. S. (2003). Defining clinical phenotypes 
of juvenile mania. American Journal of Psychiatry, 160, 
430–437. 

Leverich, G. S., & Post, R. M. (1998). Life charting of affective 
disorders. CNS Spectrums, 3, 21–37. 

Leverich, G. S., Post, R. M., Keck, P. E. J., Altshuler, L. L., 
Frye, M. A., Kupka, R. W., et al. (2007). The poor prognosis 
of childhood-onset bipolar disorder. Journal of Pediatrics, 
150(5), 485–490. 

Liberman, R. P., Wallace, C. J., Falloon, I. R. H., & Vaughn, 

C. E. (1981). Interpersonal problem solving therapy for 
schizophrenics and their families. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 
22, 627–629. 
Malhi, G. S., Adams, D., & Berk, M. (2009). Medicating 
mood with maintenance in mind: Bipolar depression pharmacotherapy. 
Bipolar Disorders, 11(Suppl. 2), 55–76. 

Malkoff-Schwartz, S., Frank, E., Anderson, B. P., Hlastala, S. 
A., Luther, J. F., Sherrill, J. T., et al. (2000). Social rhythm 
disruption and stressful life events in the onset of bipolar 
and unipolar episodes. Psychological Medicine, 30, 
1005–1016. 

Malkoff-Schwartz, S., Frank, E., Anderson, B., Sherrill, J. T., 
Siegel, L., Patterson, D., et al. (1998). Stressful life events 
and social rhythm disruption in the onset of manic and 
depressive bipolar episodes: A preliminary investigation. 
Archives of General Psychiatry, 55, 702–707. 

Masi, G., Mucci, M., Pfanner, C., Berloffa, S., Magazù, A., 
& Perugi, G. (2012). Developmental pathways for different 
subtypes of early-onset bipolarity in youths. Journal of 
Clinical Psychiatry, 73(10), 1355–1341. 

Merikangas, K. R., Akiskal, H. S., Angst, J., Greenberg, P. 
E., Hirschfeld, R. M. A., Petukhova, M., et al. (2007). 
Lifetime and 12-month prevalence of bipolar spectrum 
disorder in the National Comorbidity Survey Replication. 
Archives of General Psychiatry, 64(5), 543–552. 

Merikangas, K. R., Cui, L., Kattan, G., Carlson, G. A., 
Youngstrom, E. A., & Angst, J. (2012). Mania with and 
without depression in a community sample of US adolescents. 
Archives of General Psychiatry, 69(9), 943–951. 

Merikangas, K. R., Jin, R., He, J. P., Kessler, R. C., Lee, S., 
Sampson, N. A., et al. (2011). Prevalence and correlates 
of bipolar spectrum disorder in the World Mental Health 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

Survey Initiative. Archives of General Psychiatry, 68(3), 
241–251. 

Meyer, B., Johnson, S. L., & Winters, R. (2001). Responsiveness 
to threat and incentive in bipolar disorder: Relations 
of the BIS/BAS scales with symptoms. Journal of Psychopathology 
and Behavioral Assessment, 23, 133–143. 

Miklowitz, D. J. (2008a). Adjunctive psychotherapy for bipolar 
disorder: State of the evidence. American Journal of 
Psychiatry, 165(11), 1408–1419. 

Miklowitz, D. J. (2008b). Bipolar disorder: A family-focused 
treatment approach (2nd ed.). New York: Guilford Press. 

Miklowitz, D. J. (2012). A family intervention approach to 
bipolar disorder and substance abuse in late adolescence. 
Journal of Clinical Psychology: In Session, 68(5), 502– 
513. 

Miklowitz, D. J., Axelson, D. A., Birmaher, B., George, E. 
L., Taylor, D. O., Schneck, C. D., et al. (2008). Familyfocused 
treatment for adolescents with bipolar disorder: 
Results of a 2-year randomized trial. Archives of General 
Psychiatry, 65(9), 1053–1061. 

Miklowitz, D. J., Axelson, D. A., George, E. L., Taylor, D. O., 
Schneck, C. D., Sullivan, A. E., et al. (2009). Expressed 
emotion moderates the effects of family-focused treatment 
for bipolar adolescents. Journal of the American Academy 
of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 48, 643–651. 

Miklowitz, D. J., Biuckians, A., & Richards, J. A. (2006). 
Early-onset bipolar disorder: A family treatment perspective. 
Development and Psychopathology, 18, 1247–1265. 

Miklowitz, D. J., George, E. L., Axelson, D. A., Kim, E. Y., 
Birmaher, B., Schneck, C., et al. (2004). Family-focused 
treatment for adolescents with bipolar disorder. Journal of 
Affective Disorders, 82(Suppl. 1), 113–128. 

Miklowitz, D. J., George, E. L., Richards, J. A., Simoneau, 

T. L., & Suddath, R. L. (2003). A randomized study of 
family-focused psychoeducation and pharmacotherapy in 
the outpatient management of bipolar disorder. Archives of 
General Psychiatry, 60, 904–912. 
Miklowitz, D. J., & Goldstein, M. J. (1997). Bipolar disorder: 
A family-focused treatment approach. New York: 
Guilford Press. 

Miklowitz, D. J., Goldstein, M. J., Nuechterlein, K. H., Snyder, 
K. S., & Mintz, J. (1988). Family factors and the 
course of bipolar affective disorder. Archives of General 
Psychiatry, 45, 225–231. 

Miklowitz, D. J., Otto, M. W., Frank, E., Reilly-Harrington, 

N. A., Wisniewski, S. R., Kogan, J. N., et al. (2007a). Is 
psychosocial management effective?: In reply to Saddichha 
and Kumar. Archives of General Psychiatry, 64, 
1452–1453. 
Miklowitz, D. J., Otto, M. W., Frank, E., Reilly-Harrington, 

N. A., Wisniewski, S. R., Kogan, J. N., et al. (2007b). 
Psychosocial treatments for bipolar depression: A 1-year 
randomized trial from the Systematic Treatment Enhancement 
Program. Archives of General Psychiatry, 64, 419– 
427. 
Miklowitz, D. J., Schneck, C. D., Singh, M. K., Taylor, D. O., 
George, E. L., Cosgrove, V. E., et al. (2013). Early intervention 
for symptomatic youth at risk for bipolar disorder: 
A randomized trial of family-focused therapy. Journal of 
the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 
52(2), 121–131. 

Miklowitz, D. J., & Scott, J. (2009). Psychosocial treatments 
for bipolar disorder: Cost-effectiveness, mediating 
mechanisms, and future directions. Bipolar Disorders, 11, 
110–122. 

Miklowitz, D. J., Wendel, J. S., & Simoneau, T. L. (1998). 
Targeting dysfunctional family interactions and high expressed 
emotion in the psychosocial treatment of bipolar 
disorder. In Session: Psychotherapy in Practice, 4, 25–38. 

Miklowitz, D. J., Wisniewski, S. R., Miyahara, S., Otto, M. 
W., & Sachs, G. S. (2005). Perceived criticism from family 
members as a predictor of the 1-year course of bipolar 
disorder. Psychiatry Research, 136(2–3), 101–111. 

Monk, T. H., Kupfer, D. J., Frank, E., & Ritenour, A. M. 
(1991). The Social Rhythm Metric (SRM): Measuring 
daily social rhythms over 12 weeks. Psychiatry Research, 
36, 195–207. 

Murray, G., Suto, M., Hole, R., Hale, S., Amari, E., & Michalak, 
E. E. (2011). Self-management strategies used 
by “high functioning” individuals with bipolar disorder: 
From research to clinical practice. Clinical Psychology 
and Psychotherapy, 18(2), 95–109. 

Napier, A. Y., & Whitaker, C. (1988). The family crucible: 
The intense experience of family therapy. New York: 
Harper & Row. 

O’Connell, R. A., Mayo, J. A., Flatow, L., Cuthbertson, B., 
& O’Brien, B. E. (1991). Outcome of bipolar disorder on 
long-term treatment with lithium. British Journal of Psychiatry, 
159, 132–129. 

Priebe, S., Wildgrube, C., & Muller-Oerlinghausen, B. 
(1989). Lithium prophylaxis and expressed emotion. British 
Journal of Psychiatry, 154, 396–399. 

Rea, M. M., Tompson, M., Miklowitz, D. J., Goldstein, M. 
J., Hwang, S., & Mintz, J. (2003). Family focused treatment 
vs. individual treatment for bipolar disorder: Results 
of a randomized clinical trial. Journal of Consulting and 
Clinical Psychology, 71, 482–492. 

Sachs, G. S., Nierenberg, A. A., Calabrese, J. R., Marangell, 

L. B., Wisniewski, S. R., Gyulai, L., et al. (2007). Effectiveness 
of adjunctive antidepressant treatment for bipolar 
depression. New England Journal of Medicine, 356(17), 
1711–1722. 
Sato, T., Bottlender, R., Schröter, A., & Möller, H. J. (2003). 
Frequency of manic symptoms during a depressive episode 
and unipolar “depressive mixed state” as bipolar 
spectrum. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 107(4), 268– 
274. 

Sala, R., Axelson, D. A., Castro-Fornieles, J., Goldstein, T. 
R., Ha, W., Liao, F., et al. (2010). Comorbid anxiety in 
children and adolescents with bipolar spectrum disorders: 


Bipolar Disorder 

prevalence and clinical correlates. Journal of Clinical 
Psychiatry, 71(10), 1344–1350. 

Salavert, J., Caseras, X., Torrubia, R., Furest, S., Arranz, B., 
Duenas, R., et al. (2007). The functioning of the Behavioral 
Activation and Inhibition Systems in bipolar I euthymic 
patients and its influence in subsequent episodes over an 
eighteen-month period. Personality and Individual Differences, 
42(7), 1323–1331. 

Scherk, H., Pajonk, F. G., & Leucht, S. (2007). Secondgeneration 
antipsychotic agents in the treatment of acute 
mania: A systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized 
controlled trials. Archives of General Psychiatry, 
64(4), 442–455. 

Schlosser, D. A., Miklowitz, D. J., O’Brien, M. P., De Silva, 
S., Zinberg, J. L., & Cannon, T. D. (2012). A randomized 
trial of family-focused treatment for adolescents and 
young adults at risk for psychosis: Study rationale, design, 
and methods. Early Intervention in Psychiatry, 6(3), 
283–291. 

Scott, J., Paykel, E., Morriss, R., Bentall, R., Kinderman, P., 
Johnson, T., et al. (2006). Cognitive behaviour therapy for 
severe and recurrent bipolar disorders: A randomised controlled 
trial. British Journal of Psychiatry, 188, 313–320. 

Simon, G. E., Ludman, E. J., Bauer, M. S., Unutzer, J., & Operskalski, 
B. (2006). Long-term effectiveness and cost of 
a systematic care program for bipolar disorder. Archives of 
General Psychiatry, 63(5), 500–508. 

Simoneau, T. L., Miklowitz, D. J., Richards, J. A., Saleem, 
R., & George, E. L. (1999). Bipolar disorder and family 
communication: Effects of a psychoeducational treatment 
program. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 108, 588–597. 

Simoneau, T. L., Miklowitz, D. J., & Saleem, R. (1998). Expressed 
emotion and interactional patterns in the families 
of bipolar patients. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 107, 
497–507. 

Spitzer, R. L., Williams, J. B., Gibbon, M., & First, M. B. 
(1992). The Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-III-R 
(SCID): I. History, rationale, and description. Archives of 
General Psychiatry, 49(8), 624–629. 

Strakowski, S. M., Keck, P. E., McElroy, S. L., West, S. A., 
Sax, K. W., Hawkins, J. M., et al. (1998). Twelve-month 
outcome after a first hospitalization for affective psychosis. 
Archives of General Psychiatry, 55, 49–55. 

Suppes, T., Leverich, G. S., Keck, P. E., Nolen, W. A., 
Denicoff, K. D., Altshuler, L. L., et al. (2001). The Stanley 
Foundation Bipolar Treatment Outcome Network: II. 
Demographics and illness characteristics of the first 261 
patients. Journal of Affective Disorders, 67, 45–59. 

Suppes, T., Mintz, J., McElroy, S. L., Altshuler, L. L., Kupka, 

R. W., Frye, M. A., et al. (2005). Mixed hypomania in 908 
patients with bipolar disorder evaluated prospectively in 
the Stanley Foundation Bipolar Treatment Network: A 
sex-specific phenomenon. Archives of General Psychiatry, 
62(10), 1089–1096. 

Swann, A. C., Dougherty, D. M., Pazzaglia, P. J., Pham, M., 
& Moeller, F. G. (2004). Impulsivity: A link between bipolar 
disorder and substance abuse. Bipolar Disorders, 6, 
204–212. 

Swartz, H. A., Frank, E., & Cheng, Y. (2012). A randomized 
pilot study of psychotherapy and quetiapine for the acute 
treatment of bipolar II depression. Bipolar Disorders, 
14(2), 211–216. 

Van Meter, A. R., Moreira, A. L., & Youngstrom, E. A. 
(2011). Meta-analysis of epidemiologic studies of pediatric 
bipolar disorder. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 72(9), 
1250–1256. 

Vaughn, C. E., & Leff, J. P. (1976). The influence of family 
and social factors on the course of psychiatric illness: A 
comparison of schizophrenia and depressed neurotic patients. 
British Journal of Psychiatry, 129, 125–137. 

Vitiello, B., & Swedo, S. (2004). Antidepressant medications 
in children. New England Journal of Medicine, 350, 
1489–1491. 

Weinstock, L. M., & Miller, I. W. (2008). Functional impairment 
as a predictor of short-term symptom course in bipolar 
I disorder. Bipolar Disorders, 10(3), 437–442. 

Weinstock, L. M., Strong, D., Uebelacker, L. A., & Miller, I. 

W. (2009). Differential item functioning of DSM-IV depressive 
symptoms in individuals with a history of mania 
versus those without: An item response theory analysis. 
Bipolar Disorders, 11(3), 289–297. 
Weisman, A., Lopez, S. R., Karno, M., & Jenkins, J. (1993). 
An attributional analysis of expressed emotion in Mexican-
American families with schizophrenia. Journal of Abnormal 
Psychology, 102, 601–606. 

Wendel, J. S., Miklowitz, D. J., Richards, J. A., & George, E. 

L. (2000). Expressed emotion and attributions in the relatives 
of bipolar patients: An analysis of problem-solving 
interactions. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 109, 792– 
796. 
West, A. E., & Weinstein, S. M. (2012). A family-based psychosocial 
treatment model. Israeli Journal of Psychiatry 
and Related Sciences, 49(2), 86–93. 

Wilens, T. E., Biederman, J., Kwon, A., Ditterline, J., Forkner, 
P., Moore, H., et al. (2004). Risk of substance use disorders 
in adolescents with bipolar disorder. Journal of the 
American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 
43(11), 1380–1386. 

Yan, L. J., Hammen, C., Cohen, A. N., Daley, S. E., & Henry, 

R. M. (2004). Expressed emotion versus relationship quality 
variables in the prediction of recurrence in bipolar patients. 
Journal of Affective Disorders, 83, 199–206. 

CHaPter 12 

schizophrenia and other 
Psychotic Disorders 

Nicholas tarrier 
ruMiNa taylor 

Among the most remarkable advances in the last decade is the direct treatment of “positive” 
symptoms of schizophrenia with psychological treatments. Many of these advances 
originally emanated from the United kingdom, where a group of senior investigators 
working in the context of the national Health service (nHs) developed and evaluated 
these approaches. nick Tarrier was at the forefront of this group during this period. in 
the context of case management and antipsychotic medication, this very creative mix of 
treatment components has been proven effective for chronic patients who do not fully 
respond to medication, as well as for patients in an acute stage of the disorder. evidence is 
now sufficient that government‑sponsored treatment guidelines in both the United kingdom 
and the United states have incorporated these approaches into comprehensive treatment 
recommendations. More recently, clear evidence has emerged supporting the use 
of these procedures for preventing the onset of the disorder for those at risk. The thrusts 
and parries of these techniques are illustrated in the case of “Jim,” who had developed an 
intricate web of delusions reminiscent of russell Crowe’s character in A Beautiful Mind, 
concerning complex schemes by others, including friends and family, to take advantage 
of him and steal his money and his girlfriend. The therapist’s skill in carrying out these 
new approaches is never better illustrated than in this chapter. These new, empirically 
supported psychological treatments represent the front line of our therapeutic work with 
these severely disturbed patients and are capable of further alleviating to some degree the 
tragedy that is schizophrenia.—D. H. B. 

schizophrenia is a serious mental illness that is 
characterized by positive symptoms of hallucinations, 
delusions, and disorders of thought. Typically, hallucinations 
are auditory, in the form of hearing voices 
that often talk about the person and in the third person, 
although hallucinations can occur in other senses. 
Delusions are frequently bizarre, are held with strong 
conviction, and often involve a misinterpretation of 
perception or experience. The content of delusions 

may include a variety of themes, including alien control; 
persecution; reference; and somatic, religious, or 
grandiose ideas. Disorders of thought are inferred from 
disruption and disorganization in language. Hallucinations 
and delusions, and sometimes thought disorders, 
are referred to as “positive symptoms” and reflect an 
excess or distortion of normal functioning. “Negative 
symptoms” are also frequently present and reflect a decrease 
in or loss of normal function, including restric


502 


Schizophrenia and Other Psychotic Disorders 

tions in the range and intensity of emotions, in the fluency 
and productivity of thought and language, and in 
the initiation of behavior. The consequences of these 
symptoms can be dysfunction in personal, social, occupational, 
and vocational functioning. Comorbid disorders, 
especially depression and anxiety, are frequently 
present and further impair functioning. Suicide risk is 
high. Aspects of description, diagnosis, and classification 
of schizophrenia and psychotic disorders have 
stimulated much debate and controversy over the decades, 
and details can be found in most psychiatry textbooks. 
They do not concern us here except to say that 
there can be considerable variation in clinical presentation 
between patients and in the same patient over time. 
Furthermore, cognitive-behavioral therapy for psychosis 
(CBTp) in recent years has mainly focused on the 
reduction of positive symptoms and associated distress, 
and that is our major concern in most of this chapter. 
The standard treatments for schizophrenia remain antipsychotic 
medication and some type of case management, 
and CBTp described in this chapter is assumed 
to be in addition to this. Indeed, recent revisions to the 
National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence 
(NICE; 2009) guidelines in the United Kingdom, and 
the Schizophrenia Patient Outcomes Research Team 
(Dixon et al., 2010) in the United States, have suggested 
that CBTp be offered alongside medication for all those 
with schizophrenia. 

DeveloPMeNt of coGNitive‑Behavioral 
theraPy for schizoPhreNia 

Cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) for schizophrenia, 
although following a common theme and set of principles, 
has developed in a number of centers, mostly 
in the United Kingdom, and has been informed by a 
number of theoretical and conceptual perspectives. A 
dramatic expansion in the use of CBT in the 1980s and 
1990s in the treatment of anxiety and affective disorders 
influenced clinical psychologists in the field of 
schizophrenia, who were trying to understand and treat 
schizophrenia from a psychological perspective. This 
was especially true in the United Kingdom, where clinical 
psychologists treated a range of disorders in adult 
mental health services and were able to transfer their 
treatment methods across diagnostic groups. The structure 
and function of a system of universal health care 
in the United Kingdom, the National Health Service 
(NHS), facilitated such skills transfer and multidisci


plinary work. Furthermore, funding of the professional 
training of health professionals, especially clinical psychologists, 
has aided awareness and dissemination of 
CBT for patients in general and for psychotic patients 
in particular. However, dissemination of treatments 
into the health service and the universal availability 
of CBTp has been slow and not without its problems 
(Brooker & Brabban, 2006; Tarrier, Barrowclough, 
Haddock, & McGovern, 1999). 

research eviDeNce 

Clinical, ethical, and economic considerations have encouraged 
clinical practitioners to be guided by an evidence 
base produced from evaluations of treatments. 
The evidence develops from uncontrolled studies and 
small-scale projects to controlled studies, then to large 
randomized controlled trials (RCTs) of efficacy and effectiveness. 
In spite of criticisms of the appropriateness 
of RCTs in mental health (Richardson, Baker, Burns, 
Lilford, & Muijen, 2000; Slade & Priebe, 2001), they 
remain the “gold standard” by which all treatments are 
judged (Doll, 1998; Pocock, 1996; Salkovskis, 2002; 
Tarrier & Wykes, 2004). Once a database of controlled 
trials has been established, then meta-analysis can 
provide a measure of the average level of therapeutic 
effect for that treatment. For schizophrenia, a number 
of published meta-analyses indicate that CBTp is effective 
in treating positive psychotic symptoms in psychotic 
patients (e.g., Gould, Mueser, Bolton, Mays, & 
Goff, 2001; Pilling et al., 2002; Rector & Beck, 2001; 
Tarrier & Wykes, 2004; Zimmermann, Favrod, Trieu, 
& Pomini, 2005), although there have been conflicting 
findings (e.g., Lynch, Laws, & McKenna, 2010). Of the 
20 controlled trials of CBT for schizophrenia identified 
by Tarrier and Wykes (2004), data were available 
from 19 studies on the effects of CBT on positive 
symptoms. These studies have a mean effect size of 

0.37(SD = 0.39, median = 0.32), with a range between 
–0.49 and 0.99. Using Cohen’s (1988) convention for 
categorizing effect sizes, 14 (74%) studies achieved at 
least a small effect size, six (32%) at least a moderate 
effect size, and three (16%) achieved a large effect 
size. Overall these studies indicate a modest effect size 
in improving positive symptoms compared to standard 
psychiatric care (treatment as usual, or TAU), which 
is probably not surprising given the nature and severity 
of the disorder. An updated meta-analysis and review 
indicated that effect sizes were 0.476 for CBTp 

CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

on positive symptoms from 30 trials, 0.474 for negative 
symptoms from 14 trials, 0.477 for social functioning 
from 11 studies, and 0.424 for depression from 11 studies 
(Wykes, Everitt, Steele, & Tarrier, 2008). A more 
recent meta-analysis has extended findings by examining 
the effectiveness of CBTp at follow-up (3 to 15 
months after treatment), compared to TAU and other 
psychological treatments (psychoeducation and family 
intervention). Sarin, Wallin, and Widerlöv (2011) included 
22 studies and 2,469 participants. When CBTp 
was compared to other psychological interventions at 
follow-up the outcome was statistically significant and 
in favor of CBTp having a small treatment effect on 
positive, negative, and general symptoms. When CBTp 
was compared to TAU at follow-up and to other psychological 
treatments immediately after ending, there 
was a trend in favor of CBTp but this was not statistically 
significant. Thus, there appeared to be a delay in 
the effects of CBTp. 

Symptom Management 
in Chronic Schizophrenia 

In spite of maintenance medication, a considerable percentage 
of patients with schizophrenia continue to have 
persistent hallucinations and delusions that do not respond 
further to medication. The majority of the CBTp 
studies have been carried out with patients who have 
chronic illnesses. These studies, for which data were 
available for 16, have a mean effect size of 0.4 (SD = 
0.32, median = 0.33), with a range from –0.32 to 0.99 
(Tarrier & Wykes, 2004). Another strategy has been 
to adopt a less generic approach and instead use CBTp 
to target a more defined participant group or specific 
symptoms. Fowler and colleagues (2009), for example, 
recruited young people with early psychosis and poor 
social functioning and unemployment, and offered a 
cognitive-behavioral intervention designed to improve 
social recovery. Compared to the TAU-alone group, 
those with nonaffective psychosis and social recovery 
problems who received CBT demonstrated significant 
increases in the number of weekly hours of constructive 
and structured activity. Moreover, this was achieved in 
association with clinically meaningful and significant 
reductions in symptoms and hopelessness. Similarly, 
Grant, Huh, Perivoliotis, Stolar, and Beck (2012) evaluated 
an 18-month recovery-focused cognitive therapy 
package to improve functioning and negative symptoms 
in people with schizophrenia who had neuro


cognitive impairments. Those who received treatment 
showed significant improvements in global functioning 
and in positive and negative symptoms (motivation). In 
an earlier study, Trower and colleagues (2004) targeted 
harmful compliance in those with command hallucinations 
using cognitive therapy. Significant reductions 
in favor of the cognitive therapy group, which were 
found in perceived power and omniscience of voices, 
associated compliance behavior, and distress and depression, 
remained at 12-month follow-up. This study 
is currently being replicated in a large multicenter RCT 
with a longer follow-up to allow researchers to draw 
more definite conclusions regarding the effectiveness 
and durability of such an intervention (Birchwood et 
al., 2011). Recently, there have also been more successful 
approaches developed to treat delusional beliefs 
by addressing worry, insomnia, and reasoning biases, 
which are hypothesized to maintain the persistence of 
delusions and related distress (see Freeman, 2011, for a 
review of studies). 

Symptom Recovery in Acute Schizophrenia 

A handful of studies have investigated the use of CBTp 
in the treatment of acutely ill patients hospitalized for 
an acute psychotic episode. Because the participants 
are acutely ill and may well be suspicious, agitated, 
and unstable, the therapy is often implemented as a 
“therapy envelope,” which comprises a range of durations 
of therapy that can be delivered in a flexible manner. 
Two studies have produced effect sizes of –0.49 
and 0.93 (Drury, Birchwood, Cochrane, & Macmillan, 
1996; Haddock, Tarrier, et al., 1999), indicating considerable 
variance in this small number of studies. The 
Study of Cognitive Reality Alignment Therapy in Early 
Schizophrenia (SoCRATES) (Lewis et al., 2002), 
which is by far the largest and methodologically most 
rigorous study, recruited 309 patients with early-onset 
schizophrenia and produced an effect size of 0.12. In an 
18-month follow-up of this trial, both CBTp and supportive 
counseling continued to confer clinical benefit 
over TAU alone, although there was a trend toward significance 
for auditory hallucinations to respond better 
to CBTp (Tarrier, Lewis, et al., 2004). A more recent 
RCT included participants in the acute phase of their 
first episode of psychosis who either received CBTp or 
befriending. CBTp significantly improved functioning 
when compared to befriending at midtreatment and 
end of treatment with an effect size of 0.39, but it did 


Schizophrenia and Other Psychotic Disorders 

not improve symptoms (Jackson et al., 2008). CBTp 
appeared to promote early recovery, similar to the 
SoCRATES study (Lewis et al., 2002). However, any 
differences between the CBTp and befriending groups 
were lost at 1-year follow-up. In addition, the lack of a 
TAU group meant any additional treatment participants 
were receiving as a result of their acute phase could not 
be considered (Jackson et al., 2008). 

Relapse Prevention 

A number of studies have investigated relapse prevention, 
or the ability of CBTp to prevent or delay future 
acute episodes. Relapse is an important outcome because 
of the disruption, distress, and economic costs 
that symptom exacerbation brings. Studies of CBTp 
interventions in which relapse prevention was just one 
of a series of components achieved little success, with 
four studies showing a mean reduction in relapse of 
only 1.4% compared to control treatments, whereas 
studies in which CBTp focused on and was dedicated 
to relapse prevention resulted in some success, with 
two studies showing a mean relapse reduction of 21% 
(Tarrier & Wykes, 2004). The latest meta-analysis by 
Sarin and colleagues (2011), which included a handful 
of studies examining relapse rates comparing CBTp 
to TAU and to other psychological interventions, did 
not show any strong evidence that CBTp had treatment 
effects in the prevention of relapse. Providing cognitive 
therapy in the acute phase was also found to be 
unsuccessful in reducing the number of admissions and 
the total number of days in hospital at 1-year follow-up 
(Jackson et al., 2008). A large, multicenter, methodologically 
robust RCT investigated the effectiveness of 
CBTp and family intervention specifically designed for 
relapse prevention and symptom reduction in patients 
with psychosis who had recently relapsed (Garety et al., 
2008). Both interventions had no effects on remission 
or relapse at 12- or 24-month follow-up, although CBTp 
reduced depression and symptoms, and improved social 
functioning, and family work improved the distress 
associated with delusions. However, a later study by the 
same research group used novel statistical methodology 
to reexamine the data (Dunn et al., 2012). CBTp 
was found to be effective at increasing months in remission 
and reducing symptoms, but only when therapy 
was completed in full and included a range of cognitive 
and behavioral strategies targeting relapse prevention 
and symptoms. 

Early Intervention 

In addition to the effect on individuals with more established 
psychoses, there has been growing interest in 
diverting the course in schizophrenia at an early stage. 
Morrison and colleagues (2004) reported a study using 
CBT techniques in this early group to attempt to avert 
or postpone the first acute episode of the disorder by 
intervening during a prodromal period. Their technique 
focused not on frank positive symptoms, but on 
problem-solving difficulties. The results of this first 
RCT appeared promising. CBTp proved more beneficial 
than TAU in preventing progression into psychosis, 
preventing the prescription of antipsychotic medication, 
and reducing symptoms. However, in a more recent, 
much larger multisite RCT that compared cognitive 
therapy offered to young people at risk for serious 
mental illness and TAU, these findings were not replicated. 
There were no differences between the groups in 
terms of transition to psychosis over 12 to 24 months, 
although the authors discuss the possibility that their 
study lacked the power to detect a difference due to unexpectedly 
low conversion rates in the control group, 
and they questioned the at-risk mental state of their 
sample, as well as the impact of their active monitoring 
control condition (Morrison, French, et al., 2012). 
Therapy did confer clinically meaningful benefits in 
symptom frequency and intensity. This same research 
group has also evaluated the effectiveness of cognitive 
therapy for those within early interventions services 
who discontinued antipsychotic medication (Morrison, 
Hutton, et al., 2012). All participants received therapy, 
which was associated with improvements in positive 
and negative symptoms and functioning at the end of 
treatment and follow-up, and increases in self-rated 
recovery at follow-up. A recent meta-analysis of RCTs 
of early intervention services, CBT, and family interventions 
for those with early psychosis (3–5 years after 
illness onset) confirmed the positive effects of intervening 
in this crucial period. Early intervention services, 
which included CBTp, family work, and medication as 
part of the care package, allowed better access to and 
engagement with treatment, as well as reduced relapse 
rates, hospital admissions, and symptoms. CBTp alone 
improved symptom severity at 2-year follow-up, while 
family therapy improved relapse rates and hospital 
admissions at the end of treatment (Bird et al., 2010). 
Therefore, a holistic treatment plan provided by early 
intervention services appears advantageous during the 
initial stages of illness. 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

Summary of Evidence 

The evidence for CBTp reducing positive symptoms in 
chronic, partially remitted patients with schizophrenia 
is good. Evidence that CBTp speeds recovery in acutely 
ill patients to the level of achieving a significant clinical 
benefit is more equivocal. Reductions in relapse rates 
are achieved when the intervention focuses on and is 
dedicated to relapse reduction, but they are disappointing 
for standard CBTp. There is positive evidence that 
CBTp and family intervention can benefit patients in 
early intervention services who are in the early stages 
of illness. Offering CBT in the prodromal phase appears 
to provide little additional benefit in terms of 
preventing full psychosis in vulnerable individuals, although 
symptoms can be improved. 

theoretical aDvaNces 

There has been considerable debate about the theoretical 
understanding of schizophrenia, with biological 
explanations being dominant. However, psychological 
and social factors have consistently been shown 
to be influential, certainly in affecting the course of 
schizophrenia, and have been incorporated into stress– 
vulnerability models that have emphasized the importance 
of these psychosocial factors in precipitating and 
maintaining psychotic episodes (Nuechterlein, 1987). 
Cognitive models have been developed in tandem with 
advances in CBT (Garety, Kuipers, Fowler, Freeman, 
& Bebbington, 2001). It is expected that as these cognitive 
models develop and are subjected to empirical 
tests, further refinements of CBTp treatment will develop. 
For example, CBTp appears to have little significant 
effect in reducing suicide risk (Tarrier, Haddock, et al., 
2006); however, with a greater conceptual understanding 
of the psychological mechanisms underlying such 
risk, more focused interventions to reduce risk will 
arise (Bolton, Gooding, Kapur, Barrowclough, & Tarrier, 
2007; Johnson, Gooding, & Tarrier, 2008). 

Basic cliNical PriNciPles 

A number of common clinical strategies underlie all 
variants of CBTp for schizophrenia: engagement and 
establishment of a therapeutic relationship; assessment 
based on an individualized case formulation that 
identifies psychotic experience (symptoms) and establishes 
associations between the patient’s cognition, 

behavior, and affect within the environmental context 
in response to this experience; and an intervention 
strategy based on this formulation that uses cognitive 
and behavioral methods to reduce psychotic symptoms 
and associated emotional distress. Patients are taught 
to be aware of their symptoms and to learn methods to 
manage them (e.g., learning to control auditory hallucinations 
by switching their attention away from them, 
or by thinking about alternative explanations for their 
experiences). 

Patients can acquire coping strategies that are broken 
down into elements, learned individually, then aggregated 
into an overall strategy. To ensure that these 
coping strategies can be implemented outside of therapy, 
patients overlearn them during the therapy session. 
Learning such control techniques allows patients to 
challenge beliefs they may have had about voices, such 
as “The voices are uncontrollable,” “The voices are 
all powerful,” and “I must obey the voices.” Thus, by 
learning to control basic psychological processes such 
as attention, through attention switching and distraction, 
patients also learn to challenge their beliefs about 
their experiences and symptoms. Behavioral experiments 
and reality tests may also be used to disprove delusional 
and inappropriate beliefs. Particular attention 
is paid to identifying avoidance and safety behaviors 
that reinforce inappropriate beliefs. Changing these behaviors 
is a powerful method of changing beliefs and 
delusions. Patients may be assisted in their attempts 
at behavior change by means of self-instruction and 
coping strategies that decrease arousal (e.g., breathing 
exercises; quick relaxation; guided imagery; and 
encouraging positive task-oriented internal dialogue). 
In some refractory cases, patients are convinced and 
unshakable in the belief that their delusions are true, 
and they are unwilling to examine the veracity of this 
subjective experience. In these cases, the clinician must 
negotiate treatment goals aimed at reducing distress 
rather than the symptoms themselves. A failure to do 
this will probably result in the patient disengaging and 
refusing treatment. 

It is frequently the case that the patient’s delusional 
beliefs persist in spite of evidence to contradict them, 
including evidence that occurs naturally and that is 
manufactured by the therapist through behavioral experiments 
and reality testing. To weaken these delusional 
explanations, the therapist should use all available 
opportunities, through guided discovery and 
Socratic questioning, to reappraise the evidence for 
the patient’s explanation of events, thus weakening the 


Schizophrenia and Other Psychotic Disorders 

delusions. Pointing out the contradictory evidence in a 
quizzical and puzzled manner, often known as the “Columbo 
technique,” is advised, so the patient has to account 
for contradictions and review his/her explanation 
in light of this new and contradictory evidence. When 
delusions are strongly held, this can be a slow process, 
but the weakening of delusional beliefs can occur, or, 
as happens in some cases, the delusional interpretations 
remain or return, but their importance and distressing 
nature are greatly reduced. For example, an older 
adult female patient treated by one of the authors (N. 
T.) experienced auditory hallucinations that were of a 
blasphemous and obscene nature. She believed that her 
brain acted as a transmitter and broadcast her thoughts, 
so that other people in the vicinity could hear her blasphemous 
and obscene thoughts. Her main social contact 
was with her local church and associated social 
club. One Sunday, during the church service, she heard 
the voices and became convinced that her own thoughts 
about the voices were broadcast aloud to the congregation. 
She was mortified and so ashamed that she left the 
church and was unable to return or to have any contact 
with her friends. She was convinced that she had become 
ostracized by the church congregation. On being 
asked about the evidence for this, she replied that she 
had since met other members of the church congregation 
in town and they had totally ignored her, which had 
further reinforced her sense of exclusion, shame, and 
self-disgust. On further questioning, she revealed that 
she had been walking on the pavement and had seen her 
friends drive by some distance away. There was a high 
probability that they had not seen her. Thus, her evidence 
for being ostracized was challenged. We agreed 
upon a treatment goal that would test her interpretation 
of the situation. If the fear that the church congregation 
would shun her if she returned was real, then she 
should expect a negative reaction when she returned 
to church. If the fear was irrational, there would be no 
negative reaction; in fact, the others should be pleased 
to see her return. She experienced considerable anxiety 
at the thought of returning to church but managed the 
return using methods she had learned to cope with both 
the experience of auditory hallucinations and anxiety. 
To her surprise, far from being shunned or ostracized, 
she was greeted with warmth and concern. This experience 
considerably weakened her beliefs that others 
could hear her thoughts, and her delusions were rated 
as minimal. On being asked about the events some 
months later at follow-up, she said that she believed 
others could hear her thoughts, but because it did not 

appear to bother them, she was no longer concerned 
about it either! In this case, her delusional explanation 
of past events had returned but no longer caused her any 
distress or disrupted her social functioning. 

Emphasis has also been placed on improving the patient’s 
self-esteem and feelings of self-worth. This more 
recent addition to the treatment has been found to be 
effective and well received by patients (Hall & Tarrier, 
2003). In this chapter we have placed these methods 
after the treatment of symptoms, indicating a progression 
from symptom reduction to improved self-esteem. 
However, there is no reason why improvements in selfesteem 
cannot be initiated at the beginning of treatment, 
and in some cases this may be desirable. 

The future may hold exciting new opportunities to 
use new technology such as smartphones to implement 
real-time assessment and interventions, and to individualize 
treatment protocols (Kelly et al., 2012). 

BackGrouND aND associateD factors 

Phases of the Disorder and Relationship 
to Aims of Treatment 

Schizophrenia, a complex disorder that may well be 
lifelong, passes through a number of phases. For example, 
the prodromal phase that occurs before a fullblown 
psychotic episode is characterized by nonspecific 
symptoms and symptoms of anxiety, depression, 
irritability, insomnia, and quasi-psychotic experience 
(e.g., magical thinking, feelings of paranoia). The prodromal 
phase develops into a psychotic episode, during 
which the most florid psychotic symptoms are present 
and seriously interfere with functioning. A psychotic 
episode usually requires acute management, frequently 
including hospitalization. Recovery from an acute episode 
of psychosis is followed by a period of remission 
or partial remission with maintenance doses of antipsychotic 
medication. It is not uncommon for residual 
symptoms to remain during the recovery and remission 
phase, and in some cases, there is little recovery at all. 
Treatment aims and strategies for CBTp vary depending 
on the phase of the disorder. For example, during 
the prodromal phase, the aim is to prevent transition 
into a full psychotic episode; during an acute episode, 
the aim is to speed recovery; during partial remission, 
the aim is to reduce residual symptoms and to prevent 
further relapse; and in full remission, the aim is to keep 
the patient well. The specifics of CBTp may vary de



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

pending on these aims and the phase of the disorder in 
which they are applied. For example, during an acute 
admission for a psychotic episode, the patient is often 
disturbed, distressed, and agitated. Thus, therapy sessions 
are often brief and frequent, whereas for chronically 
ill patients living within the community, therapy 
sessions follow the normal outpatient format. In all 
cases, therapy is tailored to the tolerance of the patient. 
In all but the most exceptional cases, CBTp is used in 
addition to appropriate antipsychotic medication. The 
various phases of the disorder and appropriate treatment 
strategies are outlined in Table 12.1. 

Associated Features and Disability 

It is important that the clinician attend to associated 
features and complicating factors, as well as the symptoms 
of the disorder. These vary from the effects of the 
disorder on basic psychological processes (e.g., attention) 
to clinical issues (e.g., suicide risk) to social issues 
(e.g., social deprivation and poor employment opportunities). 
These associated features are outlined in Table 
12.2. 

The crucial point is that the clinician be aware that 
these problems can arise. Some of them can be dealt 
with by keeping the message simple and brief, but with 
plenty of repetition (i.e., use of overlearning in teaching 
coping strategies). Writing down simple points for 
the patient as a memory aid can also be helpful, as can 
creating a small “workbook,” so that the patient has a 
continuous record of these points. This is usually more 
effective than providing handouts, which are rarely 

read and frequently are lost. It is important to balance 
the nature and duration of sessions against the patient’s 
level of tolerance. Initially, it might be best to keep sessions 
brief or allow the patient to leave when he/she has 
had enough. The one-to-one nature of therapy is highly 
stressful, so initial sessions may serve merely to provide 
habituation to the social stress of being with the 
clinician. Teaching the patient simple strategies to deal 
with tension and anxiety (e.g., brief relaxation) may be 
helpful in habituating to the therapy situation and may 
also provide a concrete task on which to focus attention. 
Simple attention-focusing tasks, such as focusing 
on some item in the room for a short period, may be 
helpful in reducing the effect of irrelevant stimuli on 
the patient’s conscious awareness. It is also important to 
recognize that the verbal and nonverbal cues the therapist 
might expect to indicate severe distress, depression, 
or suicidality may not be expressed by someone 
with schizophrenia. Affect may be flat or inappropriate, 
which may result in the therapist missing important 
signs of risk. This can be avoided, in part, by knowing 
the person and how he/she reacts, by never making assumptions 
about mental state, and by having the patient 
agree from the outset that he/she will inform the therapist 
of important changes in his/her life or mood. 

Unfortunately, some issues, such as social conditions, 
are often beyond the therapist’s power to change 
but may well have an impact on the treatment process. 
However, there is nothing wrong in assuming an advocacy 
role or in helping patients to empower themselves 
by aiding their attempts to improve their own circumstances. 
Finally, it is important that therapists adopt a 

table 12.1. treatment aims and Methods in different Phases 
of the schizophrenia illness 

Phase Aim Treatment method 
Preillness Prevention of translation CBT for early signs and 
prodrome into full psychosis prevention of symptom escalation 
Acute episode Speed recovery CBT and coping training 
Partially remitted Symptom reduction CBT, coping training, self-esteem 
residual symptoms enhancement 
Remission Relapse prevention CBT for staying well and family 
intervention 
Relapse prodrome Abort relapse Early signs identification 
and relapse prevention 


Schizophrenia and Other Psychotic Disorders 

table 12.2. associated features of schizophrenia: 
features that need to be assessed and Considered as Potential 
difficulties in the Psychological treatment of schizophrenia 

Psychological 

•• 
Disrupted or slowed thought processes 
•• 
Difficulty discriminating signal from noise 
•• 
Restricted attention 
•• 
Hypersensitivity to social interactions 
•• 
Difficulty in processing social signals 
•• 
Flat and restricted affect 
•• 
Elevated arousal and dysfunctional arousal regulation 
•• 
Hypersensitivity to stress and life events 
•• 
High risk of depression and hopelessness 
•• 
Effects of trauma 
•• 
Stigmatization 
•• 
Low self-esteem and self-worth 
•• 
High risk of substance and alcohol abuse 
•• 
High risk of suicide and self-harm 
•• 
Interference of normal adolescent and early adult development due to onset of illness 

Psychosocial 

•• 
Hypersensitivity to family and interpersonal environment (including that created 
by professional staff) 

•• 
Risk of perpetrating or being the victim of violence 

Social 

•• 
Conditions of social deprivation 
•• 
Poor housing 
•• 
Downward social drift 
•• 
Unemployment and difficulty in competing in the job market 
•• 
Restricted social network 
•• 
Psychiatric career interfering with utilization of other social resources 

noncritical approach and learn to accommodate their 
own frustrations if therapy is progressing more slowly 
than they had hoped. Aspects of schizophrenia can 
make some patients difficult to deal with, and the therapist 
needs to be aware of this and develop a tolerant approach. 
The lack of a positive relationship between case 
managers and patients has been shown to be associated 
with poorer prognosis (Tattan & Tarrier, 2000). 

the coNtext of theraPy 

It is highly probable that by the time a referral is made 
for CBT the patient will be under the care of a multidisciplinary 
mental health team, and be receiving antipsychotic 
medication and some type of case management. 
People who develop a psychotic illness are usually diag


nosed by a general practitioner or primary care team, or 
in an accident and emergency department, and referred 
on to mental health services. Mental health services 
are organized in different ways in different countries, 
depending on health care philosophies and structures, 
but what is delivered in terms of therapy content may 
be independent of how that service is organized. Thus, 
the therapeutic procedures described in this chapter 
can be utilized in different types of service structure 
and organization. We have provided CBTp to patients 
on closed and open wards, in hospital and health center 
outpatient facilities, in community facilities, and in the 
patients’ own homes. It is probable that the more flexible 
the system, the more likely the patient will be engaged 
and attend. To this end we often deliver treatment in the 
patient’s home, which is a common procedure in the 
United Kingdom. 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

Evidence from research trials indicates that 
cognitive-behavioral treatments are delivered over 
about 20 treatment sessions. These can be intensive, 
over 3 months, or less intensive, over 9 months or longer. 
Clinical impressions indicate that some patients 
benefit from continued, although less intensive treatment, 
whereas others benefit from booster sessions. 
The clinician should always be led by the clinical need 
of the patient and take a collaborative approach rather 
than adhering to a rigid “one size fits all” protocol. 
It should be remembered that CBT does not “cure” 
schizophrenia, but it does help the patient cope with a 
chronic illness. 

The presence of possible associated factors, as outlined 
earlier, signifies that patients may present with 
a number of clinical difficulties, as well as psychotic 
symptoms. The clinician needs to be aware that this 
may be the case and be prepared to address or treat 
these presenting problems before moving on to treat 
the psychotic symptoms. It may be necessary to tackle 
clinical problems such as high levels of anxiety, depression, 
hopelessness, and suicidal behavior and risk because 
they are not only clinical priorities but also there 
may be important interactions between these other disorders 
and the psychosis. 

The treatment described here is for individual CBTp. 
It is possible to deliver treatment in a group format. 
Groups are well received by some patients and are 
advantageous, in that patients can learn from each 
other. The results suggest clinical benefits in terms 
of enhanced self-esteem, but reductions in symptoms 
are modest compared to those in individual treatments 
(e.g., Barrowclough et al., 2006), and any improvements 
appear to get lost at follow-up (Lecomte, Leclerc, 
& Wykes, 2012). 

Other psychosocial treatments may also be available, 
such as family interventions. There is a considerable literature 
on family interventions, which have been shown 
to reduce relapse rates in at-risk individuals, for those in 
the early stages, and in later psychosis (Bird et al., 2010; 
Onwumere, Bebbington, & Kuipers, 2011; Onwumere 
& Kuipers, 2011). Details of family intervention are beyond 
the scope of this chapter (for the clinical application 
of family interventions, see Barrowclough & Tarrier, 
1992; Kuipers, Onwumere, & Bebbington, 2010; 
Mueser & Glynn, 1995; see also Miklowitz, Chapter 
11, this volume). We have combined individual CBT 
and family intervention with some success and suggest 
that therapists consider whether this strategy would be 
clinically beneficial. Others have offered family thera


py to those with co-occurring schizophrenia spectrum 
diagnoses and substance misuse, with some benefits in 
symptoms and functioning for both clients and their 
relatives (Mueser et al., 2013). Concomitant family 
intervention may reduce stressful home environments 
and help to sustain improvement. Many patients live 
alone or are estranged from their relatives, so family 
intervention may not be an option. 

Patient Variables 

Patients with schizophrenia represent a heterogeneous 
group of whom 20–45% may be resistant to medication 
treatment (Kane, 1999) and 5–10% show no benefit from 
antipsychotic medication (Pantelis & Barns, 1996). Although 
there is confusion among the terms “treatmentresistant,” 
“incomplete recovery,” and “treatment intolerance,” 
it is clear that conventional treatment with 
antipsychotic medication is ineffective in a significant 
number of patients, in spite of well-publicized advances 
in antipsychotic medication. It is important, therefore, 
in tailoring and refining treatments to understand what 
factors predict a good response to psychological treatment 
and perhaps the converse, which patients do not 
derive benefit. Unfortunately, little is known in any 
great detail about which patients will or will not benefit 
from cognitive-behavioral treatments (Tarrier & 
Wykes, 2004). Factors that have been associated with 
poor outcome include negative symptoms of affective 
flattening and alogia (cognitive impoverishment) (Tarrier, 
1996). Factors associated with better outcome 
include a shorter duration of illness, a younger age 
(Morrison, Turkington, et al., 2012), greater pretherapy 
coping ability (Premkumar et al., 2011) and better clinical 
and cognitive insight (Emmerson, Granholm, Link, 
McQuaid, & Jeste, 2009; Perivoliotis et al., 2010), less 
severe symptoms at pretreatment (Tarrier, Yusupoff, 
Kinney, et al., 1998), higher baseline functioning and 
educational achievement (Allott et al., 2011) and receptiveness 
to hypothetical contradiction (Brabban, Tai, & 
Turkington, 2009; Garety et al., 1997). These results 
suggest that those patients who are younger with less 
severe illness, fewer severe cognitive deficits, and better 
functioning may respond better, but no hard-and-fast 
rules are currently supported by evidence. Treatment 
dropout is a further issue of importance. There is some 
evidence that patients who drop out of treatment tend to 
be male, unemployed and unskilled, and single, with a 
low level of educational attainment and a low premorbid 
IQ. They have a long duration of illness but at the 


Schizophrenia and Other Psychotic Disorders 

time of discontinuation are not necessarily severely ill 
and can function at a reasonable level. Fewer negative 
symptoms, cannabis or other drug use, and factors such 
as not having a family member involved with treatment 
have been found to predict disengagement (Stowkowy, 
Addington, Liu, Hollowell, & Addington, 2012). Dropouts 
suffer from both hallucinations and delusions, are 
paranoid, although not necessarily suspicious of the 
treating clinician, and depressed and moderately hopeless. 
The majority cannot see the point of psychological 
treatment or think that they will not personally benefit 
from treatment (Tarrier, Yusupoff, McCarthy, Kinney, 
& Wittkowski, 1998). 

Therapist Variables 

Therapist variables encompass a number of factors, including 
training, experience, competency, supervision, 
and personal style. There is a tendency for health care 
planners to expect, mainly on economic grounds, that 
these complex therapies will be delivered by minimally 
qualified clinicians. This may well be a mistake (Tarrier 
et al., 1999). Psychological treatment of someone 
with psychosis is complex, and besides having the skills 
and experience to treat the psychotic disorder itself, as 
outlined in this chapter, the clinician may well need to 
be able to treat a range of comorbid disorders, including 
anxiety, posttraumatic stress, depression, and addictive 
disorders. It seems reasonable that to treat successfully 
someone with a severe mental illness and very possibly 
a range of comorbid disorders, the clinician should 
be experienced and sufficiently well trained in CBT to 
be able to react to various clinical demands and levels 
of complexity. A recent study showed better outcomes 
from CBTp to be associated with therapists who spend 
the majority of their clinical time delivering this specific 
intervention, and who receive frequent supervision 
(Steel, Tarrier, Stahl, & Wykes, 2012). In our opinion 
the treatment of psychotic disorders does not lend itself 
well to merely following a highly prescriptive manual. 
As indicated in the previous section on associated features 
and disabilities, the clinician needs to be competent 
in recognizing and prioritizing a range of presenting 
clinical problems for treatment. Similarly, the 
clinician needs to have personal qualities that engage 
the patient, who may well be difficult to manage or disturbed, 
and to tailor the treatment to that individual. 
Previous research suggests that the absence of a positive 
relationship is associated with a poorer outcome 
(Tattan & Tarrier, 2000), so the clinician needs the ex


perience and patience to develop that relationship and 
maintain engagement. A recent study used the Delphi 
method to examine what experts in the field viewed 
as important ingredients in CBTp. Elements such as a 
detailed assessment, use of a cognitive model and formulation, 
implementation of change strategies, and the 
attitudes that should be held by therapists (e.g., normalizing 
rationale) were agreed to be essential (Morrison 
& Barratt, 2010). 

the ProceDure of cBt: 
the MaNchester MoDel 

A Clinical Model: The Coping–Recovery Model 

The model developed and described by Tarrier bears 
many similarities to other models and has benefited 
from contact and discussion with other clinical researchers 
in the field. The basic tenet is the recovery 
model, in which patients are coping with a potentially 
persistent illness that may well change many aspects 
of their lives, affect their hopes and aspirations, and be 
associated with comorbid disorders such as depression 
and anxiety disorders. The therapist aids the patient 
in facilitating, as much as possible, the process of recovery. 
The coping model strongly resembles and uses 
many methods of other CBT approaches but emphasizes 
coping with symptoms rather than curing them, 
and intervenes to modify cognitive processes (e.g., attention), 
as well as cognitive content and behavior. 

The clinical model that guides treatment is presented 
in Figure 12.1. It assumes that the experience 
of psychotic symptoms, hallucinations, and delusions 
is a dynamic interaction between internal and external 
factors. Internal factors may be either biological or psychological 
and can be inherited or acquired. For example, 
genetic factors may influence both the biochemical 
functioning of the brain and cognitive capacity. Alternatively, 
biological and psychological dysfunction may 
be acquired, for example, in deficits in cognitive flexibility 
and in the development of maladaptive attitudes. 
Such internal factors increase individuals’ vulnerability 
to psychosis, and their risk is further increased 
through exposure to environmental stress, such as certain 
interpersonal or excessively demanding environments. 
The interaction between internal and external 
factors is important both in the origins of the disorder 
and in maintaining symptoms. A dysfunction in the 
processing of information, such as source monitoring 


CLINICAL HANDBOOK OF PSYCHOLOGICAL DISORDERS 


FIGURE 12.1. A clinical model of the origins and maintenance of psychotic symptoms. 

in hallucinations (i.e., a belief about where the voice is 
coming from) and probabilistic reasoning in delusions, 
in combination with dysfunctions in the arousal system 
and its regulation, result in disturbances of perception 
and thought that are characteristic of psychosis. The individual 
is reactive to these experiences, and there is a 
process of primary and secondary appraisal in which 
the individual attempts to interpret these experiences 
and give them meaning, then react to their consequenc


es. Often patients’ appraisal of experience results in 
feelings of threat to their physical integrity or social 
standing and concomitant emotional reactions, and 
avoidant and safety behavior. The immediate reaction 
to the psychotic experience is multidimensional, including 
emotional, behavioral, and cognitive elements. 
Secondary effects, such as depressed mood, anxiety in 
social situations, and the effect of trauma may further 
compound the situation. 


Schizophrenia and Other Psychotic Disorders 

The important aspect of the model is that appraisal 
(including beliefs about experience) and reaction to 
the psychotic experience feedback through a number 
of possible routes and increase the probability of the 
maintenance or recurrence of the psychotic experience. 
For example, the emotional reaction to hearing 
threatening voices or experiencing strong feelings of 
paranoia may well be anxiety or anger. Both these emotions 
include elevated levels of autonomic arousal that 
act either directly, through sustained increased levels 
of arousal, or indirectly, through further disrupting 
information processing, to increase the likelihood of 
psychotic symptoms. Similarly, behavioral responses 
to psychotic symptoms may increase exposure to environmental 
stress or increase risk of trauma (e.g., becoming 
involved in violence or indulging in dangerous 
behavior) that maintains or aggravates psychotic symptoms. 
For example, paranoid thoughts may result in interpersonal 
conflict or, alternatively, social avoidance 
and withdrawal. Both situations are likely to increase 
the probability of symptoms occurring. Interpersonal 
conflict is likely to be interpreted as evidence for persecution, 
whereas withdrawal and isolation probably 
result in confirmatory rumination and resentment, 
with a lack of opportunity to disconfirm these paranoid 
beliefs. The appraisal of the content of voices or delusional 
thoughts as valid and true may result in behavior 
consistent with these beliefs and a confirmatory bias 
to collecting and evaluating evidence on which to base 
future judgments of reality. 

Psychotic experiences can lead to dysfunctional beliefs 
that are then acted on in a way that leads to their 
confirmation or a failure to disconfirm. This can be 
termed the experience–belief–action–confirmation, or 
EBAC, cycle. It is suggested that such cycles maintain 
psychotic experience through reinforcement of maladaptive 
beliefs and behavior. The generic model indicated 
in Figure 12.1 provides an overarching picture 
of how the patient’s problems arise and are maintained. 
Embedded within this model are the microelements of 
specific, time-linked events such as the EBAC cycle 
(see Figure 12.2). 

Assessment 

The clinician needs to be able to assess and develop a 
formulation of the determinants of the patient’s psychotic 
symptoms. Clinicians may find the use of standardized 
assessment instruments helpful (there are many of 


figUre 12.2. The experience–belief–action–confirmation 
(EBAC) cycle. 

these, and they assess a range of functions; see Barnes 
& Nelson, 1994, for a detailed description and review 
of assessments). We recommend the Psychotic Symptom 
Rating Scales (PSYRATS; Haddock, McCarron, 
Tarrier, & Faragher, 1999) as an effective method of 
assessing the multidimensional nature of positive psychotic 
symptoms. The clinician needs to understand 
the individual variation in psychotic symptoms. This 
can be achieved by the use of a semistructured interview 
(the Antecedent and Coping Interview [ACI]; for 
more details, see Tarrier, 2002, 2006) that covers the 
nature and variation of positive psychotic symptoms 
experienced by the patient, including beliefs about psychotic 
symptoms, emotional reactions that accompany 
each symptom, antecedent stimuli and context in which 
each symptom occurs, consequences resulting from the 
symptoms and how the patient’s behavior and beliefs 
are affected, and methods the patient uses to cope and 
manage his/her experiences. This allows the clinician 
to build up a comprehensive picture of how the patient 
experiences the psychosis on a daily basis and how his/ 
her affect, behavior, and beliefs are changed. The clinician 
should be careful to identify avoidance and safety 
behaviors that occur because of psychotic symptoms, 
and examples in which the patient fails to disconfirm 
irrational or delusional beliefs. The clinician should use 
the clinical models shown in Figures 12.1 and 12.2 as 
a guide. 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

Intervention 

Coping Strategies 

When the clinician has constructed a comprehensive 
picture of the patient’s psychotic experience, he/she 
can discuss this with the patient and present the rationale 
for CBTp. There may well be patients who are 
completely convinced of the truth of their delusional 
thoughts and will not accept any alternative view, in 
which case coping with distress should be advanced as 
a suitable goal. 

The characteristics of CBTp and coping training are 
that 

•• 
They are based on an individualized assessment 
or formulation. 
•• 
They emphasize a normal and general process of 
dealing with adversity. 
•• 
They emphasize that this is part of the recovery 
process. 
•• 
They are carried out systematically through overlearning, 
simulation, and role play. 

•• 
They are additive in that different strategies can be 
added together in a sequence that progresses to in 
vivo implementation. 

•• 
They are based on providing a new response set 
that will be a method of coping with an ongoing 
problem rather than being curative. 

•• 
Cognitive coping skills are learned through a process 
of external verbalization that is slowly diminished 
until the required procedure is internalized 
as thought under internal control. 

•• 
They enhance executive function. 

•• 
The learning of cognitive and behavioral coping 
skills develops through a process of graded practice 
or rehearsal. 

•• 
They provide opportunities for reappraisal and reattributions. 


These coping methods include the following changes 
in cognitive processes, cognitive content, and behavior. 

ATTenTion sWiTCHing 

A process whereby patients actively change the focus 
of their attention from one subject or experience to 
another, “attention switching” involves inhibiting an 
ongoing response and initiating an alternative. Patients 
are trained within the session to switch attention on cue 
through rehearsal to external stimuli (e.g., an aspect 

of their environment, such as describing a picture or 
being aware of background traffic noise) or to internal 
stimuli, often to a set of positive images. For example, 
one patient who was asked to choose a positive scene to 
which to attend chose a restaurant in Blackpool, where 
he had had an enjoyable meal. He was trained to be 
able to elicit a visual image of the restaurant by describing 
the scene, furniture, decorations, and such in great 
detail. He was then asked to remember the experience 
of the meal in all his senses: the visual memory of the 
food; its smell and taste; the feel of holding the knife 
and fork in his hands; the experience of eating; and so 
on. He continually rehearsed the memory of the meal 
in the restaurant until he was able to elicit it at will. He 
then rehearsed switching his attention away from delusional 
thoughts to images of the meal. He was taught to 
use the onset of a delusion as a cue for attention switching 
(see “Awareness Training” below). 

ATTenTion nArroWing 

In “attention narrowing,” a process whereby patients 
restrict the range and content of their attention, many 
patients talked about “blanking” their mind or focusing 
their attention as a method of coping. Evidence suggests 
that one problem faced by patients with schizophrenia 
is an inability to filter information input adequately, to 
distinguish signal from noise. Training patients to focus 
their attention and improve attentional control may assist 
them in overcoming this difficulty by narrowing 
and regulating their attention. 

MoDifieD self‑sTATeMenTs 
AnD inTernAl DiAlogUe 

That patients’ use of self-statements can be incorporated 
successfully into intervention has been known 
for some years. The use of self-statements and internal 
dialogue may take on a number of functions in emotion 
control, such as teaching patients to overcome negative 
emotions associated with their voices and in cueing 
goal-directed behavior, and in cueing and directing 
reality testing. In each case the patient is taught statements 
that direct the appropriate response, such as “I 
don’t need to be afraid,” “I need to keep going and get 
on the bus,” or “Why do I think that man is looking at 
me when I’ve never seen him before?” Within the session, 
the patient is first asked to repeat the set of statements 
or questions out loud when given the appropriate 
cue. The verbalized statements are then gradually re



Schizophrenia and Other Psychotic Disorders 

duced in loudness until they are internalized. The patient 
then practices these in simulated situations within 
the session. Learning such questioning statements is a 
useful stage in generating and evaluating alternative 
explanations for experience. 

reATTriBUTion 

Patients are asked to generate an alternative explanation 
for an experience, then practice reattribution statements 
when that experience occurs. Initially, when we started 
coping training, we used reattributions that were illness 
related, such as “It’s not a real voice, it’s my illness.” 
We have since abandoned this as unhelpful. We now try 
to use other, alternative explanations: “It may seem like 
a real voice, but it’s just my own thoughts” and “It may 
seem as though people are looking at me, but they have 
to look somewhere.” If patients do make changes that 
increase their control over their symptoms or circumstances, 
or challenge the omnipotence or infallibility of 
their voices, then these changes can be evidence for a 
reattribution concerning the nature of their symptoms 
or their ability to exert control—for example, “How can 
the voice be all powerful if it talks rubbish?” or “I don’t 
have to believe it if it isn’t true.” 

AWAreness TrAining 

Patients are taught to be aware of and monitor their 
positive symptoms, especially their onset. Patients not 
only become aware of their experiences but they also 
try to accept these experiences but not react to them. 
Patients are aware of their voices but do not react to 
them or become captured by their content. One function 
of awareness training is to make patients aware 
of the form and characteristics of their thoughts and 
perceptions rather than the content—for example, to 
monitor the physical onset of a voice, then use attention 
switching to reduce the emotional impact of the content. 
The aim is twofold: to assist patients in becoming 
mentally disengaged from their symptoms, especially 
the content, and to use symptoms as a cue to alternative 
action. 

DeAroUsing TeCHniqUes 

Because high levels of arousal have been implicated in 
the psychopathology of schizophrenia and frequently 
occur as both antecedents and responses to psychotic 
experience, teaching patients to cope with these is im


portant. These coping strategies may be simple passive 
behaviors to avoid agitation, such as sitting quietly 
instead of pacing up and down, or they may be more 
active methods of arousal control, such as breathing exercises 
or quick relaxation. We have not favored lengthy 
relaxation training, such as traditional progressive relaxation 
exercises, because these are time-consuming 
and off the point. What is functional here is a quick, 
usable skill. 

inCreAseD ACTiViTy leVels 

Many patients with schizophrenia are vulnerable to 
delusional thought or hallucinations during periods of 
inactivity, a problem to which they appear particularly 
prone. Many patients report that finding something to 
do is helpful. Thus, simple activity scheduling can be 
a powerful coping strategy, especially if implemented 
at the onset of the symptom, thus creating a dual task 
competing for attentional resources. Besides increasing 
purposeful activity this also reduces exposure to conditions 
under which symptoms are aggravated. 

soCiAl engAgeMenT AnD DisengAgeMenT 

Although many patients tolerate social interactions 
poorly, surprisingly, many also find social engagement 
a useful method of coping. Possibly this may occur because 
social interaction serves as a dual task and source 
of distraction, and because it may help patients rationalize 
maladaptive thinking. It is beneficial to be able 
to titrate the amount of social stimulation involved in 
any interaction with the tolerance level of a particular 
patient, and to teach the patient that levels of social 
disengagement may be used to help develop tolerance 
of social stimulation. Social withdrawal and avoidance 
are common responses to experiencing overstimulation 
as a result of social interaction. However, patients can 
learn less drastic methods of disengagement, such as 
leaving the room for a short period and then returning, 
temporarily moving away from the social group, and 
practicing functional disengagement by not conversing 
for short periods or lowering their gaze. By using these 
methods, patients can control and tolerate social stimulation. 
Patients may also initiate social interaction more 
confidently as a method to reduce the impact of their 
symptoms, if they feel they have some control over the 
intensity of those interactions. Simple training in specific 
skills for interaction and role plays can facilitate 
this. 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

Belief MoDifiCATion 

Patients can learn to examine their beliefs and to challenge 
them if they are inappropriate by examining the 
evidence and generating alternative explanations. Many 
patients do this to some extent already, but the level of 
arousal experienced, or the level of isolation and avoidance, 
can make these attempts unsuccessful. These 
methods are very similar to those used in traditional 
cognitive therapy except that the patient may need more 
prompting, and the goal is to incorporate the skills of 
belief modification into a self-regulatory process. Patients 
can be encouraged to question their beliefs as they 
occur: “What would be the purpose of someone spying 
on me; how much effort and cost would it take; how 
would this be resourced and organized; and for what 
gain?” Similarly, patients can be encouraged to look for 
inconsistencies and use these to challenge their beliefs. 
For example, the patient who was involved in a fight 
15 years earlier, and still avoids young men because he 
fears that the same group is out to get revenge, may be 
asked to reflect on the fact that because the members 
of the gang are now in their middle to late 30s, he has 
been vigilant for the wrong age group. This can be used 
to challenge his fear that he needs to be vigilant to stay 
safe. In effect, his safety behaviors have not protected 
him from the source of danger. Patients can also learn 
to examine evidence to challenge their beliefs about the 
voices they hear. When patients perceive their voices as 
omnipotent and truthful, clinicians can investigate to 
see whether they have been wrong or incorrect. For example, 
the patient whose voices told him he was going 
to be murdered because he was a spy, concluded that 
the voices must be true and that he must deserve this 
fate. However, the voices also told him that he was soon 
to be married, and because he could find no supporting 
evidence for this, he decided it was untrue. However, 
he had never thought to challenge the voices’ veracity 
concerning the threat of murder. Realizing that he was 
unlikely to be married in the near future, as the voices 
had asserted, helped him to challenge the idea that he 
was to be murdered by doubting the truthfulness of the 
voices and to look for further supporting, objective evidence 
of the spy ring, which was not forthcoming. 

reAliTy TesTing AnD BeHAViorAl exPeriMenTs 

Probably the strongest way to test beliefs is to test them 
out in reality by some type of action; behavior change is 
probably the best way to produce cognitive change. Pa


tients sometimes do this naturally, although a tendency 
toward biased interpretation and hypothesis protection 
may lead them to erroneous conclusions. Patients can 
learn to identify specific beliefs and to generate competing 
predictions that can be tested. The failure to do 
this in real life usually leads to patterns of avoidance, 
which can be reversed to challenge the beliefs that they 
underpin. 

Enhancing Coping Strategies 

Coping methods develop over time and vary in their 
complexity, from simple and direct attempts to control 
cognitive processes, such as attention, to more complex, 
self-directed methods that modify cognitive content 
and inference. Frequently, combinations of different 
coping strategies are built up, for example, the use 
of attention switching and dearousing techniques helps 
to dull the strength of a delusion, so that reality testing 
can be implemented. Without these initial coping 
methods the patient would not be able to undergo reality 
testing. Furthermore, the initial coping strategies 
can be used to challenge the strength of the delusion of 
the omnipotence of the voices and provide an increase 
in self-efficacy. The therapist may ask questions, such 
as “You’ve used these attention-switching methods to 
cope effectively with your voices. What does that tell 
you about them being in total control and you being 
helpless?” The patient may well make statements that 
indicate the voices have been demonstrated to be fallible 
and he/she has some control over the situation, 
which can then be used as self-statements or a modified 
internal dialogue to further enhance self-efficacy and 
coping. 

Modification of Behavior or Cognition 

Changes in behavior and cognition complement each 
other, and one is not necessarily better than the other. 
Changes in behavior should always be used to examine 
and potentially challenge maladaptive thoughts and 
beliefs or as learning experiences. Similarly, changes 
in cognition should be used as opportunities to change 
behavior and to establish new behaviors. The therapist 
should always look for opportunities to prompt patients 
to reappraise their beliefs. This can be carried out as 
part of formal behavioral experiments, naturally occurring 
changes, and frequent reflections on what has been 
achieved in treatment. In assessment and during formulation 
the therapist should always be alert to patients’ 


Schizophrenia and Other Psychotic Disorders 

avoidance or safety behaviors, or when patients do not 
behave in a way that could disconfirm their fears, delusions, 
or maladaptive cognitions. These can be used 
very early on in treatment as behavioral experiments to 
test out patients’ beliefs or to provide opportunities for 
quick improvements to challenge despondent or hopelessness 
beliefs, such as “Nothing is worth it if I cannot 
change” or “I have no control over my life or circumstances.” 
The belief of “no control” is often present and 
can be refuted by many small behavioral changes that 
may be repeated and referred to frequently. Finally, it 
is often helpful at the beginning of treatment to obtain 
some behavior changes, although often small, and increase 
activity that may have a number of associated 
benefits and provide the opportunity for reappraisal. 

Modification of Cognitive Content 
or Cognitive Process 

Therapists frequently face the choice of whether to try 
to modify the content of hallucinations or delusions, 
or the attentional processes that these phenomena 
have captured. Traditionally, in cognitive therapy the 
content of cognition is the main focus. In the coping 
model intervention, this is broadened to modification 
of cognitive processes because modifying cognitive 
processes provides greater clinical flexibility, and because 
deficits of the regulation of attention and executive 
function are often present in psychotic disorders. 
In practice, these tactics can work together. Initial 
modification of attentional processes through attention 
switching, for example, can decrease the emotional impact 
of the experience. A similar effect can be produced 
by attending to the physical characteristics of a hallucination 
rather than what the voice is actually saying. 
This can provide not only an opening to challenge the 
truth of the content of the voice or delusional thought 
but also a sense of control over these experiences. Take, 
for example, a young man who is experiencing voices 
that accuse him of having committed a murder and also 
say he is Russian. Initially, he can be taught to turn his 
attention away from the voices in a systematic way to 
reduce their emotional impact. This technique can be 
used to weaken the emotional strength of the experience, 
to elicit a sense of control, and to challenge the 
belief that the voices are all-powerful. With increased 
self-efficacy and a greater sense of power, the patient 
can later challenge the content of the voices that accuse 
him of murder by investigating the objective evidence 
that a murder has been committed. Furthermore, the 

untruthfulness of the voices in saying he is Russian can 
be used to challenge the veracity of the murder accusation; 
if the voices had been wrong about one issue, 
then they could be wrong about the other. Modification 
of cognitive process and content provides the therapist 
with two basic routes to intervention and the flexibility 
to move from one tactic to the other. 

case stuDy 

The following case example gives some indication of 
how CBTp works. 

History 

Jim, a 28-year-old man, developed a psychotic illness 
when he was 22. During his first episode, Jim became 
increasingly paranoid and accused people, including 
his friends, of stealing his money. He said that he 
could feel people taking money and his wallet from 
his pockets when he was socializing in his local pub 
and also when he was traveling by bus. The feeling 
that “something was wrong” had been with him for a 
few months, and Jim then began to hear voices warning 
him that people were against him and scheming to 
“do me down.” These voices talked to Jim, warning 
him against “the schemes” and telling him who was 
involved and to be on his guard. These voices were 
especially insistent that those closest to Jim were the 
people most against him and the “worst schemers.” The 
voices also told Jim that his girlfriend was unfaithful, 
and he experienced “visions,” sent by the voices, of his 
girlfriend having sex with other men. He did not actually 
believe that his girlfriend was unfaithful, but he 
became very angry that the voices should make these 
accusations. On some occasions, Jim did lose control 
and confronted some male friends about having affairs 
with his girlfriend. Usually he accepted their denials. 

Jim also heard voices talking about him. These different 
voices were usually “scheming” and making 
insulting and accusatory comments. Sometimes these 
voices would laugh at Jim because his girlfriend was 
cheating on him, and make remarks about his sexual 
inadequacy, to which they attributed her infidelity. 

Jim’s friends and family noticed that he began to 
withdraw and became increasingly disheveled. He was 
often found muttering to himself or making sarcastic 
comments to family members about how they were 
“growing rich on my hard work.” The voices also told 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

him to “look for signs that the scheming is coming to a 
head.” Jim began to write down an account of everyday 
events, such as the time certain buses arrived near his 
house and the type of advertisements on their sides. His 
parents, who would find these writings left around the 
house with various passages heavily underlined, were 
increasingly worried about Jim and also concerned that 
he was drinking considerable amounts of alcohol. Jim’s 
friends began to avoid him and he was increasingly isolated. 
He broke up with his girlfriend, who could no 
longer deal with his accusations of infidelity. 

The situation deteriorated very rapidly during the 
summer months, and Jim was hospitalized one evening 
and detained under the Mental Health Act. He had gone 
out early to his local pub. A number of his friends were 
there, but he kept away from them, drinking alone in 
a corner. Suddenly Jim got out of his seat and began 
shouting at his friends, accusing them of stealing his 
money, undermining his confidence, and spreading 
rumors about him. He took some loose change from 
his pockets and threw it at his friends. They tried to 
ignore him, but Jim became increasingly agitated and 
aggressive, and finally physically attacked one of them. 
A number of people became involved, and the situation 
became more chaotic as a fight broke out. The police 
were called and Jim was arrested. He had suffered 
minor physical injuries, so he was taken to the accident 
and emergency department of the local hospital 
and from there was admitted to the psychiatric ward. 
Jim spent about 5 weeks in the hospital, during which 
time he was treated with antipsychotic medication. 
His health care plan included counseling, and his family 
received psychoeducation, in that they were given 
information about his diagnosis of schizophrenia and 
general advice on how to manage him at home. Jim’s 
symptoms remitted during his hospital stay, and he was 
discharged, with frequent outpatient appointments with 
his psychiatrist and home treatment with the assertive 
outreach team. 

Over the intervening years Jim had five more relapses, 
during which a similar pattern would follow. 
He would become paranoid, hear voices and become 
isolated, and have increasing difficulty in caring for 
himself. Each relapse was followed by a short period 
of hospitalization with increased medication. However, 
residual symptoms became common following an episode, 
and in spite of increased medication and changes 
to atypical antipsychotics, Jim continued to experience 
auditory hallucinations, paranoid delusions, and delusions 
of reference. He often avoided going out or con


tacting people because of his paranoia. He was able to 
initiate and maintain a relationship, although the voices 
continued to send him “visions” and to question his 
girlfriend’s faithfulness. 

Jim was referred for CBT to treat his persistent positive 
psychotic symptoms as part of a multidisciplinary 
approach to his care and to promote recovery. 

Current Situation 

Jim now lives in his own apartment. He has good relations 
with his parents, who live quite close by and 
whom he sees every few weeks. He is unemployed and 
receives disability benefits. Jim attends a day center for 
people with mental health problems 2 or 3 days a week. 
He had attended a local college to study computers but 
recently discontinued schooling because he found the 
social contact too stressful. Jim has a steady girlfriend, 
Sue, whom he sees regularly. He has lost contact with 
the friends he had before he became ill, and although 
he occasionally sees them, he avoids them and places 
he thinks they might go. He receives antipsychotic 
medication, attends monthly outpatient appointments 
with a psychiatrist, and is visited at home once a week 
by a community psychiatric nurse who provides counseling 
and support, and monitors his mental state. 

Mental State at Referral 

Jim experienced auditory hallucinations in the form of 
a variety of voices talking to and about him. He described 
these as “helpful” voices and “evil” voices. The 
“helpful” voices warned him of the “schemes” of others 
and told him about dangerous situations and times 
when he was under threat. They warned him to avoid 
“dodgy people” who might attack or assault him. Jim 
thought their warnings were very helpful and was convinced 
that acting upon these warnings kept him from 
harm. The “evil” voices generally spoke about him, 
saying that he was “stupid, useless, and no good,” “not 
up to it sexually,” and other personally defamatory 
statements. 

There were voices that told Jim that his girlfriend 
Sue was unfaithful and cheating on him. He was unsure 
whether these voices were “helpful” or “evil.” These 
voices also sent Jim pictures of Sue being unfaithful 
and simultaneously told him that he was stupid and useless 
to put up with it. He described these pictures as 
“visions” that he found extremely distressing. Although 
Jim said he did not believe that Sue was unfaithful, the 


Schizophrenia and Other Psychotic Disorders 

voices became increasingly more intense and compelling, 
and he was unable to resist shouting back at them. 
Sue was able to reassure Jim that his fears were groundless. 


Engagement 

Initially Jim was resistant to contact with the clinician 
(in this case, Jim had been referred to a clinical psychologist 
for CBT). At the time of referral he was quite 
paranoid, and when he was visited at his home for the 
first appointment, having failed to attend his clinic appointment, 
Jim refused to open the door. (It is common 
practice for mental health professionals in the United 
Kingdom to do home visits.) A short conversation 
through the letter box ensued, ending with the clinician’s 
statement that he would return at a more convenient 
time. Two further visits resulted in Jim refusing to 
open the door. The strategy here was just to make contact 
to reassure Jim that his views were perfectly valid 
and that another visit would be made at a later date to 
see how he felt about things then. In situations in which 
the initial engagement is problematic, the best strategy 
is to “roll with resistance” and try to defuse the situation 
and reduce any agitation, maintain contact, and 
return at another time. 

On the next occasion Jim was more relaxed and allowed 
the clinician into his flat. Given Jim’s paranoia, 
it was important for the clinician just to establish a 
positive interaction and relationship at this point, and 
not to introduce the topic of symptoms or psychological 
treatment until Jim was completely comfortable 
with him. So, in Jim’s case, the first couple of sessions 
were kept brief and covered his general well-being 
and topics of interest for him. The clinician’s primary 
focus was to keep Jim engaged and to develop the beginnings 
of a therapeutic relationship. It is not always 
the case that assessment and treatment cannot be embarked 
upon more quickly, but maintaining engagement 
is essential. 

The fourth session was longer and the clinician introduced 
the possibility of psychological treatment. This 
necessitated a discussion of Jim’s symptoms, along the 
following lines: 

“I understand you have been hearing voices when no 
one is there? What do you make of this? Have you 
any idea what these voices are? Are the voices a difficulty 
for you? Would you want to try and do something 
about these voices?” 

These questions not only raise the topic of the psychotic 
experience and the suggestion of treatment but also attempt 
to obtain an idea of the patient’s beliefs about the 
voices and whether they are perceived as real or not. 

Similarly, the clinician can ask questions about the 
paranoid delusions: 

“It is true that you are having difficulties with people?” 


“Are you feeling that some people are against you? 
What do you make of these thoughts and feelings? 
Why do you think it is happening?” 

“Are they a difficulty for you?” “Would you want to 
try and do something about these thoughts and 
worries?” 

Again, the clinician attempts to assess quickly how 
strongly Jim holds these delusions and whether he 
would consider treatment. 

Jim was not enthusiastic about treatment. He thought 
that his fears, as well as the voices, were real, and that 
psychological treatment was not appropriate in his 
case. This reaction is often encountered in patients with 
residual and persistent psychotic symptoms. A number 
of important points should be considered: 

•• 
What needs to be done to maintain engagement? 
•• 
How can a clinically relevant problem be identified 
and mutually agreed upon? 
•• 
How can treatment be framed so that the patient 
sees it as achieving a positive and desired benefit? 

First, it is important to validate the experience, but 
it is not necessary to agree on the cause. For example, 
in this case, it was important to agree that Jim did hear 
voices and believe that some people were against him. 
This can be done without agreeing that the voices come 
from a real entity or that people are actually against 
him. This helps to separate Jim’s belief about what is 
happening to him from the experience; that is, that Jim 
has the belief is not the same as that belief being true. 
Similarly, that Jim hears voices is not the same as believing 
these voices exist as an independent and real entity. 
It may not necessarily be possible to agree on these 
points at this time, but the clinician can return to these 
issues. At the moment, engagement is more important. 

Next, it is often helpful to investigate the consequences 
of the experience. Some of the voices cause 
distress, and Jim’s paranoid ideas cause him to be fear



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

ful. Thus, distress and fear are more likely to be problems 
that Jim will be willing to address. This can be 
introduced as follows: 

“You have told me that the voices sometimes make 
you feel very upset. Perhaps that upset is something 
I can help you with and that you would like to work 
on?” 

“The thoughts that some people out there are against 
you and want to harm you make you very frightened. 
Perhaps that fear is something we can work on together, 
so you feel less afraid? Maybe if you were 
less afraid you could cope better with dealing with 
people. Would that be helpful to you?” 

So in cases when patients are very deluded or lack 
insight into their symptoms, trying to persuade them 
to eliminate their symptoms and the experiences they 
believe to be real can be counterproductive and jeopardize 
engagement. However, trying to reduce distress 
may be a viable alternative for a collaborative goal. 
There is also an assumption from the model that reducing 
emotional reactions to symptoms may well weaken 
the symptoms themselves. 

However, Jim remained unenthusiastic about this 
treatment goal as well. His view was that being fearful 
about people was a reasonable reaction given that there 
were people who would harm him, and this emotion 
kept him on his “edge,” so that he was more vigilant 
for threat and danger. His belief was that such vigilance 
actually kept him safe from harm, so there was 
little motivation to change and put himself in harm’s 
way. 

To protect engagement, it is important not to dispute 
or argue with the patient, and most definitely not at this 
early stage, when the patient is not convinced that there 
is any benefit to be gained from treatment. The next 
strategy the clinician used to engage Jim was to ask 
about his goals in life. 

clinician: Jim, what sort of goals do you have? Is 
there anything you would like to achieve personally? 
Is there anything you would like to do that you 
haven’t been able to do, for whatever reason? 

Jim: Yes, lots of things. I’d like to get a job that’s well 
paid. I’d like to go back to college. That would help 
me get a good job. 

clinician: Going to college would help you get a good 

job. That is a very good idea. Would you like to go 

back to college? 

Jim: I would, but when I went before I had problems. 

clinician: What sort of problems were they? 

Jim: Well, I got scared of the people there. I thought 
some of them were scary, dodgy, money grubbers. 
The voices told me not to go. I have to do what the 
voices tell me. 

clinician: So one of your important goals is to get to 
college so as to help you get a good job, but being 
scared of the people there and the voices is stopping 
you from going to college and achieving your goals. 
Is that about it? 

Jim: Yes, I suppose you are right. 

In this way Jim has realized that his important goals 
are being impeded by his psychosis, and he and the 
clinician are able to agree on a problem that needs to 
be addressed. Thus, Jim can see a benefit to receiving 
treatment. 

As well as maintaining engagement, the clinician 
has learned quite a lot about Jim and his problems. 
The voices warn Jim about certain situations, and he 
listens to them and takes avoidant action; thus, he has 
developed a number of safety behaviors that protect 
him from perceived harm. Opportunities to test out or 
refute these threat cognitions by dropping safety behavior 
are not taken up. However, there are situations 
that lend themselves to reality testing. Jim experiences 
command hallucinations (voices that give him a direct 
order) to which he responds. The likelihood that Jim 
thinks the voices are powerful, and that he has little 
or no control over them, provides future opportunity to 
refute these attributions. Jim experiences some feelings 
of dissonance in that he is now aware that his valued 
goals are impeded. 

Case Formulation 

Treatment naturally follows from an accurate assessment 
of the patient’s problems, and it is important to establish 
details of the antecedents and consequences of 
psychotic symptoms (see Tarrier & Calam, 2002, for a 
discussion of case formulation in general). In this case, 
Jim has many psychotic symptoms, and it is probably 
best to deal with them in stages. 


Schizophrenia and Other Psychotic Disorders 

Paranoid Delusions 

Jim has paranoid delusions that occur in a number of 
situations. When alone in his flat, Jim worries that his 
old friends and family have stolen all his money and are 
scheming against him. This is reinforced by the voices 
telling Jim he needs to be on his guard. Jim also becomes 
very paranoid when he goes out. For example, 
in the street he scans the crowds for signs of his old 
friends, so that he can make good his escape if he sees 
them or “scary people” who might assault him. He is 
also paranoid at the day center, just as he was at college. 
The voices tell him the situation is dangerous, that 
there are dangerous people about, and that he must take 
care. Jim knows the voices will warn him of danger, so 
he listens out for them and is attentive to them when 
they occur. At the day center Jim becomes more agitated 
the longer he is there, and he usually goes home 
after a short time. In doing so he feels reassured that the 
voices have helped him and kept him from harm. Jim 
also wonders why the voices help him and concludes 
that it must be because he is special in some way. This 
puzzles him because the “evil” voices are unpleasant 
and nasty to him. Jim concludes that because he is 
special, he is being tested by the “evil” voices to see 
whether he is worthy of their help. Only special people 
would be helped and be tested. In thinking this way, 
Jim has resolved the dissonance posed by experiencing 
both “helpful” and “evil” voices. 

The clinician and Jim decide jointly to focus on the 
difficult situation at the day center: 

clinician: OK, Jim, I’d like you to talk me through 
what happens at the day center. The reason I ask this 
is because you remember that attending college was 
an important goal you wanted to achieve but couldn’t 
because you felt suspicious of people there. Well, the 
situation at the day center is a lot like that at college, 
so we might learn how you can cope with returning 
to college if we examine the day center situation. 
Does that sound OK to you? 

Jim: OK. Well one of the things that happens is that I 
know the voices know I’m vulnerable because they 
can tell when I’m like that, which is when they attack 
me, but they also want to help me, so they warn me 
about the scary people there. 

clinician: How do the voices know you are vulnerable? 


Jim: They can tell because they know how I feel. 

clinician: How do you feel when you are vulnerable? 

Jim: All shaky and on edge. 

clinician: Is that like a feeling of being anxious or 
stressed? 
Jim: Yes, a bit like that. 

It appears that Jim becomes anxious in anticipation 
of going to the day center. There may be a range of reasons 
for this, such as anticipatory and situational anxiety, 
social anxiety, fear of being attacked, or general 
elevated levels of arousal. One hypothesis is that Jim 
picks up on this feeling of anxiety and misattributes 
it to being “vulnerable” to the voices. This is because 
his increased anxiety is associated with an increased 
probability of experiencing auditory hallucinations, but 
Jim attributes meaning to this association. Voices are 
imbued with attributes of power and intent. 

clinician: OK, Jim, so you’re feeling anxious and vulnerable. 
What happens next? 

Jim: Well usually the voices will start. They can say a 
lot of things, but they will warn me about danger. I 
know that the voices will attack me, but I want to 
keep safe, and they will warn me so I listen out for 
them. 

Here, Jim is indicating that not only do the voices occur 
in this situation but also his attention is focused on listening 
out for them, which may indicate that the threshold 
for detecting them is being lowered. This suggests 
that a redirection of attention may be a helpful method 
of coping with this situation. The clinician does not 
suggest this method at this stage but he may call upon 
it later. 

clinician: When they warn you, how does it happen? 

Jim: The voices will see someone that is dangerous and 
they will say, “See him? He’s going to get you, he’ll 
attack you. You better get out of here.” When they 
say that, I can see this guy looks vicious and he’s 
going to have a go at me, so I get out of there as fast 
as I can. 

clinician: Then what happens? 

Jim: I get out of there, and I feel real relieved that I’ve 
escaped. I feel real lucky that I’ve got the voices to 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

keep me safe. Otherwise, I’d be in for it, I’d be in 
terrible trouble. The more I think about it, the more 
lucky and special I feel. They keep me safe. 

It appears that Jim attributes both personal meaning 
to his voices and power to keep him safe. In fact he 
has developed a type of safety behavior that reduces 
his anxiety and helps him escape a feared consequence. 
His avoidant behavior also reinforces his feeling of 
being special. 

This establishes a useful behavior cycle that the clinician 
may utilize to help Jim abandon his safety behaviors 
and to disprove his catastrophic predictions that 
he will be attacked. First, it is helpful to establish a little 
more detail. 

clinician: You said that the voices warn you about 
danger at the day center most of the time. Does this 
always happen? 

Jim: No, not every time. I always listen out very carefully 
for the voices, but sometimes they aren’t there. 
clinician: So when the voices aren’t there, what happens? 
Jim: Sometimes I still feel vulnerable, but I just get on 
with it. 

clinician: Do you mean you don’t leave, you stay 
there? 
Jim: Yes, sometimes I get bored and go home, but usually 
I stay and have a chat and a cup of tea. 

clinician: Tell me, Jim, is it pretty much the same 
people there whether you hear the voices or not? 
Jim: Yes that’s it, pretty much the same people all the 
time. 

clinician: So sometimes the voices tell you someone 
is dangerous, and you get out pretty quick and feel 
relieved you weren’t attacked, and at other times 
the voices aren’t there, but you stay with the same 
people, those that you thought were dangerous before, 
and nothing happens. Doesn’t that mean that at 
times they are dangerous and other times they’re not 
dangerous? Isn’t that strange? 

Jim: Yes, I suppose it is. I’d not thought about that before. 


Here, the clinician is looking for inconsistencies in situations 
that can be used to refute Jim’s beliefs. The clinician 
highlights the inconsistency in the logical pres


ence of threat and feeds it back to Jim, asking him what 
he makes of it. The clinician pursues the point about the 
inconsistency of the occurrence of the voices. 

clinician: Sometimes the voices aren’t there. Why is 
that? 

Jim: I don’t know that either. Maybe they have to look 
after someone else on that day. Yes, that must be it. 
There must be other special people that they have 
to look after and they are helping them. Just goes 
to show how important the voices are if they have 
lots of special people to look after. Means I’m really 
special, too, one of the real special people. 

At this point Jim appears to be confabulating and absorbing 
this new information into his delusional thought 
network. New information is processed in a way that 
protects rather than challenges the delusional system. 
This is useful because an alternative explanation—that 
the voices occur when Jim attends to them and feels 
stressed and are less likely to occur if he is more relaxed 
and engaged—can be advanced and tested as an 
alternative belief. 

The clinician now needs to motivate Jim to test out 
some of his beliefs. He compares the day center situation 
with college and the achievement of an important 
goal to motivate Jim to attempt to cope better at the day 
center. Furthermore, it is established that generally Jim 
enjoys going, although ambivalence is maintained by 
his fear of attack. Being taught how to manage his fear 
and be more relaxed in the situation is also a motivating 
factor. 

Jim needs to have a plausible set of alternative explanations 
of what is going on, so that he may process any 
new information differently and not reinforce his delusions. 
In the past Jim has been told that he is paranoid 
because he has a mental illness involving an imbalance 
of biochemicals in his brain. This is not a particularly 
attractive explanation to Jim. It does not reflect his actual 
experience, and it is stigmatizing. Jim needs to be 
presented with an alternative model of his experiences 
that allows him to collaborate in his psychological 
treatment. 

The clinician might suggest that paranoia is a result 
of misunderstanding or misinterpreting situations, and 
that if Jim feels stressed and anxious, as he does at the 
day center, then he may misattribute this physical state 
to a “vulnerability.” He is more likely to experience the 
voices when he is anxious, but this does not mean that 


Schizophrenia and Other Psychotic Disorders 

the voices know he is vulnerable. The clinician might 
also suggest that Jim ignore the voices when they tell 
him he is about to be attacked and just get on with what 
he is doing at the day center. Because the same people 
are there, and they do not attack him when the voices 
are absent, it is unlikely that he will be attacked when 
the voices are present. Thus, a behavior experiment 
can be established to test out whether the voices keep 
Jim safe. This may help challenge Jim’s belief that the 
voices are both truthful and helpful, and that they are 
powerful and all knowing. 

When Jim did enter these situations, he was acutely 
aware that his voices might occur, so that he developed 
an internal focus to monitor for feeling “vulnerable” 
and an external attention scan for hearing the 
voices. The former meant that he was more likely to 
amplify any internal sensations. The latter meant that 
he was more likely to verbalize what the voices usually 
said to him as a match and also, paradoxically, to 
focus his attention internally. This process of internal 
focus and attention scanning was more likely to trigger 
the voices. Intervention here involved persuading 
Jim to use other attentional strategies when he entered 
these situations. These strategies were rehearsed in 
the sessions and prompted with appropriate internal 
dialogue. 

Jim also made a number of attributions about the 
voices. He believed that the voices warned him of 
threat because he “might be special”; he thought they 
might be able to do this through telepathy, and that he 
had little control over this process. Jim was troubled 
because the voices were often unpleasant, and he could 
not understand why they would be so if they were helping 
him to avoid danger. But Jim concluded that because 
he was special he needed to “be tested” by the 
voices, which in turn confirmed his belief that he was 
special. Of course, much of this explanation had been 
built up on the incorrect premise that the voices were 
actually warning him of a real danger, which could be 
challenged. An alternative explanation of his experience 
could be based on a normalization of this experience. 
Everyone has self-referent or bizarre thoughts at 
times, and in Jim’s case these are perceived as external 
voices rather than being identified as part of the self 
and merely thoughts. Jim found this explanation plausible, 
although he was not entirely accepting of it. This 
is not unusual; however, it did seed doubt in his mind 
and could be referred to constantly, further weakening 
his delusional explanations. 

Two difficulties arose with Jim. He did not have an 
alternative explanation for the voices other than they 
represented some, albeit vague and poorly defined, 
powerful entities or beings (delusional), or that they 
were the manifestation of a biochemical imbalance in 
his brain (disease). The clinician suggested to Jim that 
his voices might be his own thoughts or a leakage from 
memory into consciousness that was not identified as 
being part of his self. This was why the voices often 
reflected Jim’s fears or concerns, or aspects of his past. 

The voices warned Jim when he was in danger. He 
believed that the voices helped and protected him in 
these situations. For example, on one occasion when 
Jim was walking down a road, the voices told him that 
a man coming from the other direction was going to 
attack him. Jim crossed the road to avoid the man and 
believed that in doing so he had avoided being attacked. 
He also noticed that the man looked “suspicious,” 
which further confirmed his belief that the voices had 
saved him from danger. Here is an example of an EBAC 
cycle to which we referred earlier in the chapter. 

•• 
Experience—Voices tell him of a suspicious per


son approaching. 
•• 
Belief—He is in imminent danger. 
•• 
Action—He crosses the road. 
•• 
Confirmation—He has avoided being attacked. 

This can be used as another therapeutic example: 

clinician: You’ve told me that when the man approached 
you in the street, he was looking at you and 
the voices told you you were in danger. What happened 
next? 

Jim: Well, I knew he would go for me, so I crossed the 
street and got away. 

clinician: When you crossed the street, did the man 
look at you or follow you, or say anything? 
Jim: No, I don’t think so. 

clinician: Isn’t that strange, if he was out to attack 
you? 
Jim: Yes, I suppose so. I’d not thought about that before, 
I was so glad to get away. 

clinician: Tell me, Jim, when you walk down the 
street, where do you look? 
Jim: Well, where I’m going, of course. That’s a daft 
question! 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

clinician: Well, it may seem so, but think where was 

the man going when you thought he was looking at 

you to attack you. 

Jim: Well, he was walking toward me, and he was looking 
in that direction. 

The clinician continues his questioning, so that Jim 
keeps returning to the conclusion that the man happened 
to be looking at him because Jim was in his line 
of vision, nothing more. There was no evidence of an 
intent to attack, and once Jim was out of his line of 
vision, the man paid no further attention to him. Experiments 
can be constructed to further emphasize this 
point. Sometimes Jim may be drawing attention to himself 
by his own actions, which make people look at him 
(the self-fulfilling prophecy). Again, this can be drawn 
out by a similar line of questioning and tested. A similar 
approach can be taken with other examples of Jim’s 
paranoid behavior, and his behavior with friends and 
family. The clinician always comes back to these past 
examples of successful belief and behavior change, and 
asks Jim how he feels about them and whether he can 
identify any common factors between these past successes 
and current problems. 

“Visions” Sent by the Voices 

Jim was very upset with the “visions” he experienced of 
his girlfriend having sex with other people. He thought 
these visions were sent by the voices, also by a process 
of telepathy. Jim did not believe his girlfriend was 
unfaithful, but he became very upset and angry when 
the voices told him this. He tried to push the images 
out of his mind, but when this strategy failed, he became 
further convinced that the images were sent via 
telepathy. The more angry and upset Jim became, the 
more difficult he found it to resist the belief and to view 
the experience of the visions as collateral evidence. An 
alternative explanation was that the visions were mental 
images that had become very vivid and occurred in 
response to his catastrophic thoughts about his girlfriend’s 
infidelity and persisted because Jim attempted 
to suppress them. The voices were his own thoughts, 
which again posed questions about his girlfriend’s fidelity, 
because his constant ruminations on the topic 
had made Jim feel insecure about his relationship. This 
alternative explanation, in conjunction with a review 
of the objective evidence regarding the security of his 

relationship, significantly weakened Jim’s delusional 
beliefs about infidelity, telepathy, and the reality of 
the voices. The clinician introduced thought suppression 
exercises to demonstrate the rebound effect of 
Jim pushing the images out of his mind. Exposure to 
the “visions” was also useful in this case (although it 
might not be in all cases), demonstrating that images 
held in attention fade with time, along with the distress 
they cause, which was further evidence of an internal 
phenomenon and not external telepathy. Jim was also 
taught to identify the onset of the voices and to switch 
his attention to alternative stimuli as a way to reduce 
their impact and to demonstrate that these experiences 
were more likely generated internally rather than coming 
from an external entity. The clinician compared 
these experiences with anxiety disorders in which catastrophic 
beliefs and images serve to fuel irrational and 
threatening beliefs, pointing out that vivid imagery of 
“what might happen” or an imagined “catastrophe” 
would produce a sudden cascade of intense emotions. 
These experiences could then be relabeled as unpleasant 
but highly improbable situations rather than reality. 

Any slight reduction in the strength of a delusional 
belief was also used to challenge Jim’s general beliefs 
about control, threat, and veracity. 

low self‑esteeM: a coMMoN ProBleM 

Patients with schizophrenia frequently have a poor perception 
of themselves and low self-esteem. These global 
concepts can be hypothesized to be manifest in terms 
of a negative self-schema. This is postulated as being a 
consequence of severe mental illness and all that goes 
with this. This can involve suffering the stigma of a 
mental illness and even harassment and exclusion, the 
effects of social rejection and negative interpersonal 
environments, and the projected sense of being valueless 
and devalued. Patients with depression and suicidal 
ideation may feel increased feelings of low self-worth 
because of their depressed mood. Furthermore, an attribution 
process can make them think that if they feel 
they want to kill themselves, then they must be worthless 
and deserve to die. 

The factors that potentially impact upon and maintain 
negative self-schemas are represented in Figure 

12.3. As can be seen, the factors that influence and 
maintain negative self-schema are strong, multiple, and 
relentless. The consequence of having a severe mental 

Schizophrenia and Other Psychotic Disorders 


figUre 12.3. Maintenances of negative schemas. 

illness is the formation of such negative self-schemas, 
which then serve to bias the way information is assimilated, 
so that these negative schemas are maintained 
and strengthened rather than being challenged and 
modified. 

Feelings of low self-worth can both inhibit the effective 
use of coping strategies and increase the risk of 
depression and self-harm. 

Improving the Patient’s Self‑Esteem 

The aim of this set of techniques is to produce generalizations 
of positive attributes, challenge negative 
self-schemas, improve global self-esteem, and elicit 
positive emotional reactions. This method can be carried 
out in two stages. The first stage elicits positive 
cognitions about the self, and the second elicits a positive 
emotional response. Alternatively, the two stages 
can be combined, so that the processes of cognitive and 
emotional responding occur together. The procedure 
for the two-stage process is described for convenience 
as follows: 

Stage 1: Cognitive Responding 

•• 
Ask the patient to produce up to 10 positive qualities 
about him/herself (the number can be varied dependent 
on the patient’s capabilities; it is important that 
the patient not fail in generating the required number). 

•• 
Once the patient has produced a list of these qualities, 
ask him/her to rate each on how much he/she really 
believes it to be true on a 0- to 100-point scale (where 
0 = Not at all and 100 = Completely). 

•• 
Ask the patient to produce specific examples of 
evidence of each quality; prompt specifically for actions 
that have occurred recently and can be time 
linked, such as “last week”; also use your knowledge of 
the patient to elicit examples. Prompt and list as many 
examples as possible. 

•• 
Ask the patient to rehearse the list of examples 
for each quality, which may be done through verbal 
description and mental imagery of the event, then to 
rerate his/her belief that he/she possesses this quality. 
(Usually the belief rating changes to show an increase; 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

it should be emphasized to the patient that his/her belief 
can change depending on the evidence on which he/she 
focuses attention.) 

•• 
The patient is given a homework exercise to monitor 
his/her behavior over the next week and to record 
specific evidence to support the contention that he/she 
has these qualities. The aim is to produce generalization 
and experiential learning of a number of positive 
attributes. 

•• 
At the next session, provide feedback on examples 
and prompt further examples. Again, ask the patient to 
rerate his/her belief that he or she actually has these 
qualities, and further point out any changes in these 
beliefs. 

•• 
Ask the patient to reflect on the effect that eliciting 
and focusing on specific behaviors and evidence 
has on beliefs and qualities about him/herself and how 
this could affect the general opinion of him/herself. 
Reinforce all positive attributes and the process whereby 
the patient comes to a more positive view of him/ 
herself. 

•• 
Continue to repeat this procedure. Continually 
emphasize that the patient’s beliefs about him/herself 
vary depending on what is the focus of attention, and 
that self-esteem can be greatly affected by belief and is 
thus amenable to change. 

The case of “Dave” illustrates implementation of 
this procedure. Dave had very successfully learned to 
cope with his symptoms, which had been markedly reduced, 
and he had significantly improved his level of 
functioning. Dave produced a number of attributes that 
he thought he might have: “helpful,” which he gave a 
belief rating of 60 out of 100; “friendly,” which he rated 
50; and “a good father,” which he rated as 30. He was 
then asked to suggest concrete and specific evidence to 
support all of these. For “helpful,” he cited having lent 
money to a friend some months before, opening a door 
to someone the previous week, and helping his father in 
the garden that week. He rerated this belief as 90. 

For “friendly,” Dave cited that he had had many 
friends of 10 to 20 years’ standing; his friends contacted 
him regularly and enjoyed his company; he could 
talk comfortably to people in pubs or on buses. He got 
on well with the friends of his parents. Dave thought 
he got on well with the therapist and enjoyed speaking 
to him, and that he could talk to different types of 

people from different backgrounds without difficulty or 
reserve. He rerated this belief as 100. 

For being a “good father,” Dave said that he enjoyed 
taking his son and daughter out every week (he was 
divorced from their mother, who had custody). He was 
upset when he did not see them. He liked to buy them 
presents. He was happy for them to decide on activities 
rather than doing things purely for convenience, 
and this in itself gave him pleasure. Dave rerated this 
belief as 60. However, at this point he introduced some 
negative evaluations. He felt that he could not be a good 
father because he did not live with his children. He 
did not get on with their mother. He said that it was 
always easier for absent fathers who saw their children 
for short periods of time and tended to spoil them. This 
was not responsible parenting in his view. At this point 
it was helpful for the clinician to go through the model 
of how negative views such as this are maintained (see 
Figure 12.3), to discuss these thoughts as being negative 
schema–congruent, and to indicate that the statements 
were “overgeneralizations,” a process by which 
negatives are maximized and positives minimized. 
Furthermore, although these thoughts and beliefs had 
a depressing effect on his mood and maintained Dave’s 
negative beliefs about himself, they did not accurately 
reflect circumstances. To challenge Dave’s views of 
himself as a bad father, various exercises where undertaken: 
He was asked to define a “bad father” in explicit 
terms, then objectively compare his behavior to this 
definition. He was asked to compare his behavior with 
that of others in similar circumstances. Last, he was 
asked to give a realistic and objective appraisal of his 
performance and circumstances. While carrying out 
these exercises, the clinician emphasized the potential 
for negatively biased self-appraisals, along with strategies 
for coping with this in the future. 

Stage 2: Affective Responding 

Dave was also asked to explain why these qualities 
were important and the potential benefits of possessing 
them. The clinician used guided discovery and imagery 
during this process to ensure that the qualities selected 
were meaningful and important to Dave. He was then 
asked to generate practical examples of each quality. 
Particular emphasis was placed on describing specific 
behaviors associated with the quality and the context 
in which they were carried out. Attention was directed 
to Dave’s emotional experiences when displaying that 


Schizophrenia and Other Psychotic Disorders 

quality, thus generating the positive affect associated 
with that experience. Dave was asked to imagine the 
positive emotional reaction that another person would 
experience in interaction with him as he displayed a 
positive quality, and to vividly imagine the other person’s 
experience and describe how he/she would feel 
and attempt to mimic this experience. Dave was then 
asked to describe how he himself felt when he had 
evoked the positive emotion in the other person. 

For example, in displaying generosity by helping out 
a friend, Dave was asked to imagine through guided 
imagery how that friend felt when assisted by Dave. He 
was asked to intensify and sustain this positive emotion. 
Then, through a similar process, Dave was asked 
to imagine and describe how he himself felt when he 
realized how positive his friend had felt in being helped 
out. Again, Dave was asked to intensify and sustain this 
emotion. A similar process should be carried out for all 
positive characteristics and scenarios. 

PreveNtioN of relaPse 

Relapses rarely occur without any forewarning. They 
are usually preceded by a period of prodromal symptoms 
that can last for days, or more usually weeks, and 
in some cases, months; the average prodrome is, however, 
about 4 weeks (Birchwood, Macmillan, & Smith, 
1994). Common prodromal signs and symptoms include 
nonpsychotic symptoms (e.g., mild depression or 
dysphoria, anxiety, insomnia, irritability, mood fluctuations 
and interpersonal sensitivity) and low-level 
psychotic symptoms (e.g., suspiciousness, magical 
thinking, ideas of reference, feelings that “something 
is strange or wrong” and that the individual does not 
“fit in” with others around him/her). During the prodromal 
phase, patients display behavior change, such 
as becoming more withdrawn, avoiding social contact, 
abandoning hobbies or interests, appearing more preoccupied, 
and being unable to continue with work or 
other routine or demanding activities. As the prodrome 
progresses, these signs and symptoms intensify and patients 
may exhibit strange and bizarre behavior, such as 
being unable to care for themselves, becoming socially 
or sexually inappropriate, making accusations against 
others, muttering to themselves, and disconnecting the 
television or telephone. 

Patients may be asked to recall prodromal signs and 
symptoms that preceded previous episodes and relaps


es, which can be based on the onset of the episode or 
admission to the hospital, then identify when changes 
were first noticed, what changes occurred, and how they 
progressed and in what sequence. Each sign or symptom 
may be written on a card, and the patient may be 
asked to arrange them in temporal order of occurrence. 
In this way the patient’s relapse signature, that is, the 
individual set of signs and symptoms that characterized 
the patient’s prodrome and its time course leading 
to relapse, can be identified. Family members or 
professional mental health staff, if available, can help 
identify prodromal changes and their sequence. Clinicians 
may find the use of standardized assessments of 
prodromal symptoms helpful, such as the Early Signs 
Scale (Birchwood et al., 1989). Such instruments can 
also help the clinician cue or inquire about possible 
prodromal symptoms not spontaneously recalled by 
the patient. The patient needs to be able to discriminate 
between an actual relapse prodrome and normal mood 
fluctuations that do not signal a relapse. This is done 
through a process of discrimination training, whereby 
the patient monitors mood and experiences over a number 
of weeks, with a goal of learning to distinguish a 
real prodrome from the “false alarm” of a normal fluctuation 
in affect. 

The next stage is to formulate a “game plan” to deal 
with a prodrome should one occur. Coping strategies 
can be formulated and rehearsed, the help of others can 
be elicited, and the assistance of psychiatric services 
can be requested, which may include an increase or 
change in medication. With an understanding of the 
time course of patients’ prodromes, the clinician can 
identify different actions for different phases of the 
prodrome and the “window of opportunity” to intervene. 
An important part of the treatment approach is to 
plan for the future, especially for potentially stressful 
events that may occur and how to be aware of emerging 
symptoms and relapse. Patients can be monitored 
by returning to the clinician postcards that indicate 
they are well or that a prodrome may have started. 
Technology such as cell phones and e-mail may provide 
new, innovative platforms and methods for clinicians 
to monitor patients and maintain contact, to 
identify early signs of relapse, and to intervene at the 
optimal time. Such technological advances may also 
result in real-time assessment and intervention, and the 
development of intelligent systems to identify critical 
periods and deliver individualized interventions (Kelly 
et al., 2012). 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

cliNical ProBleMs aND Difficulties 

Thought Disorder 

Thought disorder, typically characterized by disruption 
to language, makes it difficult to comprehend the 
meaning that the patient is imparting. However, with 
experience and patience, it is often possible to follow 
some internal logic in the patient’s speech. This can 
be accomplished by asking the patient to explain the 
meaning, or by reflecting back one’s own understanding, 
which is then rephrased in more coherent language. 
Progressing through these organized steps in a 
calm manner can help prevent the patient from feeling 
overloaded with the emotional content of the discussion, 
which can occur, especially when the material 
being discussed is emotionally salient. 

Intractable Psychotic Symptoms 

Regrettably, there are cases in which the therapist’s best 
efforts and optimum medication produce little improvement 
in the patient’s symptoms. A number of options 
are available in such intractable cases. First, it is necessary 
to ensure that appropriate support services are in 
place, so that the patient’s quality of life is maximized. 
Second, there should be regular reviews of treatment, 
especially of medication and of environmental circumstances, 
so that excessive stresses are avoided. Last, it 
is always worth continuing with a few simple and direct 
cognitive-behavioral strategies because, over a long period 
of time, these may begin to have an effect. 

Risk of Suicide and Self‑Harm 

The risk of suicide in patients with schizophrenia 
is significant. Risk factors include being young and 
male, having a chronic illness with numerous exacerbations, 
high levels of symptomatology and functional 
impairment, feelings of hopelessness in association 
with depression, fear of further mental deterioration, 
and excessive dependence on treatment or loss of faith 
in treatment. In one study, two paths to suicide risk, 
both of which were mediated by hopelessness, were 
also identified: (1) increased social isolation, to which 
longer illness duration, more positive symptoms, older 
age, and being unemployed contributed, and (2) greater 
negative views of the self, higher frequency of criticism 
from relatives, and more negative symptoms, to 
which being male, unmarried, and unemployed signifi


cantly contributed (Tarrier, Barrowclough, Andrews, 
& Gregg, 2004). A more recent cohort study and systematic 
review have confirmed and extended previous 
findings. Being young and male with a history of violent 
offending were identified as predictors of suicide, 
although this latter finding was restricted specifically 
to those with lower IQ (Webb, Långström, Runeson, 
Lichtenstein, & Fazel, 2011). A systematic review of 51 
studies additionally identified important illness-related 
predictors such as depressive symptoms, hallucinations 
and delusions, and comorbid physical illness and substance 
misuse (Hor & Taylor, 2010). 

It is important for therapists to be aware that suicide 
attempts are a very real possibility while treating someone 
with schizophrenia. Unfortunately, patients with 
schizophrenia often commit suicide impulsively and 
use lethal methods, such as jumping from heights, immolation, 
or firearms. The presence of suicidal ideation 
needs to be assessed, and the patient needs to be asked 
whether he/she has made any specific plans or taken 
any actions, and whether the normal barriers to selfharm 
and suicide have broken down. It is necessary to 
be aware of factors that can elevate risk, including erosion 
of self-esteem; increased sense of hopelessness and 
despair, especially related to the patient’s perception of 
the illness and recovery; disruptive family or social relationships; 
and any changes in social circumstances or 
loss of supportive relationships (e.g., changes in mental 
health staff, staff holidays, or leave). Furthermore, the 
occurrence of major life events, loss, or shameful experiences 
can lead to despondency. 

Some factors that can increase risk for suicide are 
quite unique to the psychotic disorders, such as the experience 
of command hallucinations telling patients to 
self-harm. Other examples are more idiosyncratic. One 
of the authors (N. T.) had a patient who experienced 
strange physical sensations that he interpreted as the 
Queen of England entering his body. As a loyal subject, 
he thought he should vacate his body to give her sole 
possession, and he attempted to kill himself by slashing 
his wrists. This was not the result of a will to die, 
but was more driven by some sense of social protocol 
toward royalty. Fortunately, the attempt was unsuccessful. 


Many clinicians hypothesize that psychotic symptoms 
have a protective aspect in masking the harsh realities 
of the burden of serious mental illness. Improvement 
in insight and symptomatology can bring with it 
an increased exposure to this burden, thus increasing 
the probability of potential escape through suicide. The 


Schizophrenia and Other Psychotic Disorders 

clinician needs to be aware of all these factors, to know 
his/her patients well, and to monitor changes in their 
circumstances or mood that may be problematic. It is 
important to be aware of predictable changes and plan 
for them, to establish good communication with other 
mental health workers, and to address depressed mood 
and hopelessness in an open manner. Assessing acute 
suicide risk is further complicated by patients’ flat or 
incongruous affect, so that the cues a clinician would 
look for in a depressed patient may not be exhibited by 
a patient with schizophrenia. When risk is high, emergency 
psychiatric services should be called. 

Dual Diagnosis: Comorbidity of Alcohol 
and Substance Use 

Comorbid substance use disorders are an escalating 
problem in patients with schizophrenia. Dual-diagnosis 
patients tend to do worse than patients with schizophrenia 
alone on a range of outcomes. They tend to be more 
persistently symptomatic; to have more frequent and 
earlier relapse and readmission; to be more likely to 
present to the emergency services; and to have higher 
levels of aggression and violence, and greater risk of 
suicide and self-harm. 

Motivational interviewing has been used effectively 
to enhance motivation to change substance use behavior 
in schizophrenia patients (Barrowclough et al., 
2001; Haddock et al., 2003). Motivational interviewing 
has been termed a “style” rather than a specific intervention, 
and can be incorporated into a CBT approach 
to increase the patient’s motivation to change substance 
or alcohol use behavior and concurrently address the 
psychosis. It is postulated that an important interaction 
between alcohol or substance use and psychotic 
symptoms requires this dual-treatment approach. Many 
patients do not consider their alcohol or substance use 
a problem and perceive the positive benefits, such as 
self-medication, peer identification, or enjoyment, as 
outweighing any negative consequences. The aim during 
the initial sessions is to elicit change or motivational 
statements from the patient. The therapist uses 
the motivational interviewing skills of reflective listening, 
acceptance, and selective reinforcement to elicit 
such statements. Once the patient identifies substance 
or alcohol use as a problem and expresses a desire to 
change, therapy can then progress to practical ways to 
achieve this goal. The largest RCT to date compared 
a combined condition of TAU, motivational interviewing, 
and CBT with TAU alone in those with psycho


sis and co-occurring substance use. Results showed 
treatment to be beneficial in improving motivation to 
change substance use, and significantly reduced the 
amount of substance consumed per day, with this latter 
finding being maintained at 24-month follow-up. However, 
there were no effects on clinical outcomes such 
as relapse rates, symptoms, and functioning (Barrowclough 
et al., 2010). 

coNclusioN 

CBTp does have significant benefits for patients with 
schizophrenia and psychosis. It should be carried out 
as part of a comprehensive care plan. It is unlikely to 
“cure” patients, but it may assist them in coping with 
and recovering from their illness. Intervention is based 
on a detailed assessment and formulation. It does require 
considerable skill, experience, and knowledge of 
CBT and psychosis, and it does not lend itself easily to 
a simple protocol format. Further research on theoretical 
aspects of understanding psychosis from a psychological 
perspective is important to inform and further 
develop CBT procedures. Research into dissemination 
and how new psychological treatments penetrate into 
mental health services and become accessible to patients 
are required. 

referenCes 

Allot, K., Alvarez-Jimenez, M., Killackey, E. J., Bendall, S., 
McGorry, P. D., & Jackson, H. J. (2011). Patient predictors 
of symptom and functional outcome following cognitive 
behaviour therapy or befriending in first-episode psychosis. 
Schizophrenia Research, 132, 125–130. 

Barnes, T. R. E., & Nelson, H. E. (1994) The assessment of 
psychoses: A practical handbook. London: Chapman & 
Hall. 

Barrowclough, C., Haddock, G., Lobban, F., Jones, S., Siddle, 
R., Roberts, C., et al. (2006). Group cognitive behaviour 
therapy for schizophrenia: Randomized controlled trial. 
British Journal of Psychiatry, 189, 527–532. 

Barrowclough, C., Haddock, G., Tarrier, N., Lewis, S., Moring, 
J., O’Brian, R., et al. (2001). Randomised controlled 
trial of motivational interviewing and cognitive behavioural 
intervention for schizophrenia patients with associated 
drug or alcohol misuse. American Journal of Psychiatry, 
158, 1706–1713. 

Barrowclough, C., Haddock, G., Wykes, T., Beardmore, R., 
Conrod, P., Craig, T., et al. (2010). Integrated motivational 
interviewing and cognitive behavioural therapy for people 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

with psychosis and comorbid substance misuse: Randomised 
controlled trial. British Medical Journal, 341, 
c6325. 

Barrowclough, C., & Tarrier, N. (1992). Families of schizophrenic 
patients: A cognitive-behavioural intervention. 
London: Chapman & Hall. 

Birchwood, M., Macmillan, F., & Smith, J. (1994). Early 
intervention. In M. Birchwood & N. Tarrier (Eds.), Psychological 
management of schizophrenia (pp. 77–108). 
Chichester, UK: Wiley. 

Birchwood, M., Peters, E., Tarrier, N., Dunn, G., Lewis, S., 
Wykes, T., et al. (2011). A multi-centre randomised controlled 
trial of cognitive therapy to prevent harmful compliance 
with command hallucinations. BioMed Central 
Psychiatry, 11, 155–160. 

Birchwood, M., Smith, J., MacMillan, F., Hogg, B., Prasad, 
R., Harvey, C., et al. (1989). Predicting relapse in schizophrenia: 
The development and implementation of an early 
signs monitoring system using patients and families as observers. 
Psychological Medicine, 19, 649–656. 

Bird, V., Premkumar, P., Kendall, T., Whittington, C., Mitchell, 
J., & Kuipers, E. (2010). Early intervention services, 
cognitive-behavioural therapy and family intervention in 
early psychosis: Systematic review. British Journal of Psychiatry, 
197, 350–356. 

Bolton, C., Gooding, P., Kapur, N., Barrowclough, C., & Tarrier, 
N. (2007). Developing psychological perspectives of 
suicidal behaviour and risk in people with a diagnosis of 
schizophrenia: We know they kill themselves but do we 
understand why? Clinical Psychology Review, 27, 511– 
536. 

Brabban, A., Tai, S., & Turkington, D. (2009). Predictors of 
outcome in brief cognitive behavior therapy for schizophrenia. 
Schizophrenia Bulletin, 35, 859–864. 

Brooker, C., & Brabban, A. (2006). Measured success: A 
scoping review of evaluated psychosocial interventions 
training for work with people with serious mental health 
problems. London: National Health Service, National Institute 
for Mental Health in England. 

Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical power analysis for the behavioral 
sciences (2nd ed.). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. 

Dixon, L. B., Dickerson, F., Bellack, A. S., Bennett, M., 
Dickinson, D., Goldberg, R. W., et al. (2010). The 2009 
schizophrenia PORT psychosocial treatment recommendations 
and summary statements. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 
36, 48–70. 

Doll, R. (1998). Controlled trials: The 1948 watershed. British 
Medical Journal, 317, 1217–1220. 

Drury, V., Birchwood, M., Cochrane, R., & Macmillan, F. 
(1996). Cognitive therapy and recovery from acute psychosis: 
A controlled trial: I. Impact on psychotic symptoms. 
British Journal of Psychiatry, 169, 593 –601. 

Dunn, G., Fowler, D., Rollinson, R., Freeman, D., Kuipers, 
E., Smith, B., et al. (2012). Effective elements of cognitive 
behaviour therapy for psychosis: Results of a novel type 

of subgroup analysis based on principal stratification. Psychological 
Medicine, 42, 1057–1068. 

Emmerson, L. C., Granholm, E., Link, P. C., McQuaid, J. R., 
& Jeste, D. V. (2009). Insight and treatment outcome with 
cognitive-behavioral social skills training for older people 
with schizophrenia. Journal of Rehabilitation Research 
and Development, 46, 1053–1058. 

Fowler, D., Hodgekins, J., Painter, M., Reilly, T., Crane, C., 
Macmillan, I., et al. (2009). Cognitive behaviour therapy 
for improving social recovery in psychosis: A report from 
the ISREP MRC trial platform study (improving social 
recovery in early psychosis). Psychological Medicine, 39, 
1627–1636. 

Freeman, D. (2011). Improving cognitive treatments for delusions. 
Schizophrenia Research, 132, 135–139. 

Garety, P. A., Fowler, D. G., Freeman, D., Bebbington, P., 
Dunn, G., & Kuipers, E. (2008). Cognitive-behavioural 
therapy and family intervention for relapse prevention and 
symptom reduction in psychosis: Randomised controlled 
trial. British Journal of Psychiatry, 192, 412–423. 

Garety, P. A., Fowler, D., Kuipers, E., Freeman, D., Dunn, 
G., Bebbington, P., et al. (1997). London–East Anglia randomised 
controlled trial of cognitive-behavioural therapy 
for psychosis: II. Predictors of outcome. British Journal of 
Psychiatry, 171, 420–426. 

Garety, P., Kuipers, E., Fowler, D., Freeman, D., & Bebbington, 
P. E. (2001). A cognitive model of the positive symptoms 
of psychosis. Psychological Medicine, 31, 189–195. 

Gould, R. A., Mueser, K. T., Bolton, E., Mays, V., & Goff, 

D. (2001). Cognitive therapy for psychosis in schizophrenia: 
An effect size analysis. Schizophrenia Research, 48, 
335–342. 
Grant, P. M., Huh, G. A., Perivoliotis, D., Stolar, N. M., & 
Beck, A. T. (2012). Randomized trial to evaluate the efficacy 
of cognitive therapy for low-functioning patients 
with schizophrenia. Archives of General Psychiatry, 69, 
121–127. 

Haddock, G., Barrowclough, C., Tarrier, N., Moring, J., 
O’Brien, R., Schofield, N., et al. (2003). Randomised 
controlled trial of cognitive-behavior therapy and motivational 
intervention for schizophrenia and substance use: 18 
month, carer and economic outcomes. British Journal of 
Psychiatry, 183, 418–426. 

Haddock, G., McCarron, J., Tarrier, N., & Faragher, B. 
(1999). Scales to measure dimensions of hallucinations 
and delusions: The Psychotic Symptom Rating Scales 
(PSYRATS). Psychological Medicine, 29, 879–890. 

Haddock, G., Tarrier, N., Morrison, A. P., Hopkins, R., 
Drake, R., & Lewis, S. (1999). A pilot study evaluating the 
effectiveness of individual inpatient cognitive behavioural 
therapy in early psychosis. Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric 
Epidemiology, 34, 254–258. 

Hall, P. H., & Tarrier, N. (2003). The cognitive-behavioural 
treatment of low self-esteem in psychotic patients: A pilot 
study. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 41, 317–332. 


Schizophrenia and Other Psychotic Disorders 

Hor, K., & Taylor, M. (2010). Review: suicide and schizophrenia: 
A systematic review of rates and risk factors. 
Journal of Psychopharmacology, 24, 81–90. 

Jackson, H. J., McGorry, P. D., Killackey, E., Bendall, S., Allott, 
K., Dudgeon, P., et al. (2008). Acute-phase and 1-year 
follow-up results of a randomized controlled trial of CBT 
versus befriending for first-episode psychosis: The ACE 
project. Psychological Medicine, 38, 725–735. 

Johnson, J., Gooding, P., & Tarrier, N. (2008). Suicide risk in 
schizophrenia: Explanatory models and clinical implications, 
the schematic appraisal model of suicide (SAMS). 
Psychology and Psychotherapy, 81, 55–71. 

Kane, J. M. (1999). Management strategies for the treatment 
of schizophrenia. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 
60(Suppl. 12), 13–17. 

Kelly, J. A., Gooding, P., Pratt, D., Ainsworth, J., Welford, 
M., & Tarrier, N. (2012). Intelligent real time therapy 
(iRTT): Harnessing the power of machine learning to optimise 
the delivery of momentary cognitive-behavioural 
interventions. Journal of Mental Health, 21(4), 404–414. 

Kuipers, E., Onwumere, J., & Bebbington, P. (2010). Cognitive 
model of caregiving in psychosis. British Journal of 
Psychiatry, 196, 259–265. 

Lecomte, T., Leclerc, C., & Wykes, T. (2012). Group CBT 
for early psychosis—Are there still benefits one year later? 
International Journal of Group Psychotherapy, 62, 309– 
321. 

Lewis, S. W., Tarrier, N., Haddock, G., Bentall, R., Kinderman, 
P., Kingdon, D., et al. (2002). Randomised controlled 
trial of cognitive-behaviour therapy in early schizophrenia: 
Acute phase outcomes. British Journal of Psychiatry, 
181(Suppl. 43), 91–97. 

Lynch, D., Laws, K. R., & McKenna, P. J. (2010). Cognitive 
behavioural therapy for major psychiatric disorder: Does it 
really work?: A meta-analytical review of well-controlled 
trials. Psychological Medicine, 40, 9–24. 

Morrison, A. P., & Barratt, S. (2010). What are the components 
of CBT for psychosis?: A Delphi study. Schizophrenia 
Bulletin, 36, 136–142. 

Morrison, A. P., French, P., Stewart, S. L. K., Birchwood, M., 
Fowler, D., Gumley, A. I., et al. (2012). Early detection 
and intervention evaluation for people at risk of psychosis: 
Multisite randomised controlled trial. British Medical 
Journal, 344, e2233. 

Morrison, A. P., French, P., Walford, L., Lewis, S., Kilcommons, 
A., Green, J., et al. (2004). A randomised controlled 
trial of cognitive therapy for the prevention of psychosis 
in people at ultra-high risk. British Journal of Psychiatry, 
185, 291–297. 

Morrison, A. P., Hutton, P., Wardle, M., Spencer, H., Barratt, 
S., Brabban, A., et al. (2012). Cognitive therapy for people 
with a schizophrenia spectrum diagnosis not taking antipsychotic 
medication: An exploratory trial. Psychological 
Medicine, 42, 1049–1056. 

Morrison, A. P., Turkington, D., Wardle, M., Spencer, H., 

Barratt, S., Dudley, R., et al. (2012). A preliminary exploration 
of predictors of outcome and cognitive mechanisms 
of change in cognitive behaviour therapy for psychosis in 
people not taking antipsychotic medication. Behaviour 
Research and Therapy, 50, 163–167. 

Mueser, K., & Glynn, S. M. (1995). Behavioral family therapy 
for psychiatric disorders. Needham Heights, MA: 
Allyn & Bacon. 

Mueser, K. T., Glynn, S. M., Cather, C., Xie, H., Zarate, R., 
Fox Smith, L., et al. (2013). A randomized controlled 
trial of family intervention of co-occurring substance use 
and severe psychiatric disorders. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 
39(3), 658–672. 

National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (NICE). 
(2009). Schizophrenia: core interventions in the treatment 
and management of schizophrenia in adults in primary 
and secondary care, updated guideline. London: Author. 

Nuechterlein, K. H. (1987). Vulnerability models for schizophrenia: 
State of the art. In H. Hafner, W. F. Gattaz, & 

W. Janzarik (Eds.), Search for the cause of schizophrenia 
(pp. 297–316). Heidelberg, Germany: Springer-Verlag. 
Onwumere, J., Bebbington, P., & Kuipers, E. (2011). Family 
interventions in early psychosis: specificity and effectiveness. 
Epidemiology and Psychiatric Sciences, 20(13), 
113–119. 

Onwumere, J., & Kuipers, E. (2011). Cognitive-behavioral 
family intervention in psychosis. In M. Rimondini (Ed.), 
Communication in cognitive behavioral therapy (pp. 185– 
201). New York: Springer. 

Pantelis, C., & Barns, T. R. E. (1996). Drug strategies in treatment 
resistant schizophrenia. Australian and New Zealand 
Journal of Psychiatry, 30, 20–37. 

Perivoliotis, D., Grant, P. M., Peters, E. M., Ison, R., Kuipers, 
E., & Beck, A. T. (2010). Cognitive insight predicts favorable 
outcome in cognitive behavioral therapy for psychosis. 
Psychosis, 2, 23–33. 

Pilling, S., Bebbington, P., Kuipers, E., Garety, P., Geddes, 
J., Orbach, G., et al. (2002). Psychological treatments in 
schizophrenia: I. Meta-analysis of family interventions 
and cognitive behaviour therapy. Psychological Medicine, 
32, 763–782. 

Pocock, S. J. (1996). Clinical trials: A practical approach. 
Chichester, UK: Wiley. 

Premkumar, P., Peters, E. R., Fannon, D., Anilkumar, A. P., 
Kuipers, E., & Kumari, V. (2011). Coping styles predict responsiveness 
to cognitive behaviour therapy in psychosis. 
Psychiatry Research, 187, 354–362. 

Rector, N. A., & Beck, A. T. (2001). Cognitive behavioral 
therapy for schizophrenia: An empirical review. Journal 
of Nervous and Mental Disease, 189, 278–287. 

Richardson, A., Baker, M., Burns, T., Lilford, R. J., & Muijen, 

M. (2000). Reflections on methodological issues in mental 
health research. Journal of Mental Health, 9, 463–470. 
Salkovskis, P. M. (2002). Empirically grounded clinical 
interventions: Cognitive behaviour therapy progresses 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

through a multidimensional approach to clinical science. 
Behavioural and Cognitive Psychotherapy, 30, 3–10. 

Sarin, F., Wallin, L., & Widerlöv, B. (2011). Cognitive behavior 
therapy for schizophrenia: A meta-analytical review of 
randomized controlled trials. Nordic Journal of Psychiatry, 
65, 162–174. 

Slade, M., & Priebe, S. (2001). Are randomised controlled 
trials the only gold that glitters? British Journal of Psychiatry, 
179, 286–287. 

Steel, C., Tarrier, N., Stahl, D., & Wykes, T. (2012). Cognitive 
behaviour therapy for psychosis: The impact of therapist 
training and supervision. Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics, 
81(3), 194–195. 

Stowkowy, J., Addington, D., Liu, L., Hollowell, B., & Addington, 
J. (2012). Predictors of disengagement from treatment 
in an early psychosis program. Schizophrenia Research, 
136, 7–12. 

Tarrier, N. (1996). A psychological approach to the management 
of schizophrenia. In M. Moscarelli & N. Sartorius 
(Eds.), The economics of schizophrenia (pp. 271–286). 
Chichester, UK: Wiley. 

Tarrier, N. (2002). The use of coping strategies and selfregulation 
in the treatment of psychosis. In A. Morrison 
(Ed.), A casebook of cognitive therapy for psychosis 
(pp. 79–107). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 

Tarrier, N. (2006). A cognitive-behavioural case formulation 
approach to the treatment of schizophrenia. In N. Tarrier 
(Ed.), Case formulation in cognitive behaviour therapy: 
The treatment of challenging and complex clinical cases 
(pp. 167–187). London: Routledge. 

Tarrier, N., Barrowclough, C., Andrews, B., & Gregg, L. 
(2004). Suicide risk in recent onset schizophrenia: The 
influence of clinical, social, self-esteem and demographic 
factors. Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology, 
39, 927–937. 

Tarrier, N., Barrowclough, C., Haddock, G., & McGovern, 

J. (1999). The dissemination of innovative cognitivebehavioural 
treatments for schizophrenia. Journal of Mental 
Health, 8, 569–582. 
Tarrier, N., & Calam, R. (2002). New developments in 
cognitive-behavioural case formulation: Epidemiological, 
systemic and social context: An integrative approach. 
Cognitive and Behavioural Psychotherapy, 30, 311–328. 

Tarrier, N., Haddock, G., Lewis, S., Drake, R., Gregg, L., & 
the Socrates Trial Group. (2006). Suicide behaviour over 
18 months in recent onset schizophrenic patients: The effects 
of CBT. Schizophrenia Research, 83, 15–27. 

Tarrier, N., Lewis, S., Haddock, G., Bentall, R., Drake, R., 
Kinderman, P., et al. (2004). Cognitive-behavioural therapy 
in first-episode and early schizophrenia 18-month 
follow-up of a randomised controlled trial. British Journal 
of Psychiatry, 184, 231–239. 

Tarrier, N., & Wykes, T. (2004). Is there evidence that cognitive 
behaviour therapy is an effective treatment for schizophrenia: 
A cautious or cautionary tale? (Invited essay). 
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 42, 1377–1401. 

Tarrier, N., Yusupoff, L., Kinney, C., McCarthy, E., Gledhill, 
A., Haddock, G., et al. (1998). A randomised controlled 
trial of intensive cognitive behaviour therapy for 
chronic schizophrenia. British Medical Journal, 317, 
303–307. 

Tarrier, N., Yusupoff, L., McCarthy, E., Kinney, C., & Wittkowski, 
A. (1998). Some reason why patients suffering 
from chronic schizophrenia fail to continue in psychological 
treatment. Behavioural and Cognitive Psychotherapy, 
26, 177–181. 

Tattan, T., & Tarrier, N. (2000). The expressed emotion of 
case managers of the seriously mentally ill: The influence 
of EE and the quality of the relationship on clinical outcomes. 
Psychological Medicine, 30, 195–204. 

Trower, P., Birchwood, M., Meaden, A., Byrne, S., Nelson, 
A., & Ross, K. (2004). Cognitive therapy for command 
hallucinations: Randomised controlled trial. British Journal 
of Psychiatry, 184, 312–320. 

Webb, R. T., Långström, N., Runeson, B., Lichtenstein, P., 
& Fazel, S. (2011). Violent offending and IQ level as predictors 
of suicide in schizophrenia: National cohort study. 
Schizophrenia Research, 130, 143–147. 

Wykes, T., Everitt, B., Steele, C., & Tarrier, N. (2008). Cognitive 
behaviour therapy for schizophrenia: Effect sizes, 
clinical models and methodological rigor. Schizophrenia 
Bulletin, 34, 523–537. 

Zimmermann, G., Favrod, J., Trieu, V. H., & Pomini, V. 
(2005). The effect of cognitive behavioural treatment on 
the positive symptoms of schizophrenia spectrum disorders: 
A meta-analysis. Schizophrenia Research, 77, 1–9. 


CHaPter 13 

Alcohol Use Disorders 

BarBara s. MccraDy 

Clinicians working with individuals with alcohol use problems, as well as clinicians in 
training, have found this chapter to be an extraordinarily useful resource in guiding 
their treatment approaches. in this thoroughly updated and edited revision, the author 
begins by describing how recent societal trends and legislative initiatives have altered 
the nature of the clientele with drinking problems that comes for treatment. After briefly 
reviewing the available empirical evidence on treatment approaches that range from Alcoholics 
Anonymous to brief interventions to intensive inpatient treatment, the author 
describes the myriad factors that every clinician must consider in choosing and carrying 
out appropriate interventions for individuals with drinking problems. Using a variety of 
illuminating case vignettes, Barbara McCrady illustrates important therapeutic strategies, 
including methods for motivating these patients to begin treatment. in a manner that 
emphasizes the humanity of the couple and makes the partners come to life, the extended 
case study in this chapter illustrates the all‑too‑frequent tragic consequences of excessive 
drinking. in the context of this case description, the author describes in great detail 
what clinicians will not find in books that simply lay out various treatment procedures— 
that is, the thrusts and parries of a superb and experienced clinician in overcoming the 
roadblocks that inevitably emerge during treatment.—D. H. B. 

Alcohol use disorders are a heterogeneous group of 
problems ranging in severity from the heavy-drinking 
college student who occasionally misses classes to the 
person with severe and chronic alcoholism who experiences 
serious medical and social consequences of 
drinking. Although the prevalence of alcohol use disorders 
is higher in males than in females and in younger 
than in older adults, these problems affect individuals 
from any sociodemographic, racial/ethnic, or occupational 
background. In mental health and medical 
settings, at least 25% of clients are likely to have an 
alcohol use disorder as part of their presenting problems 
(e.g., Zimmerman, Lubman, & Cox, 2012), so 
clinicians in health and mental health professions need 
to be competent to identify, assess, and plan an effec


tive course of treatment for these clients. This chapter 
describes the social context of drinking and drinking 
problems, provides an integrative model for conceptualizing 
and treating alcohol use problems, and presents 
both a series of case vignettes and an extended case 
study to illustrate the clinical model. 

The clinician functioning in the 21st century must 
provide treatment within a complex and contradictory 
treatment network; must have formal and systematic 
training in the treatment of alcohol and other drug use 
disorders; must have tools to work with involuntary and 
voluntary clients, those who adhere passionately to a 
traditional recovery perspective, and those who are offended 
by it; and must work either to promote major 
and enduring changes in alcohol use or to decrease the 

533 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

harm that individuals and groups may experience from 
their use. The need for clinicians who are competent 
in treating alcohol and other substance use disorders 
(AUDs and other SUDs) will increase because of two 
Federal laws passed in recent years. The Patient Protection 
and Affordable Care Act, passed in 2010 in 
the United States, mandates alcohol and drug screening 
and brief intervention in primary care settings as a 
covered benefit, and the Wellstone–Domenici Mental 
Health Parity and Addiction Equity Act of 2008 mandates 
comparable health care coverage for treatment 
for physical health, mental health, and addictions problems. 
If these laws are implemented successfully, more 
individuals with AUDs will be identified and referred 
to treatment. 

Although the need for clinicians who are competent 
to treat AUDs is likely to increase, many clinicians 
may shy away from this population given the notorious 
reputation of persons with AUDs for being difficult 
and frustrating to treat. This chapter assumes that the 
clinician who has useful and effective tools for working 
with persons with drinking problems, and who has a bit 
of success with these tools, will find positive reasons to 
see these clients. Persons with drinking problems are 
treatable; they are both challenging and rewarding to 
treat; and when they change successfully, the clinician 
has the rare opportunity to participate in helping people 
make major and satisfying changes in their lives. 

DefiNitioNs aND DiaGNosis 
of alcohol ProBleMs 

Diagnosis 

The diagnosis of alcohol problems in the Diagnostic 
and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, fifth edition 
(American Psychiatric Association, 2013), treats 
AUDs as a single disorder, ranging along a spectrum of 
severity. Previous editions of the DSM discriminated 
between alcohol abuse and dependence; this distinction 
no longer applies. To be diagnosed with an AUD, 
an individual must meet at least two of 11 criteria, and 
the AUD is classified as mild (two to three symptoms), 
moderate (four to five symptoms) or severe (six to 
eleven symptoms). The 11 diagnostic criteria combine 
the DSM-IV criteria for alcohol abuse and alcohol dependence, 
eliminating “repeated alcohol-related legal 
consequences,” and adding “craving.” Thus, the diagnostic 
criteria include (1) failing to fulfill major social 

role obligations, such as those related to work, home, or 
school; (2) drinking repeatedly in a ways that that have 
the potential to create physical harm (e.g., drinking and 
driving); (3) continuing to drink despite the fact that 
drinking is causing social or interpersonal problems; 

(4) having the desire to or attempting to cut down or 
stop without success; (5) drinking larger amounts or 
alcohol or drinking over longer periods of time than 
planned, (6) exhibiting signs of physical tolerance; (7) 
showing signs of physical withdrawal; (8) neglect of 
other activities; (9) spending considerable time obtaining 
alcohol, drinking, and recovering from its effects; 
(10) continuing to use despite knowing that alcohol is 
causing recurrent physical or psychological problems; 
and (11) experiencing persistent craving for alcohol. 
Alcohol dependence also may be classified as being 
in “partial remission” or in “full remission”; remission 
may be “early” (at least 3 months) or “sustained” (1 
year or more). 
Alternative Definitions 

In contrast to the formal psychiatric diagnosis of an 
AUD, behavioral researchers and clinicians have suggested 
that alcohol problems represent one part of a 
continuum of alcohol use, ranging from abstinence 
through nonproblem use to different types and degrees 
of problem use. DSM-5 is more aligned with this perspective 
but still considers a cutoff indicative of a disorder. 
From the alcohol problems continuum perspective, 
problems may be exhibited in a variety of forms— 
some that are consistent with a formal diagnosis, and 
others that are milder or more intermittent. By using an 
alcohol problems perspective, the clinician can focus 
more clearly on the pattern of drinking, negative consequences 
that the client has accumulated, his/her behavioral 
excesses and deficits across various areas of 
life functioning, and his/her particular strengths. A deemphasis 
on diagnosis forces the clinician to consider 
clients from a more individual perspective. Therefore, 
although formal diagnosis is useful for identifying and 
defining the severity of a client’s problems and is necessary 
for formal record keeping, the approach to clinical 
assessment emphasized in this chapter attends less to 
diagnostic issues and more to problem identification. 

This chapter views alcohol use problems as a multivariate 
set of problems, with alcohol consumption as a 
common defining characteristic. These problems vary 
in severity from severe alcohol dependence to mild and 
circumscribed problems. For some, alcohol consump



Alcohol Use Disorders 

tion itself is a major presenting problem; for others, 
the consequences of alcohol use—such as disruption 
of a relationship, occupational problems, or health 
problems—are the major reason for seeking treatment. 
In viewing alcohol problems as multivariate, this chapter 
also assumes the existence of multiple etiologies 
for these problems, with genetic, psychological, and 
environmental determinants contributing in differing 
degrees for different clients. 

Complicating Problems 

Drinking problems are complicated by a variety of concomitant 
problems. Of significance is the comorbidity 
of AUDs with other psychiatric diagnoses. A high 
percentage of those diagnosed with an AUD also experience 
other psychological problems, which may be 
antecedent to, concurrent with, or consequent to their 
drinking (Rosenthal, 2013). The most common Axis I 
disorders are other SUDs, depression, and anxiety disorders, 
occurring in up to 60% of males in treatment. 
The most common Axis II disorder comorbid with an 
AUD in males is antisocial personality disorder, with 
rates ranging from 15 to 50%. Females more often 
present with depressive disorders; 25 to 33% of women 
with an AUD experience depression prior to the onset 
of their AUD. 

Alcohol problems also are complicated by problems 
with cognition, physical health, interpersonal 
relationships, the criminal justice system, the employment 
setting, and the environment. Many people with 
alcoholism have subtle cognitive deficits, particularly 
in the areas of abstract reasoning, memory, cognitive 
flexibility, problem solving, and difficulties in emotional 
differentiation (for a review of this literature, 
see Oscar-Berman & Marinkovi, 2007). Because verbal 
functioning is usually unimpaired, these cognitive 
problems are not always immediately apparent. Heavy 
drinking also causes a variety of medical problems and 
can affect any organ system in the body. Heavy drinking 
may cause conditions such as cardiomyopathy, liver 
diseases, gastritis, ulcers, pancreatitis, and peripheral 
neuropathies. Even when obvious medical conditions 
are not present, the effects of heavy drinking can be insidious 
and debilitating. Many people eat poorly when 
drinking, which results in nutritional deficits, poor energy, 
or vague and diffuse physical discomfort. Mortality 
rates among persons of all ages are elevated with 
alcohol dependence, and are higher among women than 
among men. 

Interpersonal relationships also may be disrupted. 
The rates of separation and divorce range up to seven 
times those of the general population (Paolino, Mc-
Crady, & Diamond, 1978); spousal violence is higher 
among both men and women with AUDs (Smith, Homish, 
Leonard, & Cornelius, 2012); and emotional and 
behavioral problems are more common among their 
spouses/partners and children (Moos & Billings, 1982; 
Moos, Finney, & Gamble, 1982). Health care utilization 
is elevated among the spouses and children of 
actively drinking individuals with AUDs (Spear & 
Mason, 1991). 

Persons presenting for treatment of a drinking problem 
may be involved with the legal system because of 
charges related to driving while intoxicated (DWI), 
other alcohol-related offenses (e.g., assault), or involvement 
with the child welfare system. Drug-related 
charges also may bring a client to treatment. Clients 
vary in the degree to which they recognize that their 
drinking is creating problems, and in their degree of 
motivation to change their drinking patterns. 

In conclusion, the client presenting for treatment may 
be drinking in a manner that creates concern, be formally 
diagnosed as having AUD, and also meet criteria 
for one or more Axis I or Axis II disorders. The person 
also may have other major problems, such as cognitive 
impairment, physical health problems, interpersonal or 
occupational problems, and/or legal problems. Problem 
recognition and motivation to change may be low. How 
does the clinician develop a rational approach to conceptualizing 
and treating this rather complicated clinical 
picture? 

TheoreTical Model 

The model presented in this chapter assumes that treatment 
planning must be multidimensional, and that 
there is more than one effective treatment for alcohol 
problems. Unlike certain disorders for which one treatment 
approach has demonstrable superiority over others, 
in the alcohol field there are a number of legitimate 
and empirically supported approaches to treatment (for 
a review, see Hallgren, Greenfield, Ladd, Glynn, & Mc-
Crady, 2012). These treatments are based in different 
conceptualizations of the etiology, course, treatment 
goals, and length of treatment for alcohol problems. 
Among the treatments with the best support are brief 
and motivationally focused interventions, cognitivebehavioral 
treatment, 12-step facilitation treatment, 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

behavioral couple therapy, cue exposure treatment, and 
the community reinforcement approach. A number of 
factors seem to be common to effective treatments. 
These are summarized in Table 13.1. A key therapist 
responsibility is to help a client find a treatment approach 
and treatment setting that is effective for him/ 
her, rather than slavishly adhering to a particular treatment 
model or setting. A second and equally important 
therapist responsibility is to enhance the client’s motivation 
to continue to try, even if the initial treatment 
setting is not effective. This treatment model takes into 
account seven major considerations: (1) problem severity, 
(2) concomitant life problems, (3) client expectations, 
(4) motivation and the therapeutic relationship, 

(5) variables maintaining the current drinking pattern, 
(6) social support systems, and (7) maintenance of 
change. 
Problem Severity 

Problem severity is relatively atheoretical, and is most 
important in decision making about the types of treatments 
to be offered, the intensity of the treatment, and 
the initial treatment setting. Severe alcohol dependence 
can best be conceptualized as a chronic, relapsing disorder 
(McLellan, Lewis, O’Brien, & Kleber, 2000), 
with relapses occurring even after extended periods 
of abstinence. As with other chronic disorders, such 
as diabetes, cardiovascular disease, or rheumatoid arthritis, 
the clinician necessarily takes a long-term perspective, 
and maximizing periods of positive functioning 
and minimizing periods of problem use should be 
the primary goals. In contrast, other individuals have 
alcohol-related problems that may be circumscribed 
and not progressive (Finney, Moos, & Timko, 2013). 
Epidemiological data suggest that for the majority of 
those with alcohol-related problems, the problems will 
resolve or remit without any need for formal treatment 
or intervention. The clinician encountering individuals 
at the mild end of the severity spectrum should plan a 
brief, motivationally enhancing intervention to complement 
the natural change process and inspire these individuals 
to make changes in their drinking. 

Concomitant Life Problems 

Clients with AUDs often have problems in multiple 
areas of life functioning—physical, psychological/psychiatric, 
familial, social/interpersonal, occupational, 
legal, child care, housing, and transportation. Assess


ment of multiple areas of life functioning is crucial 
for the planning and delivery of effective treatment. 
Research suggests that targeting client problem areas 
successfully can result in appreciable changes in these 
problems, even with clients who are severely alcohol 
dependent and homeless (Cox et al., 1998). Furthermore, 
providing treatment directed at multiple problem 
areas enhances positive alcohol and drug use outcomes 
as well (McLellan et al., 1997; Morgenstern et al., 2006; 
Rynes, McCrady, Morgan, Violette, & Pandina, 2012). 

Client Expectations 

Clinicians should provide clients with accurate expectations 
about the intensity of their treatment and the 
probable course of their problems. To date, limited research 
has examined ways to affect such client expectations, 
although the recent development of the Psychosocial 
Treatment Expectation Questionnaire suggests that 
clients have expectancies about the purpose and atmosphere 
of treatment, as well as the likelihood that treatment 
will impact their daily lives (Leite, Seminotti, 
Freitas, & Drachler, 2011). Because research is limited, 
the recommendations provided here derive only partly 
from empirical findings about the course and treatment 
of AUDs and remain to be tested. 

The clinician can inform clients with circumscribed, 
less severe problems that treatment will be short in duration, 
that they are likely to be successful in reducing 
their drinking, and that the long-term prognosis is 
good. Such clients also can be told that now or at some 
point in the future they may decide to stop drinking 
completely (Miller, Leckman, Delaney, & Tinkcom, 
1992), or that they may continue to drink in a moderated 
fashion. 

Clients with more severe and chronic AUDs, however, 
should be given a different set of expectations 
about treatment and the likely course of their problems. 
It is fair to tell them that about 25% of clients maintain 
sustained abstinence for at least 1 year after treatment, 
that another 10% will use alcohol in moderation and 
without problems, that, on average, clients will reduce 
the amount they drink by about 87%, and that alcoholrelated 
problems will decrease by about 60% (Miller, 
Walters, & Bennett, 2001). The challenge for such 
clients is to learn skills to manage their drinking in a 
way that makes it minimally disruptive to their lives. 
Chronic illness metaphors may be helpful. For example, 
like a patient with diabetes, a client with a severe 
AUD needs to make and maintain significant lifestyle 


Alcohol Use Disorders 

table 13.1. Principles for treatment of substance Use disorders 

1. Structure and organization of the treatment setting 
•• 
Clear and well organized 
•• 
Actively involve the clients in the program 
•• 
Provide a supportive and emotionally expressive environment 
•• 
Emphasize self-direction, work, and social skills development 
•• 
Expect clients to take responsibility for their treatment and follow through 
2. Type of provider and what the provider does 
•• 
Treatment by addictions specialists or mental health clinicians 
•• 
Development of an effective therapeutic alliance is crucial 
||Accurate empathy 

||Respect for the experience of clients in therapy 

||Avoidance of confrontational struggles 

•• 
Provide goal direction for the clients 

•• 
Provide a moderate level of structure for the therapy 

•• 
Handle ambivalence about changing or being in treatment: 

||Titrate level of confrontation to the level of clients’ reactance 
||Avoid arguing with angry clients 
||Avoid pushing clients hard to accept their diagnosis or the need to change 

3. Level of care, continuity of care, and elements of treatment 
•• 
Pay attention to retaining clients in treatment 
•• 
Determine the intensity and length of treatment partly by considering the severity of the substance use disorder. 
||For heavy drinkers with low alcohol dependence, less intense, briefer treatments are appropriate and 
intensive inpatient therapy yields poorer outcomes. 
||Clients with severe alcohol dependence have better outcomes with more intensive initial treatment, and 
respond most positively to treatment that focuses on 12-step counseling and involvement with 12-step groups. 
•• 
Assess and arrange for attention to clients’ other social service and medical care needs 

4. Contextual factors 
•• 
Involve a significant other 
•• 
Help clients restructure their social environments to include persons that support change and abstinence. 
•• 
With clients who have little commitment to remain in treatment or change their substance use, involve the 
family or other member of the social support system in the treatment to foster retention in treatment 
•• 
In the treatment of adolescents with substance use disorders, use approaches that involve multiple systems, 
including the family, peers, and others 

5. Client characteristics 
•• 
Greater client readiness to change is associated with greater treatment success 
•• 
Greater severity of the substance use disorder is associated with a poorer response to treatment 
6. Specific therapeutic elements 
•• 
Focus on client motivation 
•• 
Help clients develop awareness of repetitive patterns of thinking and behavior that perpetuate their alcohol or 
drug use 
•• 
Attend to the affective experiences of clients 
•• 
Consider the role of conditioning in the development and maintenance of substance use disorders. Clinicians 

should carefully assess for indicators of specific conditioned responses to alcohol or drugs, and develop ways to 
change these conditioned responses 
•• 
Enhance positive outcome expectancies 

7. Client–treatment matching 
•• 
Assess for comorbid disorders and use empirically supported treatments for additional presenting problems 
•• 
Use female-specific treatment with women clients 
Note. From Haaga, McCrady, and LeBow (2006). Copyright 2006 by Wiley Journals, Inc. Reprinted by permission. 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

changes to support healthy functioning. Like the patient 
with diabetes, the client with a severe AUD needs 
to know warning signs that he/she may be getting into 
trouble and know what to do. And neither individual 
can afford to forget or ignore his/her chronic problem. 

Motivation and the Therapeutic Relationship 

Clients vary in the degree to which they recognize 
their drinking is problematic and in their readiness to 
change. Motivational models suggest that individuals 
initiate change when the perceived costs of the behavior 
outweigh the perceived benefits, and when they can anticipate 
some benefits from behavior change (Cunningham, 
Sobell, Sobell, & Gaskin, 1994). Prochaska and 
DiClemente (2005) proposed a continuum of stages of 
readiness for change. The continuum includes the stages 
of “precontemplation,” in which a person does not 
recognize a behavior as problematic; “contemplation,” 
in which the person considers that a behavior pattern 
might be problematic; “determination” or “preparation,” 
in which the individual resolves to change; and 
“action,” in which a person initiates active behaviors 
to deal with the problem. Following “action” is “maintenance,” 
if the behavior change is successful, or “relapse,” 
if the person returns to the problem behavior. 
Miller and Rollnick (2002) suggested that several factors 
influence a person’s readiness to change, including 
awareness of problem severity, awareness of positive 
consequences for changing the behavior, and the perception 
of choice in making changes. Clients’ apparent 
stage of change and self-perception of their problems 
should guide a clinician’s initial approach to treatment 
and treatment planning. 

Contemporary models view motivation as a state 
that can be influenced by therapeutic behaviors and the 
client’s life experiences. Therapeutic approaches to enhance 
motivation lead clients to talk more about changing 
their drinking than continuing to drink, and in turn 
this “change talk” predicts better outcomes (Moyers, 
Martin, Houck, Christopher, & Tonigan, 2009). Motivationally 
enhancing approaches appear to be particularly 
effective with clients who enter treatment very 
angry and hostile (Project MATCH Research Group, 
1997b). Miller and Rollnick (1991) described six common 
elements to enhance motivation, summarized in 
the acronym FRAMES: personalized feedback (F) to 
the client about his/her status; an emphasis on the personal 
responsibility (R) of the client for change; provision 
of clear advice (A) about the need for change, 

given in a supportive manner; providing the client with 
a menu (M) of options for how to go about changing, 
rather than insisting upon one treatment or treatment 
goal; providing treatment in a warm, empathic (E), and 
supportive style; and enhancing the client’s perceived 
self-efficacy (S) for change. 

Factors Maintaining the Current 
Drinking Pattern 

Case conceptualization for treatment planning focuses 
on factors maintaining the problematic drinking pattern. 
Different treatment models use different frameworks 
for conceptualizing current factors that maintain 
drinking. Presented here is a cognitive-behavioral approach 
to case conceptualization (see Epstein & Mc-
Crady, 2009). The cognitive-behavioral case formulation 
assumes that drinking can best be treated by 
examining current factors maintaining drinking rather 
than historical factors. Factors maintaining drinking 
may be individual, or related to environmental circumstances 
or interpersonal relationships. The model assumes 
external antecedents to drinking that have a lawful 
relationship to drinking through repeated pairings 
with positive or negative reinforcement, or through the 
anticipation of reinforcement. The model assumes that 
cognitions and affective states mediate the relationship 
between external antecedents and drinking behavior, 
and that expectancies about the reinforcing value of 
alcohol play an important role in determining subsequent 
drinking behavior. Finally, the model assumes 
that drinking is maintained by its consequences, and 
that the sources of these consequences may be physiological, 
psychological, or interpersonal. 

To integrate these assumptions about drinking, 
my colleagues and I use a functional analytic framework, 
in which the drinking response (R) is elicited 
by environmental stimuli (S) that occur antecedent to 
drinking; that the relationship between the stimulus 
and response is mediated by cognitive, affective, and 
physiological, or organismic (O) factors; and that the 
response is maintained by positive or the avoidance 
of negative consequences (C) as a result of drinking. 
Various individual, familial, and other interpersonal 
factors are associated with drinking. At the individual 
level, environmental antecedents may be associated 
with specific drinking situations, times of the day, or 
the mere sight or smell of alcohol. Organismic variables 
may include craving for alcohol; withdrawal 
symptoms; negative affects such as anger, anxiety, or 


Alcohol Use Disorders 

depression; negative self-evaluations or irrational beliefs; 
or positive expectancies about the effects of alcohol 
in particular situations. Individual reinforcers may 
include decreased craving or withdrawal symptoms, 
decreases in negative affect or increases in positive affect, 
decreased negative self-evaluations, or decreased 
focus on problems and concerns. 

At the familial level, various antecedents to drinking 
occur. Alcohol may be a usual part of family celebrations 
or daily rituals. Family members may attempt to 
influence the problematic drinking behavior by nagging 
the person to stop or by attempting to control 
the drinking through control of the finances or liquor 
supply. These actions may become antecedents to further 
drinking. Families in which a member is drinking 
heavily may develop poor communication and problemsolving 
skills, as well as marital/couple, sexual, financial, 
and child-rearing problems that then cue further 
drinking. The person with the drinking problem may 
have a variety of reactions to these familial antecedents, 
experiencing negative affect, low self-efficacy 
for coping with problems, and/or retaliatory thoughts. 
Family behaviors may serve to reinforce the drinking. 
The family may shield the person from negative consequences 
of drinking by taking care of the drinker when 
intoxicated or assuming his/her responsibilities. A 
number of investigators have observed positive changes 
in marital/couple interactions associated with drinking, 
such as increases in intimate exchanges or increased 
assertiveness by the drinker, suggesting that these positive 
behaviors may reinforce the drinking (e.g., Frankenstein, 
Hay, & Nathan, 1985). 

There also are other interpersonal antecedents to 
drinking. These may include social pressures to drink; 
work-related drinking situations; friendships in which 
alcohol consumption plays a major role; or interpersonal 
conflicts with work associates, friends, or acquaintances. 
The person may react to interpersonal 
antecedents to drinking with craving, positive expectancies 
for alcohol use, social discomfort, or negative 
self-evaluations for not drinking. Positive interpersonal 
consequences of drinking may include decreased craving 
or social anxiety, an enhanced sense of social connectedness 
or fun, or increased social comfort or assertiveness. 


Social Support 

The behaviors of family and other members of the client’s 
social network are integral to the case conceptu


alization. The availability of general social support, as 
well as social support for abstinence or moderate drinking, 
is crucial to successful treatment. Support from the 
client’s social network for abstinence is associated with 
better drinking outcomes; support for continued drinking 
is associated with poorer outcomes (Longabaugh, 
Wirtz, Zywiak, & O’Malley, 2010). Clients in a social 
network that is strongly supportive of drinking may 
need to take deliberate steps to detach from that social 
network and access new social networks that support 
abstinence or moderate drinking. Some data suggest 
that involvement with Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) can 
serve such a function (Longabaugh, Wirtz, Zweben, & 
Stout, 1998), and data on natural recovery from alcohol 
problems suggest that finding a new love relationship or 
involvement in religious activities also may be viable 
avenues for change (Vaillant & Milofsky, 1982). 

Maintenance of Change 

Implicit in much of the preceding discussion is a view 
that individuals with severe AUDs have a high probability 
of relapse, an ever-present consideration, both 
because long-term, ingrained habits are difficult to 
change, and because of the permanent physiological 
and metabolic changes stimulated by heavy drinking 
(Woodward, 2013). Several models have been proposed 
to conceptualize the maintenance or relapse process, 
with associated treatments. The most prominent 
maintenance models include the relapse prevention 
(RP) model (Marlatt & Gordon, 1985; Witkiewitz & 
Marlatt, 2004), and the disease model, best exemplified 
by the practices common to AA. The RP model, 
an extension of the functional-analytic model described 
earlier, focuses on the interplay among environment, 
coping skills, and cognitive and affective responses 
in maintaining successful change. In the RP model, 
relapse occurs in response to a high-risk situation for 
which the client either lacks or does not apply effective 
coping skills. Low self-efficacy for coping with the 
situation may contribute to the difficulties. If the client 
does not cope effectively, use of alcohol is likely. Marlatt 
and Gordon (1985) suggested that, following initial 
drinking, a cognitive factor, the “abstinence violation 
effect” (AVE), is activated. The AVE represents allor-
nothing thinking; after drinking, the client makes a 
cognitive shift to viewing him/herself as “drinking”; 
therefore, he/she continues to drink. RP treatment 
focuses on several points of intervention common to 
cognitive-behavioral treatment, such as identification 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

of high-risk situations and acquisition of coping skills, 
as well as cognitive restructuring to help the client view 
a drinking episode as a “lapse” from which he/she can 
learn and return to abstinence rather than a “relapse” 
into previous drinking patterns. RP also focuses on 
lifestyle changes to decrease the presence of high-risk 
situations, and encourages development of a balance 
between pleasures and desires, and obligations and responsibilities 
(a “want–should” balance) in the client’s 
life. In his more recent work, Marlatt (Marlatt & Donovan, 
2005; Witkiewitz & Marlatt, 2004) described relapse 
as “multidimensional and dynamic” (Marlatt & 
Donovan, 2005, p. 21), and considered the influence of 
longer-term risk factors such as family history and social 
supports, and well as more proximal influences on 
relapse. He also suggested that there are reciprocal interactions 
among cognitions, coping skills, affect, and 
drinking. 

Disease model perspectives view alcoholism as a 
chronic, progressive disease that can be arrested but not 
cured. Treatment based on the disease model focuses 
on helping the client recognize that he/she has this disease, 
that abstinence and a lifelong program of recovery 
are the only means to arrest the disease, and that 
involvement in AA or other 12-step groups is essential 
to successful maintenance of change (e.g., Slaymaker 
& Sheehan, 2013). 

The model presented in this chapter is most closely 
allied with the RP model, but clinicians should be 
knowledgeable about the disease model underlying AA 
and recognize that some clients are drawn to it because 
they find the model and the program helpful and relevant 
to them. 

cliNical aPPlicatioN 
of the theoretical MoDel 

Overview 

The major elements of the treatment model have direct 
implications for facilitating problem recognition and 
entry into treatment, and for the planning and delivery 
of treatment. If an individual has not entered treatment, 
there are techniques to help that individual recognize 
his/her drinking as problematic and in need of change. 
For a client seeking alcohol treatment, the therapist 
must make decisions about the most appropriate setting 
in which to provide treatment and select the therapeu


tic modalities most appropriate to him/her. Therapeutic 
techniques must be tailored to the client’s needs related 
to drinking and other life problems. The therapist also 
must consider the social context in which drinking occurs, 
as well as the social context for change. He/she 
must be cognizant of the subtle and nonspecific aspects 
of providing treatment to clients with drinking problems 
and utilize a therapeutic stance that enhances the 
client’s motivation to continue to engage in the change 
process. The therapist must attend to the client’s own 
views about treatment and change, and provide the client 
with accurate long-term expectations about drinking 
outcomes. Core components of the treatment model 
are listed in Table 13.2. 

Case Identification and Entry into Treatment 

Before discussing applications of the model to active 
treatment, it is important to consider how to help clients 
enter the treatment system. 

Case Identification and Screening 

Many individuals who drink do not think they have 
problems related to drinking. They may be unaware of 
the high-risk nature of their drinking pattern, or unaware 
of the negative consequences that are occurring. 
Feeling ashamed or guilty, they may be reluctant to 
tell others about their problems, or they may perceive 

table 13.2. steps in treatment 

1. Case identification and motivation to enter treatment 
2. Assessment 
3. Selection of treatment setting 
4. Selection of treatment modalities 
5. Enhancing and maintaining motivation to change 
6. Selection of drinking goals 
7. Initiation of abstinence 
8. Developing a functional analysis 
9. Early sobriety strategies 
10. Coping strategies 
11. Partner/family involvement 
12. Long-term maintenance 
13. Managing complicating conditions 
14. Self-help groups 

Alcohol Use Disorders 

health care professionals as uninterested or unconcerned 
about drinking. Routine queries about drinking 
and its consequences in both medical and mental health 
care settings can obviate some of these difficulties. 
Given the high prevalence of drinking problems among 
individuals seeking health and mental health services, 
questions about drinking should be part of all clinicians’ 
intake interviews. The Affordable Care Act will 
require screening for alcohol and drug problems of all 
patients who are seen in primary care settings. Given 
the increased integration of psychological services into 
primary care, mental health professionals may take the 
lead in introducing appropriate screening tools into 
these health care settings. 

Many screening interviews and questionnaires have 
been developed to identify clients with alcohol problems. 
At a minimum, all clients should be asked whether 
they drink, and drinkers should be asked follow-up 
questions about the quantity and frequency of their 
drinking. Drinking should be considered as heavy or 
high-risk if a man drinks more than 28 standard drinks 
in a week, or a woman drinks more than 21 standard 
drinks in a week.1 Concern should also be heightened 
if a client reports heavy drinking (five drinks for men, 
four for women) twice or more than per month. Followup 
questions may be used to inquire about subjective 
and objective consequences of drinking. The CAGE 
(cut down, annoyed, guilty, eye-opener; Mayfield, 
McLeod, & Hall, 1974; see Table 13.3) and the Alcohol 
Use Disorders Identification Test (AUDIT; Saunders, 
Aasland, Babor, de la Fuente, & Grant, 1993) are two 
useful screening measures. Two affirmative responses 
to the CAGE suggest a high probability of an AUD, 
but even one positive response warrants further clinical 
inquiry. The AUDIT includes both direct and subtle 
approaches to alcohol screening; therefore, it may be 
useful with clients who are reluctant to self-identify 
drinking problems. The CAGE and AUDIT questions 
are reproduced in Table 13.3. 

Motivating a Drinker to Enter Treatment 

The initial challenge for a clinician is to stimulate the 
client to initiate any change. Methods for motivating 
clients to enter treatment vary; a clinician may draw 
upon motivational interviewing techniques (Miller & 
Rollnick, 2002), may involve family and concerned 
others in collaborative, client-centered work (Miller, 
Meyers, & Tonigan, 1999; Smith & Meyers, 2004), or 

may use confrontational approaches, such as an “intervention” 
(Liepman, 1993). Implementation of motivational 
principles and techniques in ongoing clinical 
practice, however, presents creative challenges to the 
clinician. Three examples illustrate the application of 
different approaches to motivating clients to enter treatment. 


Bill was a retired chemist with a long history of 
heavy drinking, multiple phobias, and bipolar disorder. 
I was initially contacted by his wife Diana, who told 
me that her husband had a 20-year drinking history, 
that his drinking had increased since his retirement, 
and that she did not know what to do: The children 
were angry and threatening to break off contact with 
him; she and Bill were arguing frequently; and she was 
beginning to feel increasingly anxious and depressed 
herself. Diana had consulted with a certified addictions 
counselor, who told her that they should set up 
an “intervention”—a meeting in which Diana and the 
children would confront Bill about his drinking, insist 
that he get treatment, then take him directly to an inpatient 
treatment facility. When Diana was hesitant, the 
counselor told her she was codependent and enabling 
him. She left the counselor’s office discouraged, certain 
that she did not want to initiate an intervention, but also 
certain that something should be done. I tried the most 
minimal intervention first. Over the telephone, I suggested 
that Diana speak with Bill one morning (before 
he had begun drinking) and say, “Bill, I am concerned 
about your drinking. I have spoken with a psychologist 
who specializes in alcohol treatment, and she said that 
she would be happy to see you for an evaluation. At 
the end of the evaluation, she’ll give us feedback about 
what we could do.” I told her not to elaborate on this 
statement, but simply to respond to Bill’s questions. If 
he refused, she was to get back in touch with me. 

I next heard from Diana a month later. Bill had 
refused her request, and she wondered what else she 
could do. I suggested an individual consultation with 
me to discuss how to change her own actions to motivate 
Bill toward change. Diana came in, and after some 
further assessment of both Bill’s drinking history and 
her current functioning, I suggested three basic behavioral 
strategies, which I drew from Thomas’s unilateral 
family therapy (Thomas, Yoshioka, & Ager, 1996) 
and the community reinforcement and family training 
(CRAFT) model (Smith & Meyers, 2004). First, I instructed 
Diana to leave Bill to his drinking as much as 
possible, to let negative consequences occur naturally. 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

table 13.3. Questions to screen for alcohol Use and Problems 

CAGEa 

1. Have you ever felt you should cut (C) down on your 3. Have you ever felt bad or guilty (G) about your drinking? 
drinking? 4. Have you ever had a drink first thing in the morning 
2. Have people annoyed (A) you by commenting on your (eye-opener [E])? 
drinking? 
Alcohol Use Disorders Test (AUDIT)b 

These 10 questions are about your use of alcohol during the past 12 months. 

1. How often do you have a drink containing alcohol? 
0) Never [Skip to questions 9–10] 
1)Monthly or less 
2) 2 to 4 times a month 
3) 2 to 3 times a week 
4) 4 or more times a week 
2. How many alcohol units do you have on a typical day 
when you are drinking? 
0) 1 or 2 
1) 3 or 4 
2) 5 or 6 
3) 7, 8, or 9 
4) 10 or more 
3. How often do you have seven or more units on one 
occasion? 
0)Never 
1) Less than monthly 
2)Monthly 
3) Weekly 
4) Daily or almost daily 
4. How often during the last year have you found that you 
were unable to stop drinking once you had started? 
0)Never 
1) Less than monthly 
2)Monthly 
3) Weekly 
4) Daily or almost daily 
5. How often during the last year have you failed to do 
what was normally expected from you because of 
drinking? 
0)Never 
1) Less than monthly 
2)Monthly 
3) Weekly 
4) Daily or almost daily 
6. How often during the last year have you needed a first 
drink in the morning to get yourself going after a heavy 
drinking session? 
0)Never 
1) Less than monthly 
2)Monthly 
3) Weekly 
4) Daily or almost daily 
7. How often during the last year have you had a feeling of 
guilt or remorse after drinking? 
0)Never 
1) Less than monthly 
2)Monthly 
3) Weekly 
4) Daily or almost daily 
8. How often during the last year have you been unable to 
remember what happened the night before because you 
had been drinking? 
0)Never 
1) Less than monthly 
2)Monthly 
3) Weekly 
4) Daily or almost daily 
9. Have you or someone else been injured as the result of 
your drinking? 
0)No 
2) Yes, but not in the last year 
4) Yes, during the last year 
10. Has a relative, friend, or a doctor or other health worker 
been concerned about your drinking or suggested you 
cut down? 
0)No 
2) Yes, but not in the last year 
4) Yes, during the last year 
aFrom Mayfield, McLeod, and Hall (1974). 
bFrom http://whqlibdoc.who.int/hq/2001/who_msd_msb_01.6a.pdf. Copyright by the World Health Association. Reprinted by permission. 
Complete scoring is available from this source. 


Alcohol Use Disorders 

Second, I encouraged her to give him factual feedback 
about negative behaviors related to his drinking, but 
only at times when he was sober. The structure of the 
feedback was as follows: “Bill, I am concerned that X 
happened last night when you were drinking.” Third, I 
encouraged her to spend time with him in positive pursuits 
when he was not drinking. Given that they were 
going to Florida for the winter, I suggested that just before 
they returned, she should repeat her request that he 
come to see me for an evaluation. 

I next heard from Diana in the spring, when she 
called me to make an appointment for the two of them 
to come in for an evaluation. They both attended. What 
follows is our initial discussion.2 (In this and other dialogues 
in this chapter, I am the therapist.) 

tHeraPist: I’m so glad to get to meet you. As you 
know, Diana first spoke with me a few months ago, 
so I feel as though I know you a bit. I understand 
that you were initially reluctant to come in, and I’m 
pleased that you decided to come. How did that come 
about? 

Bill: Well, Diana asked me, and I know she’s been 
concerned, so I agreed. But I only agreed to come to-
day—I’m not making any kind of commitment here. 

tHeraPist: I understand that and certainly won’t try 
to push you to do anything you’re not comfortable 
with. What I’d like to do today is to get a better understanding 
about your drinking and the kinds of 
problems it might be causing. At the end of our time 
together, I’ll give you some feedback and we can discuss 
some options for you, if you decide you want to 
make any changes. If I ask you anything that you’re 
not comfortable answering, just let me know. OK? 

Bill was visibly uncomfortable, and pushed his chair 
as far back into the corner of my office as possible. He 
sat with his body turned away from Diana and often 
looked up at the ceiling or sighed when she was speaking. 
Despite his visible discomfort, he gave a clear account 
of his drinking. He had been drinking heavily 
for the past 25 years, and at one point had been drinking 
a pint of Jack Daniels whiskey each evening. He 
was diagnosed with colon cancer in his early 60s and 
treated surgically. Since the surgery, he had been concerned 
about his health and had attempted to reduce his 
drinking. His current pattern was almost daily drinking, 
in the evenings, ranging from two to four bottles of 

Grolsch beer to an occasional (approximately twice per 
month) pint of Jack Daniels. He reported no withdrawal 
symptoms on days when he did not drink, and no apparent 
medical sequelae of his drinking. He said that he 
did not feel that he had control over his drinking, and 
expressed sadness that Diana was so upset. His love for 
her, apparent in his speech and demeanor, was clearly 
the primary reason he had come to see me. 

Given Bill’s discomfort, I did not try to complete any 
standardized assessment instruments or even to structure 
the initial interview as I might have with other clients. 
Instead, I followed his lead, made frequent comments 
reflecting the emotions he was expressing, and 
at times asked Diana not to interrupt, so that Bill could 
express himself. In the last 15 minutes of the 1-hour 
interview, we shifted to feedback and discussion: 

tHeraPist: I’d like to stop asking you so many questions 
now, and see if we can talk about possible options. 
I am glad that you came in and appreciate that 
this was not easy for you. From what you and Diana 
have told me, it does seem that it makes sense to be 
concerned about your drinking. The amount you’re 
drinking is above the recommended levels for safe 
and healthy drinking; you are concerned by your 
own feelings of lack of control; and your drinking 
has been upsetting to your family, which is painful 
to you. What do you think? 

Bill: I guess talking about all of this at once makes it 
clearer that I’m drinking too much. I don’t want to 
stop, though—I appreciate good beer, and look forward 
to having a bottle or two in the evening. I just 
don’t want to overdo it to the point of hurting Diana. 

tHeraPist: So you are concerned and think that some 
kind of change makes sense, but you’re not sure exactly 
what those changes should be? 

Bill: Exactly. 

tHeraPist: I think you have a number of options. 
Making some kind of change makes sense given 
the problems we’ve discussed. Probably your safest 
choice is to stop drinking—you can’t create future 
health problems from drinking if you don’t drink, 
and in some ways it might be easiest given that 
you’re in a pretty daily routine of drinking now. But 
if you don’t want to stop, we could also work toward 
your reducing your drinking to a level that is safer 
and healthier, and one that Diana and your children 
are comfortable with. I’d be willing to work with you 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

to try to reach that goal. I don’t think that you need 
intensive treatment in a hospital program right now, 
but you would probably benefit from some help to 
make changes. What do you think? 

Bill: I’m surprised that you think I could reduce my 

drinking. I have to think about this. I’ll have Diana 

get back to you. 

The discussion continued with input from Diana as 
well, and the session ended with a commitment only to 
think about our discussion. Several days later, Diana 
called to indicate that Bill wanted to begin treatment 
with me, and we scheduled an appointment. 

Dorothy, a 78-year-old, widowed, retired schoolteacher, 
was hospitalized at a local medical center after 
a fall in her apartment. Her blood alcohol level (BAL) 
on admission was 185 mg%, and she had extensive evidence 
of old bruises, as well as a dislocated shoulder 
and broken wrist from the fall. She was immediately 
started on medication for alcohol withdrawal, and our 
addictions consultation team was called in to see her 
on the second day of her hospitalization. Dorothy’s son 
John was in the room when I came to see her. With 
his assistance, I was able to obtain a lengthy history 
of alcohol consumption that dated back to her early 
40s. Although Dorothy had wanted to stop drinking, 
she had never been successful for more than a few days 
at a time, and had never received any form of alcohol 
treatment. Since her husband’s death 2 years earlier, 
she had been consuming a pint bottle of blackberry 
brandy each day. She had completely withdrawn from 
her previous social activities with friends, her hygiene 
had deteriorated, and she had had multiple accidents in 
her house. Dorothy provided this information tearfully, 
expressing a great sense of shame about her behavior. 
John described her home as “a mess” and said that he 
was angry and disgusted with her. Dorothy’s family 
history revealed many family members with alcohol 
dependence, including her father, two brothers, and a 
maternal uncle. Despite the medication, she showed 
visible signs of alcohol withdrawal during the interview. 
Dorothy was tearful and stated repeatedly that 
she was a “sinful, bad” person. My interviewing style 
with her was empathic: I asked her about her concerns, 
inquired how she felt, and reflected back her obvious 
distress with her current situation. I then told her that 
there were treatments available to help people with 
problems like hers. Her immediate and strong reaction 
was to say that she was too bad, and that her drinking 

was a sin. Although not usually a strong proponent of 
labeling alcohol dependence as a disease, I decided that 
this framework might in fact be acceptable and supportive 
to her. Given her long history of alcohol dependence 
with physiological dependence, and her heavy 
family history of alcohol dependence, such a framework 
seemed plausible and appropriate. 

“Dorothy, it is clear to me that you are very, very 
upset by your drinking and by all the problems it has 
caused for you and your family. I understand that 
you blame yourself and seem to think your drinking 
shows that you are a bad person. There is another 
way of thinking about your drinking that I’d like to 
tell you about. You may or may not agree with me, 
but I hope you’ll think about what I say. Some people 
say that alcoholism is a disease. In your case, I think 
that is true. You probably have genes that made you 
very vulnerable to alcohol—your father, your uncle, 
and your brothers all seem to have the same disease. 
We know that the vulnerability to alcoholism can be 
inherited, and I would guess that you inherited it. 
Over time, your body has become adapted to your 
drinking—it is more comfortable with alcohol than 
without it. If you try to stop, your body reacts badly. 
The shaking and nausea that you’re experiencing 
now are signs that your body has become hooked on 
alcohol. 

“What does all this mean? It means that your body 
reacts differently to alcohol than other people’s, and 
probably has from the beginning of your drinking. It 
is no more your fault that you have a drinking problem 
than it is the fault of a diabetic that her body 
can’t make insulin. People are not responsible for 
the diseases they develop. But they are responsible 
for making the decision to take care of their disease, 
for getting help, and for following the advice of the 
people who give them that help. Except for the problems 
your drinking has caused, you’re healthy, and 
you obviously have people who care about you. If 
you can get help, you have a good chance of getting 
better.” 

Dorothy initially was skeptical of this reframing of 
her problems. Without my prompting, when her son 
left the hospital that day, he picked up some brochures 
about alcoholism as a disease and brought them back 
for his mother to read. When I came to see her the next 
day, she had many questions about this disease notion 
and about treatment, which I answered as factually as 


Alcohol Use Disorders 

possible, still maintaining a motivational interviewing 
stance—not trying to push her into treatment, but 
reflecting her interest and concern. By my third visit, 
she agreed to enter a treatment program. She entered a 
short-term residential rehabilitation program, followed 
by longer-term outpatient group therapy. She began 
to volunteer at the hospital where I first saw her, and 
she remained sober and an active volunteer for several 
years, until advancing age required that she retire. 

Dennis was a 41-year-old dentist with a history of 
abuse of alcohol, prescription opiates, and benzodiazepines. 
Dennis’s case illustrates the need for a full 
armamentarium of clinical techniques to motivate individuals 
to enter treatment. At the time that I saw Dennis, 
our center had a contract with the state dental association 
to provide assessment, motivation, referral, and 
monitoring services for dentists with alcohol and drug 
problems. I was called about Dennis on a Friday afternoon 
by an emergency room physician. Dennis had 
taken an overdose of medications and had been rushed 
to the emergency room by his office staff. His condition 
had been stabilized, and he was now insisting that he 
leave the hospital. The physician wanted our program 
to “do something.” In rapid succession, I received calls 
from the office staff, from Dennis’s wife, and from another 
dentist, who had been serving as his AA sponsor. 
By telephone, they provided me with a horrific history 
of abuse of multiple substances, domestic violence, 
canceled afternoons of appointments with patients, extraction 
of the wrong tooth from a patient, and repeated 
failures in AA and outpatient treatment. Each caller described 
Dennis as intractable, and all were desperately 
concerned that he would kill himself. I asked them all 
to meet me at the hospital, and left my office to join 
them there. I informed the emergency room physician 
that I would be coming to the hospital, and asked him 
to hold Dennis there until I arrived. 

When I arrived at the hospital, I first spoke with 
Dennis individually. He was alert, oriented, belligerent 
and angry, and utterly unwilling to speak with me at 
any length or to agree to any kind of plan of care. My 
best motivational interviewing skills failed completely 
with him. Given the crisis nature of the situation and 
his extremely severe SUD, I decided to utilize a more 
confrontational technique—the intervention (Liepman, 
1993). Interventions are designed to confront the resistant 
client and create a forced plan of action. Research 
suggests that two-thirds of families will not follow 
through with an intervention (as was the case with Diana 
and Bill), but that if an intervention is implemented, 

the probability of the client’s entering treatment is very 
high (Miller et al., 1999). I gathered the office staff, 
Dennis’s wife, and his AA sponsor together and asked 
them whether they would be willing to sit down to talk 
with Dennis about his problems. They were relieved 
and eager to do so. We spent about 30 minutes together, 
during which time I outlined the basic requirements 
for the intervention: (1) Each person’s feedback should 
begin with an expression of caring or concern; (2) each 
should provide concrete, behavioral feedback related to 
Dennis’s drinking and drug use (e.g., mentioning his 
canceling appointments rather than saying he was irresponsible); 
(3) at the end of his/her feedback, each person 
should repeat the expression of concern and request 
that Dennis get help. We then sat down with Dennis, 
and each person spoke. Dennis began to cry and after a 
lengthy period of time agreed that he needed help and 
would follow my recommendations for treatment. 

Assessment 

Once a client has entered treatment, the therapist should 
begin with an initial assessment of drinking, other drug 
use, and problems in other areas of life functioning. 
(Donovan, 2013, provides a comprehensive description 
of assessment for SUDs; Green, Worden, Menges, & 
McCrady, 2008, provide an evaluation of the psychometric 
properties of various assessment instruments for 
AUDs). Assessment of motivation, as well as resources 
that the client brings to the treatment, is important. If 
the therapist provides cognitive-behavioral treatment, 
assessment for a functional analysis of drinking is necessary. 
If the client’s spouse/partner or other family 
members are involved in the treatment, their role in the 
drinking, as well as overall relationship functioning, 
should be assessed. 

Drinking Assessment 

The clinical interview is used to assess drinking history 
and client perceptions of his/her current drinking. 
Major topics to cover in the clinical interview are outlined 
in Table 13.4. Typically, we use a handheld breath 
alcohol tester at the beginning of each session to assess 
current BAL. In addition to the clinical interview, 
two structured interviews—the Timeline Follow-Back 
Interview (TLFB; Sobell & Sobell, 1995), designed to 
assess drinking and drug use behavior each day in a 
set window of time before treatment; and the alcohol 
and drug sections of the Structured Clinical Interview 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

table 13.4. topics to Cover in initial 
Clinical interview (if both Partners 
are Present) 

1. Initial orientation 
a. Introductions 
b. Breathalyzer reading 
c. Brief questionnaires 
2. Initial assessment 
a. Presenting problems 
b. Role of drinking/drug use in presenting problems 
c. Other concerns 
d. How the drinking has affected the partner 
e. How the drinking has affected the relationship 
3. Drinking/drug use assessment 
a. Identified patient 
i. Quantity, frequency, pattern of drinking 
ii. Last drink/drug use 
iii. Length of drinking/drug problem 
iv. Negative consequences of drinking/drug use 
v. DSM-5 symptoms 
vi. Assessment of need for detoxification 
b. Partner 
i. Quantity, frequency, pattern of drinking 
ii. Last drink/drug use 
iii. Length of drinking/drug problem 
iv. Negative consequences of drinking/drug use 
v. DSM-5 symptoms 
vi. Assessment of need for detoxification 
4. Assessment of other problems 
a. Psychotic symptoms 
b. Depression 
c. Anxiety 
d. Cognitive impairment 
e. Health status 
5. Assessment of domestic violence 
a. This assessment is done privately with each partner 
alone 
b. Review of Conflict Tactics Scales 
i. Identification of episodes of physical aggression 
ii. Determination of level of harm/injury from 
aggression 
iii. Assessment of individual’s sense of safety in 
couple therapy 
for DSM-IV (SCID; Spitzer, Williams, Gibbon, & 
First, 1996)—provide standardized information about 
quantity, frequency, pattern of drinking, and other information 
needed to establish a formal diagnosis. Alternative 
structured interviews, such as the Form-90 
(Tonigan, Miller, & Brown, 1997), may be used to obtain 
information about drinking history, patterns, and 
consequences of use. Self-report measures may be used 
to assess severity of alcohol dependence (the Alcohol 
Dependence Scale [ADS]; Skinner & Allen, 1982) and 
negative consequences of drinking (the Drinker Inventory 
of Consequences [DrInC] or the Short Inventory 
of Problems [SIP]; Miller, Tonigan, & Longabaugh, 
1995). 

Assessment of Other Problem Areas 

The clinician can draw from a wide variety of measures 
to assess other life problems. Assessment may 
range from unstructured interviews to the use of simple 
problem checklists to formal interviewing techniques. 
The Addiction Severity Index (ASI; McLellan et al., 
1992) is a widely used measure of client functioning 
across multiple domains; subscales include Medical, 
Psychological, Family/Social, Legal, Employment, 
Alcohol, and Drug. The ASI is in the public domain, 
and the instrument, instructions, and scoring programs 
can be downloaded from http://triweb.tresearch.org/ 
index.php/tools/download-asi-instruments-manuals. 
The ASI can be administered as an interview in about 
45 minutes, and computer-assisted interview versions 
are available. The ASI, however, does not provide diagnostic 
information for any psychological disorders, 
and the cautious clinician should use formal diagnostic 
screening questions to assess for the possible presence 
of other psychological disorders. 

Assessment of Motivation 

Assessment of motivation should consider (1) reasons 
why the client is seeking treatment, with careful attention 
to external factors involved with help seeking; (2) 
the client’s treatment goals; (3) the client’s readiness 
to change; and (4) the degree to which the client sees 
negative consequences of his/her current drinking pattern 
and envisions positive consequences of change. 
Clinical interviewing provides information about reasons 
for seeking treatment, and drinking goals may be 
assessed either by asking the client directly or by using 


Alcohol Use Disorders 

We 
would 
like 
to 
know 
the 
one 
GOAL 
you 
have 
chosen 
for 
yourself 
about 
drinking 
at 
this 
time. 
Please 
read 
the 
goals 
listed 
below 
and 
choose 
the 
ONE 
goal 
that 
best 
represents 
your 
goal 
at 
this 
time 
by 
checking 
the 
box 
next 
to 
the 
goal 
and 
by 
filling 
in 
any 
blanks 
as 
indicated 
for 
that 
goal. 



I 
have 
decided 
not 
to 
change 
my 
pattern 
of 
drinking. 
I 
have 
decided 
to 
cut 
down 
on 
my 
drinking 
and 
drink 
in 
a 
more 
controlled 
manner—to 
be 
in 
control 
of 


how 
often 
I 
drink 
and 
how 
much 
I 
drink. 
I 
would 
like 
to 
limit 
myself 
to 
no 
more 
than 
drinks 
(upper 
limit 
amount) 
per 
(time 
period). 
I 
have 
decided 
to 
stop 
drinking 
completely 
for 
a 
period 
of 
time, 
after 
which 
I 
will 
makea 
new 
decision 


about 
whether 
I 
will 
drink 
again. 
For 
me, 
the 
period 
of 
time 
I 
want 
to 
stop 
drinking 
is 
for 


(time). 
I 
have 
decided 
to 
stop 
drinking 
regularly, 
but 
would 
like 
to 
have 
an 
occasional 
drink 
when 
I 
really 
have 
the 
urge. 


I 
have 
decided 
to 
quit 
drinking 
once 
and 
for 
all, 
even 
though 
I 
realize 
I 
may 
slip 
up 
and 
drink 
once 
in 


a 
while. 
I 
have 
decided 
to 
quite 
drinking 
once 
and 
for 
all, 
to 
be 
totally 
abstinent, 
and 
to 
never 
drink 
alcohol 
ever 
again 
for 
the 
rest 
of 
my 
life. 


None 
of 
this 
applies 
exactly 
to 
me. 
My 
own 
goal 
is 


figUre 13.1. Goal choice questionnaire. 

a simple goal choice form (see Figure 13.1). The Readi-Hall, 1992), and the Stages of Change Readiness and 
ness Ruler (Hesse, 2006) is a simple 10-point scale on Treatment Eagerness Scale (SOCRATES; Miller & Towhich 
clients can indicate their readiness to change. It nigan, 1996) all measure stage of change. Perception 
also can be used to assess the client’s desire to change of negative consequences of drinking and positive conand 
confidence in being able to change. The University sequences of change also may be assessed through the 
of Rhode Island Change Assessment Scale (McCon-clinical interview, or by developing a Decisional Balnaughy, 
Prochaska, & Velicer, 1983), the Readiness ance Sheet (Marlatt & Gordon, 1985) with the client 
to Change Questionnaire (Rollnick, Heather, Gold, & (see Figure 13.2). 

Not 
Drinking 
Drinking 
Pros 
Cons 


figUre 13.2. Decisional Balance Sheet. 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

Urges 
Drinks/Drugs 
Time 
Strength 
(1–7) 
Trigger? 
Time 
Type 
Amount 
% 
Alcohol 
Trigger? 


Relationship 
satisfaction: 
123456 
7 
Worst 
Greatest 
ever 
ever 
figUre 13.3. Sample client self-recording card. 

Functional Analysis 

Two assessment techniques may be used to identify 
antecedents to drinking. A self-report questionnaire, 
the Drinking Patterns Questionnaire (DPQ; Menges, 
McCrady, Epstein, & Beem, 2008), lists potential environmental, 
cognitive, affective, interpersonal, and 
intrapersonal antecedents to drinking or drinking 
urges. The Inventory of Drinking Situations (Annis, 
Graham, & Davis, 1987), a shorter measure that assesses 
situations in which a client drinks heavily, also is 
available. Daily self-recording cards (Figure 13.3) are 
used throughout the treatment to record clients’ drinks 
and drinking urges. Discussing events associated with 
drinking or drinking urges can help both client and clinician 
to develop a clearer picture of drinking antecedents 
and consequences. Self-recording cards also allow 
the clinician to track progress in terms of quantity and 
frequency of drinking, as well as frequency and intensity 
of urges to drink. 

Partner Assessment 

Questionnaires and self-recording cards can be used 
to assess how the client’s partner has coped with the 
drinking. Each day, the partner who is involved with 
treatment records his/her perceptions of the drinker’s 

drinking and drinking urges on a Likert scale (None, 
Light, Moderate, or Heavy; see Figure 13.4). In addition, 
the partner may complete the Coping Questionnaire 
(Orford, Templeton, Velleman, & Copello, 2005) 
to describe the variety of ways the partner has tried to 
cope with drinking. These include engaged, tolerant– 
inactive, and withdrawal coping. It also is important to 
assess other aspects of the couple’s relationship, if both 
partners are to be involved in treatment. The Areas 
of Change Questionnaire (ACQ; Margolin, Talovic, 
& Weinstein, 1983) and the Dyadic Adjustment Scale 
(DAS; Spanier, 1976) are excellent self-report measures 
of relationship problems and satisfaction. The Revised 
Conflict Tactics Scales (Straus, Hamby, Boney-McCoy, 
& Sugarman, 1996) provides a succinct measure of relationship 
conflict, including physical violence. 

Selection of Treatment Setting 

Information from the assessment of drinking, concomitant 
problem areas, and motivation is used to determine 
the appropriate setting in which to initiate treatment. As 
with other areas of health and mental health care, the 
principle of least restrictive level of care should apply 
to alcohol and drug treatment. Residential rehabilitation 
of fixed length (usually 28–30 days) historically 


Alcohol Use Disorders 

Day 
Date 
Drinking 
Druguse 
Urgeintensity 
Relationshipsatisfaction 
NoLMHNoLMH0123456701234567 
NoLMHNoLMH0123456701234567 
NoLMHNoLMH0123456701234567 
NoLMHNoLMH0123456701234567 
NoLMHNoLMH0123456701234567 
NoLMHNoLMH0123456701234567 


Note.Usethereversesideofthecardtotrackbehaviorsyouarelearningtochange. 


figUre 13.4 Sample spouse self-recording card. 

was seen as the treatment of choice. However, studies 
comparing the effectiveness of different levels of care 
(e.g., see Fink et al., 1985; Longabaugh et al., 1983; 
McCrady et al., 1986) have found that most clients can 
be treated effectively in an ambulatory treatment setting, 
and health care insurers typically require preauthorization 
of episodes of care. Outpatient treatment is 
the predominant form of treatment, with the ratio of 
clients seen in outpatient versus inpatient treatment at 
about 10:1 (Roman, 2013). 

Both the Institute of Medicine (1990) and Sobell and 
Sobell (2000) have proposed stepped-care models for 
making decisions about level of care. The stepped-care 
model proposes brief interventions as the modal initial 
approach to treatment, with treatment “stepped up” to 
more intensive or extensive treatment based on the client’s 
response to the initial treatment. Such models are 
economically conservative and maintain the principle 
of least restrictive level of care. However, some clients 
with more severe problems might not be served well by 
very brief treatment (e.g., Rychtarik et al., 2000), and 
studies using American Society of Addiction Medicine 
(ASAM) criteria suggest that patients have poorer outcomes 
if they receive less intensive treatment than suggested 
by these criteria (Magura et al., 2003). 

Proposed decision-making models to determine 
level of care have been implemented in many states. 
The ASAM (2001) has proposed a multidimensional 
decision-making model for selecting initial level of 
care. ASAM criteria consider need for supervised withdrawal, 
medical conditions that might require monitoring, 
comorbid psychiatric conditions, motivation for 

change and degree of treatment acceptance or resistance, 
relapse potential, and nature of the individual’s 
social environment in recommending an initial level of 
care. These criteria are mapped onto five major levels 
of care, including early intervention, outpatient, intensive 
outpatient/partial hospitalization, residential/inpatient, 
and medically managed intensive inpatient treatment. 
Table 13.5 summarizes how the major criteria are 
applied to level of care determinations. Studies of the 
ASAM criteria suggest a number of barriers to using 
the criteria in clinical practice. For example, among 
homeless individuals, treatment facilities may be inaccessible 
because of lack of insurance or money to pay. 
Also, such individuals often are placed on waiting lists 
because programs are full. Some programs also may 
lack adjunctive services needed by a homeless population, 
such as assistance with pragmatic issues (food 
stamps, housing, unemployment, medical care, mental 
health care, or family treatment) (O’Toole et al., 2004). 
Among other patients seeking alcohol treatment, some 
may receive treatment that is more intensive than that 
suggested by ASAM criteria because their insurance 
or Medicaid only covers inpatient treatment, there may 
have been pressure from the family for inpatient treatment, 
or a specific level of care was mandated by an 
external agency (e.g., Employee Assistance Program). 
Patients also may receive treatment that is less intensive 
than that suggested by ASAM criteria because of 
their work schedule or reluctance to commit to more 
(Kosanke, Magura, Staines, Foote, & DeLuca, 2002). 
Additional considerations in determining initial level 
of care are discussed below. 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

table 13.5. american society of addiction Medicine general 
guidelines for selection of treatment settings 

Level of care Criteria 
Level 0.5. Early 
intervention 
•• 
At risk for developing an SUD 
•• 
Insufficient information to establish and SUD diagnosis 
Level I. Outpatient 
treatment 
•• 
No serious risk for major withdrawal or withdrawal seizures 
•• 
No acute or chronic medical or psychiatric problems that 
could interfere with treatment 
•• 
Some openness to change 
•• 
Some ability to maintain change 
•• 
Reasonable environmental support for change 
Level II. Intensive 
outpatient treatment 
•• 
No serious risk for major withdrawal or withdrawal seizures 
•• 
No acute or chronic medical or psychiatric problems that 
could be managed with intensive supervision and 
•• 
Some reluctance to change or 
•• 
Limited ability to maintain change or 
•• 
Limited environmental supports for change 
Level III. Medically 
monitored intensive 
•• 
At least two: 
||Risk for withdrawal 
inpatient treatment ||Some level of acute or chronic medical or psychiatric 
problems that could be managed with intensive supervision 
||Reluctance to change 
||Limited ability to maintain change 
||Limited environmental supports for change 
Level IV. Medically 
managed intensive 
inpatient treatment 
•• 
Serious risk for major withdrawal or withdrawal seizures or 
•• 
Acute or chronic medical or psychiatric problems that could 
interfere with treatment 

Need for Detoxification 

If a client is physically dependent on alcohol, then 
he/she will experience alcohol withdrawal symptoms 
when drinking is decreased or stopped. A number of 
signs suggest that a client may be physically dependent 
on alcohol, including daily drinking, drinking regularly 
or intermittently throughout the day, and morning 
drinking. Awakening during the night with fears, 
trembling, or nausea, or experiencing such symptoms 
upon first awakening, also suggests dependence. Cessation 
or a substantial decrease in drinking will result 
in the appearance of minor withdrawal symptoms, such 
as tremulousness, nausea, vomiting, difficulty sleeping, 
irritability, anxiety, and elevations in pulse rate, 
blood pressure, and temperature. Such symptoms usually 
begin within 5–12 hours. More severe withdrawal 
symptoms (e.g., seizures, delirium, or hallucinations) 
may also occur, usually within 24–72 hours of the ces


sation of drinking. If a client has not consumed alcohol 
for several days prior to initial clinical contact, concerns 
about alcohol withdrawal are not relevant. If the client 
has stopped drinking within the last 3 days, the clinician 
needs to inquire about and observe the client for 
signs of withdrawal. The Clinical Institute Withdrawal 
Assessment (CIWA, Sullivan, Sykora, Schneiderman, 
Naranjo, & Sellers, 1989) provides an objective measure 
of current withdrawal symptoms. If the client currently 
is drinking, the clinician must rely on drinking 
history, pattern, and the results of previous attempts to 
stop drinking to determine whether detoxification will 
be necessary. 

If the client needs detoxification, five alternatives 
are available: inpatient or partial hospital medical detoxification, 
inpatient nonmedical detoxification, or 
outpatient medical or nonmedical detoxification. Inpatient, 
medically assisted detoxification is essential if 


Alcohol Use Disorders 

the client has a history of disorientation, delirium, hallucinations, 
or seizures during alcohol withdrawal, or 
is showing current signs of disorientation, delirium, or 
hallucinations. If the client does not believe that he/she 
can stop drinking without being physically removed 
from alcohol, but does not show any major withdrawal 
signs, is in good health, and does not abuse other drugs, 
a social setting detoxification may be appropriate. If 
the client has some social supports, then detoxification 
can be initiated on a partial hospital or outpatient 
basis. The choice between these two latter settings is 
determined by how much support the person will need 
during withdrawal, and whether a structured program 
will be needed after detoxification. If the client needs 
a fairly structured program, then the partial hospital is 
the preferred setting for detoxification. If a client has 
a mild to moderate AUD, a program to reduce alcohol 
consumption gradually over several weeks also can be 
managed (Cohn et al., 2010). 

Medical Problems 

The clinician who is considering the best setting for 
detoxification should take into account the presence of 
other medical problems. A cautious approach dictates 
that every client should have both a thorough physical 
examination and blood and urine studies at the beginning 
of treatment. The clinician should routinely include 
questions about physical health in the first contact 
with a client, and if significant physical complaints 
are noted, the client should receive immediate medical 
attention. Some clients have medical problems that require 
hospitalization; if so, the hospitalization should 
initiate the treatment. 

Treatment History 

After physical health issues have been considered, the 
clinician should examine the client’s previous treatment 
history. Questions to consider include the following: 


1. Has the client attempted outpatient treatment in 
the past and been able to stop or decrease drinking 
successfully? If so, then another attempt at 
outpatient treatment may be indicated. 
2. Has the client dropped out of outpatient treatment 
in the past? If so, and there is no indication 
that any variables have changed in the interim, 
then a more intensive partial hospital or inpatient 
program should be considered. 

3. Has the client dropped out of, or drunk repeatedly, 
while in a partial hospital program? If so, 
then inpatient treatment may be indicated. 
4. Did the client relapse immediately after discharge 
from an inpatient program? If so, then a 
partial hospital or outpatient setting may be appropriate 
because relapse may have been associated 
with problems in generalization from the inpatient 
to the natural environment. Alternatively, 
a halfway house may be considered to provide a 
longer-term structured environment. 
Previous Quit Attempts 

Many clients have successfully decreased or stopped 
drinking on their own at some time. Outpatient treatment 
is more likely to be successful for a client with a 
history of stopping successfully on his/her own than for 
a client without any history of successful change. 

Social Support Systems 

Social support systems are a critical variable to consider 
in determining the appropriate setting for initial treatment. 
If a client has support from another person, and 
that person is perceived as an important source who is 
willing to provide support and reinforcement, then the 
client is a good candidate for ambulatory treatment. If 
the client is lacking in social support, or is in an environment 
that supports heavy drinking, then inpatient or 
partial hospital treatment may be advisable. Alternatively, 
a halfway house may provide a good treatment 
setting for persons who do not have current social supports 
and have not been successful at developing them 
in the past, even during periods of abstinence. 

Personal Resources 

The next area to consider encompasses the client’s personal 
psychological resources. Has he/she been successful 
in other areas of life in setting goals, changing 
behavior, and completing tasks? If so, outpatient 
treatment is more feasible. Another aspect of personal 
resources is cognitive functioning. If the client shows 
significant cognitive deficits in memory, attention, abstraction, 
or problem solving, a higher level of care may 
be considered. Otherwise, the client may have difficul



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

ty with retaining information presented in treatment or 
generating successful ways to avoid drinking. 

Other Psychological Problems 

As noted earlier in the chapter, persons with drinking 
problems often have other, significant psychological 
problems. The clinician must not only assess these 
problems but also determine level of care based on the 
appropriate setting for treatment of these other problems. 
A client who presents with serious depression 
must be assessed for suicidality and appropriate precautions 
should be taken. 

Attitudes about Treatment 

Although difficult areas to assess, the client’s commitment 
to treatment and desire to change are important 
factors in selecting level of care. The client who is ambivalent 
but willing to come to treatment may respond 
better to a more intensive program that provides higher 
density reinforcement for attending treatment and making 
changes. However, sometimes ambivalence makes 
it impossible to provide treatment in a more intensive 
setting because the client is unwilling to disrupt his/her 
life to the extent required for such a program. 

Practical Concerns 

There are a number of practical concerns that the clinician 
must consider. Although in certain therapeutic 
approaches these issues might be considered evidence 
of client “denial,” I view practical matters as real barriers 
to treatment and work with the client to overcome 
these barriers. Some practical barriers revolve around 
employment—whether the client can get time off from 
work, whether the job is in jeopardy, whether the employer 
is willing to support treatment, or whether missing 
any more work would result in termination of employment. 


A second concern is the client’s financial condition. 
Can the client afford to take time off from work and 
experience a reduction in income while he/she collects 
temporary disability (if sick time is not available)? If not, 
outpatient treatment, or a partial hospital program that allows 
the person to work, is appropriate. Another financial 
concern is the client’s ability to pay for treatment. 

Other practical concerns revolve around transportation 
and child care. Can the client get to outpatient ap


pointments? Does he/she have a driver’s license, and 
if not, is other transportation available? Is child care 
available if the person has to be hospitalized? If not, a 
day treatment setting may be preferred. The clinician 
must consider a range of pragmatic barriers to treatment. 


Personal Preferences 

Finally, the client’s own preferences about the treatment 
must be considered carefully. If the client feels 
strongly about wanting to be in a hospital or residential 
treatment program, the clinician should listen carefully 
to this request, even if the initial assessment suggests 
that outpatient treatment may be feasible. Similarly, 
if the client wants outpatient treatment, the clinician 
should perhaps attempt it, even if he/she believes that a 
more intensive treatment is preferable. 

General Considerations 

In general, the selection of the initial treatment setting 
must be seen as a tentative decision. Often an initial 
contract may be established that includes the client’s 
preferred setting, but with specification of the circumstances 
that will dictate a different level of care. For 
example, if the clinician believes that the client will 
find it extremely difficult to discontinue drinking on 
an outpatient basis, but this is the client’s desire, then 
an initial contract may involve a plan for reducing or 
stopping drinking, learning skills to support that plan, 
and a time limit. If the person is unsuccessful within 
the specified time frame, then the contract is reviewed 
and alternative settings are considered. Thus, although 
the initial setting decision is important, continuing to 
consider and discuss other treatment settings is an important 
early step in the treatment process. 

Selection of Treatment Modalities 

If a client is referred to inpatient, residential, or intensive 
outpatient treatment, a mixture of treatment modalities 
is included in the treatment. Six major treatment 
modalities are available for the provision of 
alcohol treatment: self-help groups, individual therapy, 
group therapy, couple therapy, family therapy, and intensive 
treatment programs. In the ambulatory setting, 
the clinician has more flexibility in selecting from 
among these treatment modalities. 


Alcohol Use Disorders 

Self-Help Groups 

AA is the most commonly utilized self-help group. 
With groups in all 50 states, as well as more than 150 
countries throughout the world, AA is widely available. 
It offers a specific approach to recovery, rooted in the 
view that alcoholism is a physical, emotional, and spiritual 
disease that can be arrested but not cured. Recovery 
is viewed as a lifelong process that involves working 
the 12 Steps of AA and abstaining from the use 
of alcohol (for a detailed description of AA, see Mc-
Crady, Horvath, & Delaney, 2003). The only requirement 
for membership in AA is a desire to stop drinking, 
and members do not have to pay dues or join the 
organization. Persons who become involved with AA 
usually attend different meetings; have a relationship 
with an AA sponsor who helps them with their recovery; 
and become involved with other AA-related activities, 
ranging from making the coffee before meetings to 
going on “commitments,” in which members of one AA 
group speak at another group. More active involvement 
is correlated with more successful change (reviewed in 
McCrady & Tonigan, in press). 

Research suggests that persons most likely to affiliate 
with AA have a history of using social supports as 
a way to cope with problems, experience loss of control 
over their drinking, drink more per occasion than 
persons who do not affiliate, experience more anxiety 
about their drinking, believe that alcohol enhances 
their mental functioning, and are more religious or 
spiritual (McCrady & Tonigan, in press). Outpatient 
treatment to facilitate involvement with AA (12-step 
facilitation) has been found to be as effective as other 
forms of outpatient therapy in controlled trials, and 
some evidence suggests that clients receiving 12-step 
facilitation are more likely to maintain total abstinence 
from alcohol than clients receiving more behaviorally 
oriented treatments (Project MATCH Research Group, 
1997a). Twelve-step facilitation treatment appears to 
be particularly successful for individuals with social 
systems that support them in drinking heavily (Longabaugh 
et al., 1998). 

Alternative self-help groups have developed in recent 
years. Self-Management and Recovery Training 
(SMART) is a self-help approach based largely on 
cognitive-behavioral principles. SMART offers several 
steps to recovery, emphasizing awareness of irrational 
beliefs, self-perceptions, and expectancies as 
core to successful change. SMART suggests abstinence 
as a preferred drinking goal but emphasizes personal 

choice. Secular Organizations for Sobriety/Save Ourselves 
(SOS) was developed largely in response to the 
spiritual aspects of AA and does not invoke a Higher 
Power as a part of the change process. Women for Sobriety, 
a self-help approach for women, emphasizes 
women’s issues such as assertiveness, self-confidence, 
and autonomy as a part of the change process. Moderation 
Management (2006) draws on behavioral principles 
to accomplish moderate drinking outcomes. All 
of these alternative approaches are more compatible 
with behavioral approaches than is AA, but none are as 
widely available to clients. 

Individual Treatment 

Individual therapy is offered primarily on an outpatient 
basis. Few data are available to guide the choice of individual 
versus group therapy. The literature on women 
with alcoholism is replete with suggestions that women 
respond better to individual than to group therapy, but 
empirical support for that assertion is lacking. Similar 
assertions apply to the treatment of older persons who 
have alcoholism, with a similar lack of empirical support. 


Group Therapy 

There is a strong belief in the alcohol field that group 
therapy is preferable to individual therapy (but see 
the previous comments in regard to women and older 
adults). Group therapy is more economical to provide, 
and interaction among group members provides opportunities 
for modeling, feedback, and behavioral rehearsal 
that are less available in the individual setting. 
Behavioral models for providing group therapy (Monti, 
Kadden, Rohsenow, Cooney, & Abrams, 2002; Sobell 
& Sobell, 2011) are well documented. Clients who are 
able to function in a group setting and do not require 
intensive individual attention because of other psychological 
problems can be assigned to group therapy. 

Couple Therapy 

A number of studies have suggested that involving the 
spouse/partner in alcoholism treatment increases the 
probability of a positive treatment outcome (McCrady, 
Epstein, Cook, Jensen, & Hilderbrand, 2009; McCrady, 
Owens, & Brovko, 2013). Despite the empirical evidence, 
traditional alcoholism counselors prefer individ



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

ual or group therapy over couple therapy, emphasizing 
the importance of a focus on personal change before relationship 
change. Models for treatments that integrate 
individual and relationship treatment are available 
(McCrady & Epstein, 2009). Couple therapy is most 
appropriate for clients who have a stable relationship in 
which the partner is willing to be involved in treatment 
and can function in a supportive manner in the early 
phases of treatment. Couples who have experienced severe 
domestic violence, or in which one partner’s commitment 
to the relationship is highly ambivalent, are 
less appropriate for couple therapy. 

Techniques also have been developed to provide 
treatment to partners of people with AUDs when the 
drinker will not seek help. Behavioral groups that emphasize 
personal decision making, communication, and 
limit-setting around drinking are effective in motivating 
individuals to seek treatment or to decrease drinking 
(Miller et al., 1999; Sisson & Azrin, 1986; Smith & 
Meyers, 2004; Thomas, Santa, Bronson, & Oyserman, 
1987). Al-Anon offers a self-help approach to partners 
and other family members affected by alcoholism. 

Family Therapy 

Despite a strong interest in AUDs in the family therapy 
field, models for working with whole families in 
which an AUD is present are scarce. Within the selfhelp 
area, Alateen is available for teens affected by a 
family member’s alcoholism, and Alatot is available for 
younger family members. 

Intensive Treatment Programs 

Although, technically, a treatment setting rather than 
a modality, intensive treatment programs have such a 
specific and defined role in alcohol treatment that they 
can be considered a treatment modality. The “Minnesota 
model” (Slaymaker & Sheehan, 2013) is an intensive 
treatment approach that includes group therapy, 
education, self-help group involvement, and some individual 
counseling. Programs based on the Minnesota 
model emphasize confrontation of denial, acceptance 
that one is an alcoholic who is powerless over alcohol, 
development of caring and interdependent relationships, 
and commitment to AA involvement. Over time, 
Minnesota model programs have incorporated many 
behavioral strategies and techniques, including social 
skills and relaxation training, as well as RP techniques. 
Minnesota model programs have been marketed as 

the most effective approach to alcoholism treatment, 
but data to support these claims are lacking. Most research 
on these programs has involved the evaluation 
of a single treatment program, and all the evaluations 
have been of private treatment centers. The evaluations 
suggest substantial levels of abstinence among persons 
receiving treatment (see, e.g., Filstead, 1991; Stinchfield 
& Owen, 1998), but the subjects in these studies 
tend to be good-prognosis patients, and without appropriate 
controls, conclusions cannot be drawn about the 
relative efficacy of these treatments compared to other 
approaches. Slaymaker and Sheehan (2013) reviewed 
more recent experimental and quasi-experimental studies 
of intensive treatments based on the disease model 
that were similar to Minnesota model programs, concluding 
that these studies supported the efficacy of the 
treatment model. Their wide visibility has made them 
the choice of many individuals with alcoholism and 
their families. 

Enhancing and Maintaining Motivation 
to Change 

Once a decision has been made about the level of 
care and the client has entered treatment, the clinician 
needs to continue to focus on motivation to be in 
treatment and to change. Techniques to enhance motivation 
include feedback, use of motivational interviewing 
techniques, mutual goal setting and decision 
making, treatment contracting, and the instillation of 
hope. Three clinical examples illustrate some of these 
techniques. 

Bill (described earlier in this chapter) began treatment 
quite tentatively. He was willing to complete a 
standardized assessment of his drinking, so we completed 
a 1-month TLFB (Sobell & Sobell, 1995), the 
DrInC (Miller et al., 1995), and a Decisional Balance 
Sheet (Marlatt & Gordon, 1985; see Figure 13.2). Based 
on this information, I provided him with a standardized 
feedback sheet (Figure 13.5) about his drinking. The 
sheet provided data about how his drinking compared 
to national norms (Epstein & McCrady, 2009), as well 
as information about his peak BAL, usual BAL, and 
negative consequences of his drinking. Bill found the 
feedback interesting and asked questions about alcohol 
metabolism, epidemiological surveys, and alcohol and 
health effects. Although his wife, Diana, was somewhat 
impatient with this conversation, I thought that Bill’s 
interest in learning more about alcohol and its effects 
was a positive sign. 


Alcohol Use Disorders 

For 
the 
Drinker 


1. Based on the information I obtained during the assessment, I calculated the number of “standard 
drinks” you consumed in a typical week, during the last month: 
Total number of standard drinks per week 
Average number of standard drinks per day 

2. When we look at everyone who drinks in the United States, you have been drinking more than 
approximately percent of the population of women/men in the country. 
3. I also estimated your highest and average blood alcohol level (BAL) in the past month. Your BAL is 
based on how many standard drinks you consume, the length of time over which you drink that 
much, whether you are a man or a woman, and how much you weight. So, 
Your estimated peak BAL in an average week was 
Your estimated average BAL in an average week was 

This is a measure of how intoxicated you typically become. In New Jersey, the legal intoxication limit 
is 80 mg% or higher. 

4. You have experienced many negative consequences from drinking. Here are some of the most 
important: 
For 
the 
Partner 


1. You have been trying many ways to cope with your wife/husband’s drinking. The things you have 
tried the most include: 
For 
the 
Couple 


1. You havea number of areas of your relationship that you are concerned about. Some are concerns 
for both of you: 
2. Some concerns are mostly concerns for the husband: 
3. Some concerns are mostly concerns for the wife: 
figUre 13.5. Drinking feedback sheet for a couple. 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

We discussed drinking goals, and I suggested the 
Moderation Management (2006) drinking guideline 
for men of no more than 14 drinks in a week, no more 
than 4 days’ drinking per week, and no more than four 
drinks per occasion. Bill indicated that he wanted to 
continue with daily drinking, but with a limit of three 
drinks per day. Diana was agreeable, saying that if he 
kept to this limit she would be “thrilled.” Although 
his selected goal was higher than I would have liked, 
I agreed in order to engage him further in treatment. 
I then gave him his first “homework” assignment—to 
initiate self-recording of his drinking (see Figure 13.3). 
The assignment of homework serves as a useful behavioral 
probe for level of motivation, and I was pleased 
when Bill returned to the next session with completed 
self-recording cards. 

Suzanne was a 39-year-old computer programmer 
whom I treated in outpatient therapy as part of a treatment 
research project. Suzanne drank daily, typically 
consuming three glasses of wine per day. She had made 
a number of unsuccessful attempts to stop drinking and 
felt that she had completely lost control over her drinking 
even though the amount she drank was not remarkably 
high. She was concerned about her ability to be 
alert and available to her children in the evenings when 
she was drinking, particularly since her husband traveled 
frequently for his business. Suzanne sought treatment 
voluntarily and wanted to abstain from drinking 
completely. Despite her self-referral to treatment and 
her self-defined need for abstinence, Suzanne reacted 
to the same structured feedback quite differently than 
Bill did. She had provided information for the TLFB 
and completed the Rutgers Consequences of Use Questionnaire 
(RCU), but when I gave her feedback that 
she had been drinking an average of 21.5 drinks per 
week, she told me that this figure was too high and that 
our measure was not very accurate. She also indicated 
that she was participating in a research study, not in 
therapy, which was why she thought it important that 
we have accurate data. I did not argue with her perspective, 
agreeing that she was in a research study, but 
that I hoped that the study would helpful to her. She 
continued with treatment, and several weeks later commented 
spontaneously, “You know, I know that I’m in 
treatment, and I really need it. I think I was just protecting 
my ego at the beginning by focusing on the research 
part so much.” 

Anne, a 32-year-old, married college graduate 
working as a cocktail waitress, was the mother of a 
20-month-old daughter, Breanne. Her husband, Char


lie, was working full time and enrolled in a doctoral 
program in mechanical engineering. She entered treatment 
as part of our women’s treatment research program. 
She was a daily drinker with a varying pattern of 
consumption. During the evenings, when her husband 
was at school, she drank one or two bottles of wine. 
When he was home, her typical consumption was one 
glass of wine with dinner. She also drank at the end of 
her shift at work, consuming four to six beers on those 
evenings. When I gave her the feedback about her alcohol 
consumption, indicating that her level of consumption 
placed her in the 99th percentile of women, her 
eyes filled with tears and she looked visibly distraught, 
saying repeatedly, “I knew it was bad, but I never knew 
it was this bad.” As treatment progressed, Anne made 
few changes in her drinking. She canceled or changed 
appointments, and said on several occasions, “If I 
didn’t like you, I’d probably just quit the whole thing.” 
She continued: 

anne: I really like to drink. When Charlie is at school, 
I make myself a nice dinner—a lamb chop, a salad— 
and have an excellent bottle of wine. No one bothers 
me, and I enjoy myself. But I know I should stop because 
of Breanne. 

tHeraPist: [As part of the treatment protocol, we had 
completed a decisional matrix, and I suggest that we 
return to that form.] Anne, let’s look at your decisional 
matrix again. We did this a few weeks ago. 
When you look at it now, what strikes you? 

anne: Everything on it is still true. I’m not being a 
good mother with all this drinking. I’m out of it at 
night, and I have no energy during the day. I just plop 
her in front of the television, and she watches Dora 
the Explorer. I keep thinking about when she gets 
older, “Do I want her to have a drunken mother?” 

tHeraPist: It seems as though those feelings are very 
strong right now, but it’s hard for you to keep them 
in the front of your mind each day. I wonder if you 
could review this sheet every day at some point. 
Would that help? 

anne: I think so. I can look at it while Breanne is eating 
her breakfast. My motivation would be sitting 
right in front of me then. I’ll try that. 

Anne began reviewing her decisional matrix every 
day. The task seemed helpful for about a month, and 
she began to decrease her drinking, joined a gym, and 


Alcohol Use Disorders 

came to treatment regularly. However, these changes 
were short-lived, and she fairly quickly reverted to 
her pattern of erratic treatment attendance and heavy 
drinking. 

Selection of Drinking Goals 

The final major area to consider in treatment planning 
is the selection of drinking goals. Traditional approaches 
to alcoholism treatment view abstinence as 
the only appropriate drinking goal because these approaches 
view alcoholism as a progressive disease that 
can only be arrested with abstinence. Behavioral clinicians 
have examined alternatives to abstinence and 
have developed a number of strategies to teach clients 
how to drink moderately. Although better accepted as 
a goal for individuals who are hazardous drinkers or 
have a mild AUD, moderation training continues to be 
controversial, and the clinician who elects to provide 
such treatment may be vulnerable to criticism from 
the traditional, mainstream alcoholism treatment community. 
Earlier studies suggest that the long-term outcomes 
of alcoholism include reduced drinking (e.g., 
Helzer et al., 1985; Vaillant, 1983), but early data about 
the success of moderation training were more mixed. 
Two European studies found that giving clients the 
opportunity to select treatment goals increased compliance 
with treatment and might improve treatment 
outcome (Ojehegan & Berglund, 1989; Orford & Keddie, 
1986). Two recent studies that have tested training 
in moderate drinking using a Web-based intervention 
(Hester, Delaney, Campbell, & Handmaker, 2009) or 
a women’s therapy group (Walitzer & Connors, 2007) 
both found positive outcomes for moderation training 
with low dependence drinkers, with the results for the 
women’s group sustained over 30 months of follow-up. 
In the past, I have argued in favor of abstinence as a 
preferred treatment goal (see, e.g., McCrady, 1992; Nathan 
& McCrady, 1987), and continue to view it as the 
preferred treatment goal for individuals with moderate 
to severe AUDs. Abstinence is clearly defined and is in 
accord with usual clinical practice in the United States. 
Also, agreeing readily to a goal of moderate drinking 
may reinforce a client’s view that alcohol is important 
and necessary to his/her daily functioning. 

Under certain circumstances the use of a reduced 
drinking goal is appropriate. Moderation may be used 
as a provisional goal to engage a client in treatment, or 
it may be used when the client will not agree to abstinence 
but does want assistance to change (as with Bill). 

A moderate drinking goal also is more appropriate if a 
client shows few signs of alcohol dependence or withdrawal, 
has a history of being able to drink in moderation, 
does not have medical or psychological problems 
that would be exacerbated by continued drinking, is 
younger, and does not have a family history of alcoholism 
(Rosenberg, 1993). If clinician and client select a 
moderation goal, a period of initial abstinence usually 
makes it easier for the client to drink moderately. In selecting 
a moderation goal, the clinician should be careful 
to help the client recognize the current and potential 
negative consequences of excessive drinking, and make 
an informed and thoughtful choice in selecting a treatment 
goal. The clinician should view any initial drinking 
goal (abstinence or moderation) as tentative, to be 
reevaluated as therapy progresses. 

Initiating Abstinence 

For the client with a goal of abstinence, the clinician 
has a variety of alternatives to help him/her initiate 
abstinence. With a client whose goal is moderation, 
the most conservative approach is to initiate a period 
of abstinence, then gradually reintroduce alcohol. As 
noted earlier, several detoxification alternative strategies 
are available, including inpatient detoxification, 
ambulatory detoxification, “cold turkey” detoxification 
(in which the client simply stops drinking abruptly), or 
a graduated program of reduction of drinking over a 
period of weeks, until the client reaches abstinence. A 
case example illustrates a graduated program of reduction 
of drinking. 

Steve, a 48-year-old, homeless, unemployed man 
with a long history of heroin, cocaine, and alcohol dependence, 
entered treatment after heroin detoxification 
but was still drinking an average of eight drinks per 
day (usually a half-pint of hard liquor plus one to two 
beers). He was healthy and had no history of alcohol 
withdrawal symptoms. No inpatient detoxification facility 
was available to him given his homeless and economically 
destitute state. Initial treatment focused on 
helping him achieve a stable housing situation and obtaining 
temporary General Assistance (welfare). Following 
these social interventions, the therapist (one of 
our practicum students) began to focus on his drinking. 
Steve expressed a strong preference for a program of 
graduated reduction in drinking. He was evaluated by a 
physician at the local free clinic and cleared medically. 
We had him record his drinking for 1 week to establish 
a clear baseline. We then set a program to reduce his 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

drinking by 15% per week, or eight drinks per week. 
We discussed specific strategies to achieve this goal 
each week, and Steve continued to monitor his drinking. 
During the alcohol reduction period, Steve reestablished 
contact with a former long-term girlfriend who 
had terminated their relationship when he relapsed to 
alcohol and heroin use. She had heard that he was off 
heroin and expressed interest in being involved with 
him again. Her presence provided a strong incentive for 
him to follow the alcohol reduction program because 
she was unaware that he had been drinking. The program 
progressed smoothly, and he stopped drinking 
after 7 weeks. 

Developing a Functional Analysis 

As described earlier, completing a behavioral assessment 
of the factors associated with a client’s drinking 
includes both a structured and a qualitative dimension, 
and incorporates clinical interviewing, questionnaires, 
and self-recording of drinking and drinking urges. Suzanne, 
described briefly earlier, provides an excellent 
illustration of the complexity and results of the behavioral 
assessment process. 

Suzanne came from a large Jewish family, many 
members of whom made demands on her. She had three 
daughters, ages 10, 8, and 4 years old. Her drinking had 
increased 5 years prior to treatment after a car accident 
that took the life of her fraternal twin brother. They 
had gone out to a Bruce Springsteen concert together, 
and her brother had had several drinks at the concert. 
An autopsy after the accident revealed that he had also 
been using cocaine, but Suzanne had been unaware of 
his drug use. She blamed herself for allowing him to 
drive and for not insisting that he stop when he began 
to drive in a reckless manner. She began to drink immediately 
after the accident and quickly established a 
pattern of daily consumption of a half-bottle of wine 
per day. 

Although the amount was not that great, she reported 
that the alcohol was very important because it helped 
her avoid her overwhelming sadness about her brother’s 
death, especially at the end of the day. The results of 
the behavioral assessment revealed a more complex 
pattern of drinking antecedents. On the DPQ, Suzanne 
rated emotional antecedents as most important, endorsing 
feelings of sadness, hurt, and frustration. She also 
indicated that certain environments were triggers for 
drinking, such as specific restaurants, times of the day 
(evening), and activities (particularly watching televi


sion). Other major triggers emerged from Suzanne’s 
self-recording cards—her interactions with extended 
family members and with friends, and situations related 
to her children. Her parents were highly critical 
of how she was raising her children. Suzanne and her 
husband, Josh, were attending a conservative temple, 
kept kosher in their home, did not allow violent video 
games, and expected each daughter to participate in a 
fine arts activity (music, dance, or painting). Her parents 
believed that their grandchildren’s upbringing and 
Suzanne and Josh’s standards were too strict and conservative, 
and they were vocal in their criticisms. Other 
familial stressors included her interactions with a sister 
who was getting divorced and a cousin who was in 
economic straits. Each contacted Suzanne on a regular 
basis, demanding either her attention or her money. Suzanne’s 
functional analysis is provided in Figure 13.6. 

Early Sobriety Strategies 

Early sobriety strategies help the client maintain abstinence 
from alcohol. Cognitive-behavioral techniques 
vary with the individual but may include stimulus control 
strategies to avoid or rearrange high-risk situations, 
development of skills to deal with urges to drink, learning 
to think differently about drinking and not drinking, 
identification of behaviors alternative to drinking 
in high-risk situations, developing alternative ways to 
obtain the reinforcers previously obtained from alcohol, 
and learning to refuse drinks. 

Stimulus Control 

Stimulus control strategies are designed to alter environmental 
cues for drinking by avoiding the cue, rearranging 
it, or implementing different responses in 
the same environment. Stimulus control strategies are 
compatible with the AA suggestion to be attuned to 
“people, places, and things.” Work with Suzanne illustrates 
stimulus control strategies. 

With Suzanne, stimulus control strategies served a 
major function early in treatment. She developed specific 
strategies to deal with a number of the environmental 
high-risk situations identified in her functional 
analysis. Her first approach was to avoid such situations 
whenever possible. She suggested to Josh that they eat 
only at restaurants without liquor licenses, and asked 
that they decline several social invitations to places 
where alcohol would be the main focus of the evening 
(e.g., cocktail parties). The one situation that she could 


Alcohol Use Disorders 


figUre 13.6. Suzanne’s functional analysis. 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

not avoid was the end of the day, after the children had 
gone to bed. Her usual routine had been to complete 
the dinner dishes while Josh helped the girls get ready 
for bed, then to sit down in the den with her wine and 
the television after reading the children a story. She 
decided that she needed to disrupt this pattern and 
thought that if she got ready for bed herself, then curled 
up on the couch with a book and a cup of herbal tea, she 
would experience less urge to drink. It took her 3 weeks 
to get to a bookstore to buy some light novels, but once 
she had the books, Suzanne was able to implement this 
plan with success, except when she was upset. 

Dealing with Urges 

As individuals decrease their drinking or initiate abstinence, 
they may experience urges or cravings for alcohol. 
It is helpful to provide the client with a framework 
for understanding that urges are learned responses to 
drinking situations, and that urges abate if unfulfilled. 
Marlatt and Gordon (1985) suggested the use of imagery 
to help clients cope with urges, and described 
either acceptance-oriented imagery (e.g., surfing with 
the urge) or action-oriented imagery (e.g., attacking the 
urge with a samurai sword). 

Suzanne struggled with urges to drink, particularly 
when anything reminded her of her twin brother’s 
death. During therapy, we focused on a variety of aspects 
of her feelings about her brother’s death and also 
addressed the urges more directly. Suzanne initially 
reacted to the imagery techniques negatively, saying 
that she was not a person who imagined things much. 
She clearly needed some way to cope with these rather 
strong urges, so I pushed her a bit to try: 

tHeraPist: I appreciate that you don’t think of yourself 
as imaginative, but maybe I can help you out. 
Just humor me for a minute, and let’s see if we can 
come up with an image that grabs you. It doesn’t 
matter what the image is—you could imagine climbing 
a mountain and coming down the other side, or 
spraying the urge with a fire extinguisher. 

suzanne: (smiling) I know what I can imagine—I 

could picture you jumping out of the bottle and shak


ing your head at me. 

tHeraPist: OK. Should I look mean? 

suzanne: No, just having you there would help me 
deal with it. 

tHeraPist: All right, I can live with that. 

suzanne: In fact, I could picture a row of wine 

bottles—with you coming out of the first one, then 

showing me all the disgusting things in the other one. 

tHeraPist: So what would be disgusting? Ticks? 

suzanne: Ticks would be good, and maybe cockroaches, 
too. 

tHeraPist: Let’s try this out. 

At that point, I had her practice using the imagery in 
an imagined urge situation. Remarkably, she used the 
imagery frequently and found it helpful. 

A second technique for coping with urges is to enlist 
the assistance of a family member or friend. Persons 
involved with AA are told to call someone in the AA 
program when they feel the urge to drink, and they usually 
receive telephone numbers from several members. 
Clients not involved with AA can seek other sources of 
support. Suzanne, for example, asked her husband to 
help her when she had the urge to drink. She asked Josh 
to remind her of why she had stopped drinking and to 
say, “Of course, it has to be your decision.” 

Addressing Cognitive Distortions about Alcohol 

People who drink heavily hold stronger positive expectancies 
about the effects of alcohol than do people 
who drink more lightly (Pabst, Baumeister, & Kraus, 
2010). Clients may believe that drinking facilitates social 
interactions, enhances sexual responsiveness, allows 
them to forget painful events or feelings, or makes 
them more capable. These beliefs often are deeply held 
and difficult to challenge, particularly if a client continues 
to drink. Several cognitive strategies may help. 
First, effecting a period of abstinence allows the client 
to experience many situations without alcohol—an 
experience that often leads to reevaluation, with little 
input from the therapist. At some point, many clients 
are impressed with the vacuous nature of drunken 
conversation; the undesirable physical appearance, 
behaviors, and odors that accompany high BALs; and 
the shallow nature of drinking relationships. The wise 
therapist watches carefully for these observations and 
underscores their importance and self-relevance. If a 
client does not have such experiences spontaneously, 
the therapist facilitates new views of drunken comportment 
by developing a relatively safe way for the client 
to observe intoxicated behavior—through either mov



Alcohol Use Disorders 

ies or videotapes, or visits to a local bar (accompanied 
by someone who is aware of and supports the client’s 
abstinence). 

A second strategy reported in the self-change literature 
(Ludwig, 1985) is the ability to think past anticipated 
positive benefits of drinking to the clear, though 
often delayed, negative consequences of drinking. The 
therapist and client can generate a list of negative consequences 
of drinking and use imaginal rehearsal in 
the session to help the client pair positive thoughts with 
the list of negatives. Continued rehearsal in the natural 
environment is then important. Third, some clients 
develop a set of erroneous beliefs about their drinking 
that set them up for drinking. Common beliefs include 
“I’ve been doing so well, I can just drink tonight,” or 
“I’ll have just one.” Although moderate drinking is possible 
for some clients, others have histories of drinking 
until they lose control, which is in direct opposition to 
a belief in control, and they need to learn to counter 
these beliefs. 

Work with Steve provides a simple illustration of 
cognitive strategies to address positive expectations 
about drinking. Steve had a long history of loss-ofcontrol 
drinking. After a period of abstinence, he began 
to think, “I could have just one beer, and that would 
be fine.” His therapist questioned the accuracy of that 
belief. Steve readily acknowledged that he had never 
been able to control his drinking in the past, that if his 
girlfriend found out she’d be very upset and probably 
leave him, and that relapses to heavy drinking usually 
led him to use heroin. Steve and his therapist developed 
a simple cognitive formula to use when he thought 
about drinking: “1 = 32 = 10,” meaning that for him, 
one drink would lead to a quart of liquor (32 ounces), 
which would lead to heroin use (10 bags a day). 

Alternative/Distracting Behaviors 

Drinking is a time-occupying activity, and clients may 
see few alternatives to help them through times when 
they previously would drink. Discussion of specific 
behavioral alternatives to drinking that are both timeoccupying 
and mentally or physically absorbing is another 
helpful strategy early in treatment. 

Steve’s experiences provide a particularly powerful 
example of the alternatives that highly motivated clients 
may find. After Steve found a room in a rooming house 
and had begun the detoxification process, he was faced 
with the daunting prospect of filling his completely un


structured days. Some of his time was occupied with 
the time-consuming work of being poor—getting back 
and forth to the soup kitchen, waiting at the free clinic 
for medical services, getting an appropriate identification 
card so that he was eligible for other charitable 
programs, such as clothing distribution. But even with 
these necessary activities, Steve had hours and hours 
of free time. Steve began to address this challenge by 
creating his own activities. He obtained a library card 
and scheduled times for himself at the library. Instead 
of reading randomly or recreationally, he decided to 
read about the Crusades, which sparked an interest for 
him in medieval Christianity. A lapsed Catholic, he decided 
to attend Mass again, and began to attend daily. 
His daily attendance led to involvement in a Bible study 
group, and he became a thoughtful and passionate participant. 
A creative man, Steve then began to write 
short stories with religious themes. 

Identifying Alternative Ways to Obtain Reinforcers 

Among the more compelling aspects of alcohol and 
drug use are the psychoactive properties of the substances. 
In the short term, large quantities of alcohol 
effectively deaden negative affect, decrease obsessional 
thoughts, and decrease muscle tension, although these 
effects do not endure over the long term. Alcoholic beverages 
also have distinctive and desirable tastes that are 
difficult to replace with other beverages. An important 
aspect of the functional analysis is articulating the client’s 
perception of positive consequences of drinking. 
The clinician can address the power of these perceived 
reinforcers in several ways: helping the client develop 
alternative means of obtaining the same types of positive 
experiences; challenging the client’s belief that the 
desirable consequences will occur (e.g., questioning 
whether the client is in fact more socially adept and appealing 
after consuming a quart of vodka); helping the 
client reevaluate the importance of these reinforcers; 
and/or helping the client identify other classes of reinforcers 
that might be valued more highly in the long run 
(e.g., valuing spirituality more highly than hedonism). 

Drink Refusal Skills 

Some drinkers find the interpersonal aspects of abstinence 
difficult. For them, identification of interpersonal 
situations as high risk for drinking, development of effective 
responses, and rehearsal of these responses all 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

form an important component of treatment. Early research 
(Chaney, O’Leary, & Marlatt, 1978) suggested 
that giving a quick response is strongly associated with 
successful change. More recent research has found that 
drink refusal training makes a unique positive contribution 
to treatment outcome (Witkiewitz, Donovan, 
& Hartzler, 2012). Suggested components of effective 
drinks refusal include indicating clearly that the one 
does not want an alcoholic beverage, requesting an 
alternative beverage, communicating confidence and 
comfort with the request, and being persistent in the 
face of social pressure (Foy, Miller, Eisler, & O’Toole, 
1976). In addition, clients who face excessive social 
pressure may be advised to consider avoiding certain 
social situations or persons. 

Although the guidelines for refusing drinks appear 
simple, client beliefs and expectations often make the 
drink refusal process difficult. Common cognitions include 
“Everyone will think I’m an alcoholic,” “My host 
will be offended if I don’t drink,” or “People will think 
I’m too good for them if I don’t drink.” As with other 
distorted beliefs, the clinician can provide alternative 
frameworks for thinking about drink refusal situations, 
suggesting that most people really are uninterested in 
others’ drinking, or that hosts are most concerned that 
guests are enjoying themselves. Many clients also experience 
ambivalence about not drinking and find that 
the most difficult part of the drink refusal process is 
internal rather than interpersonal. Another complicated 
aspect of drink refusal is how much personal information 
the client wishes to divulge. Most people share different 
levels of personal information, depending on the 
closeness of the relationship and their knowledge of the 
other person’s behavior and attitudes. For persons to 
whom a client does not want to disclose his/her drinking 
problem, we encourage use of a simple “No, thank 
you,” or, if pressed, a simple response that would discourage 
pushing without being revealing, such as “I’m 
watching my weight and can’t afford the calories,” “I’m 
on medication that doesn’t allow me to drink,” or “My 
stomach’s been acting up—I better pass.” None of these 
replies protects the client against future offers, but each 
is effective in the moment. For closer relationships, the 
client makes a decision about when, where, and how 
much to reveal. Two clinical examples illustrate these 
points. 

Steve was living in a boarding house and had friendly, 
sociable neighbors who liked to drink on the front 
porch. These neighbors were from the Portuguese 
Azores and spoke virtually no English. After accepting 

a beer from them one day, he insisted to his therapist 
that he could not refuse because he did not speak Portuguese. 
The therapist suggested that perhaps the word 
“No,” spoken with a smile and a hand gesture, might 
be understood even in Portuguese. Steve acknowledged 
that his difficulty with refusing the drink came from 
his desire to drink, and that a friendly “No” would certainly 
work. 

Suzanne did not want anyone to know that she had 
a drinking problem, or that she was abstaining. This 
stance posed problems for an upcoming cocktail party. 
Strategizing, Suzanne decided ahead of time that she 
would drink seltzer water that evening, and that she 
would attempt to forestall offers of drinks by keeping 
a glass of seltzer in her hand at all times. If offered 
a drink, she decided to tell people that she had had 
some health problems that might be made worse by her 
drinking, so she was sticking to seltzer. Although she 
was concerned that one of her friends (a social worker) 
might surmise that she had an alcohol problem, the evening 
progressed uneventfully. 

Coping Strategies 

Clients face challenges beyond those directly related 
to their drinking. As do clients without drinking problems, 
clients with such problems face common life 
difficulties stemming from dysfunctional thoughts, 
negative affect, and interpersonal conflicts. As clients 
develop a greater ability to maintain abstinence or 
moderated drinking, the clinician may devote increasing 
attention to other problems clients are facing. Clinical 
techniques to deal with dysfunctional thoughts or 
social skills deficits can be used readily with clients 
with drinking problems. 

Dealing with Negative Affect 

There are multiple sources of negative affect in persons 
with alcohol abuse or dependence. As noted earlier in 
the chapter, comorbidity with other psychiatric disorders 
is high (e.g., mood and anxiety disorders are quite 
common). Rates of sexual and physical abuse are also 
elevated among those with AUDs (Cisler et al., 2011), 
and the sequelae of these problems often include a 
strongly negative affective component. In addition, 
persons who have used alcohol to cope with negative 
affect over an extended period of time may simply have 
limited experience, and limited skills, to cope with the 
pain that is a part of everyday life. 


Alcohol Use Disorders 

In focusing on negative affect, a careful assessment 
of the causes is essential. Intense negative affect associated 
with another disorder should be treated in accord 
with the appropriate approach for that disorder. Dealing 
with negative affect that is not necessarily disorderbased 
presents different challenges. Full behavioral 
mood management programs (e.g., Monti et al., 1990) 
have been developed, although a description of these is 
beyond the scope of the chapter. However, certain common 
principles are of value. When clients first reduce 
or stop drinking, they may experience all emotions as 
unfamiliar and intense. Cognitive reframing to help clients 
view these intense emotions as a natural part of 
the change process may be useful. For clients pursuing 
a moderation goal, avoidance of drinking at times 
of intense negative affect provides the opportunity to 
learn alternative coping strategies. Coping strategies 
may vary with the type of negative emotion, and may 
include relaxation, prayer or meditation; increasing the 
experience of pleasurable events to decrease depression; 
or use of anger management and assertiveness 
skills to cope with angry feelings. 

Work with Suzanne illustrates several of these principles. 
Most difficult for Suzanne were any situations 
that reminded her of the death of her twin. Their birthday, 
the anniversary of his death, the celebration of 
Father’s and Mother’s Days, holiday celebrations, and 
special celebratory events for her children in which he 
would have been importantly involved with (e.g., a bat 
mitzvah) all elicited intense negative affect and a strong 
desire to drink. Given that Suzanne had begun drinking 
heavily right after her twin’s death, she had spent little 
time experiencing grief or even discussing his death 
and her feelings about it. My initial approach in therapy 
was to give her opportunities to be exposed to these 
negative feelings by simply talking about him in the 
therapy session. The second approach was to discuss 
and identify ways to approach events that reminded her 
of him. I saw her over a 6-month period, during which 
a number of these situations arose naturally. For example, 
in the week prior to the anniversary of his death, 
we discussed ways that she could focus on his death 
and memories. Suzanne took one of her children to his 
gravesite, and they cleaned it up and planted flowers together. 
On the Saturday of the anniversary of his death, 
she went to temple with her family, and then cooked 
what had been her twin’s favorite dinner. The day was 
sorrowful and Suzanne cried several times, but it was 
the first anniversary that she felt she had honored him 
rather than shaming his memory by getting drunk. We 

also addressed her repetitive, self-blaming thoughts 
about his death by using cognitive restructuring techniques. 
She found it difficult not to blame herself for 
his death, and few cognitive strategies had much impact 
on the self-blame. Suzanne finally was able to begin to 
think, “I cannot torture myself forever with this blame. 
If I don’t let go of it, I won’t be a good mother. He’d be 
disappointed with me if I let my children down.” 

Lifestyle Balance and Pleasurable Activities 

Marlatt and Donovan (2005) suggest that long-term 
success is supported by lifestyle changes that enhance 
positive experiences and allow for a balance between 
responsibilities and pleasure. Although some studies 
of successful self-changers (e.g., Vaillant & Milofsky, 
1982) have revealed that development of an “alternative 
dependency” (e.g., obsessive involvement with 
work or exercise) is associated with successful longterm 
abstinence, we typically work toward a more 
balanced approach. As they begin to change, some of 
our clients believe that they need to make up for their 
previous lack of responsibility with a very high level 
of responsibility to family, job, and home. Taking on 
major redecorating or remodeling projects, trying to 
spend every free moment with their children, or cleaning 
out 10 years’ worth of messy drawers and cabinets 
is not uncommon. This zeal for responsibility can be a 
double-edged sword for both client and family. Unrelenting 
attention to responsibilities may be simultaneously 
satisfying and exhausting and unrewarding, and 
may lead the client to question the value of not drinking. 
Family members may be thrilled that the client is 
taking on responsibility but leery of the stability of the 
change and unwilling to give up responsibilities they 
have assumed for him/her. They also may experience 
the client’s enthusiasm as an intrusion on their own 
independent lives and schedules. Clients should be 
prepared for such reactions, and the clinician can help 
reframe the family’s response as understandable. With 
most clients, it is important for the clinician to suggest 
the importance of leisure time, pleasurable activities, 
and self-reinforcement for positive changes made. 

Helping Suzanne identify a half-hour per day during 
which she could relax, read, or exercise was a challenge. 
She believed that she should devote herself to 
her daughters—a belief that resulted in her being with 
them virtually all the time when they were home. 
When they were at school, she focused on housecleaning, 
cooking, errands, paying bills, and other chores. 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

She was exhausted and tense at the end of the day, and 
commented that alcohol had been a good way to “come 
down.” We finally agreed on a half-hour block before 
lunch, during which she would use her exercise bike, 
read a book of daily meditations, or take a walk. She 
was only partially successful in these efforts, often citing 
other responsibilities that took precedence. 

Partner/Family Involvement and the Social 
Context of Treatment 

The literature on the treatment of alcohol use disorders 
suggests that the involvement of some significant social 
system is associated with positive treatment results 
(reviewed in McCrady et al., 2013). Because of these 
findings, the clinician’s first inclination should be to 
involve the client’s spouse/partner or some significant 
other in the treatment. There are a number of ways to 
involve significant others: using them as sources of information, 
having them provide differential reinforcement 
for drinking and abstinence, helping them to provide 
emotional or practical support, involving them in 
relationship-focused treatment, providing treatment to 
them without the person who drinks, and/or helping 
them access new social systems. 

Information 

Folklore suggests that persons with alcoholism minimize 
or lie about their drinking and its consequences. 
The empirical literature suggests that such individuals 
provide relatively accurate data when sober, and when 
there are no strong negative consequences for telling 
the truth (e.g., Sobell & Sobell, 2003). Despite these 
results, a number of clinical considerations suggest that 
obtaining information from a family member may be 
useful in the assessment phase of treatment. 

Clients who are referred to or coerced into treatment 
may be reluctant to provide full information about their 
drinking. Collecting data from the referring agent helps 
both client and clinician understand the reasons for the 
referral. Even with self-referred clients, significant others 
can provide information that may be unavailable to 
the clients because of problems with memory or recall. 
In addition, an intimate significant other usually has 
observed the drinker over a long period of time and in 
multiple environments, and may have valuable observations 
to contribute to the conceptualization of antecedents 
to drinking. 

Responses to Drinking and Abstinence 

A different type of social system involvement is the 
establishment of a network that provides differential 
reinforcement for abstinence and applies negative consequences 
for drinking. Such reinforcement may be 
relatively simple, such as positive comments and encouragement 
from friends and family, or it can involve 
the negotiation of detailed contracts that specify the 
consequences of drinking and abstinence. The “community 
reinforcement approach” (CRA; Meyers & 
Smith, 1995) helps clients access potential reinforcers 
(jobs, families, social clubs), teaches clients and partners 
behavioral coping skills, and may involve development 
of contingency contracts to make access to reinforcers 
contingent on sobriety. In addition, clients may 
be prescribed disulfiram or naltrexone, and compliance 
may be monitored by a significant other. Evaluations 
of the CRA approach suggest that clients are significantly 
more successful than controls in maintaining 
abstinence and employment, avoiding hospitalizations 
or jail, and maintaining a stable residence. In addition 
to formal treatments that focus on manipulation 
of environmental contingencies, the therapist also may 
teach spouses/partners and other family members how 
to allow the client to experience the naturally occurring 
negative consequences of drinking. Many spouses/ 
partners protect the drinker from these consequences 
by covering for him/her at work, doing his/her chores, 
or lying to friends and family about the drinking (e.g., 
Orford et al., 2005). Experience of these negative consequences 
may increase the client’s awareness of the 
extent and severity of his/her drinking problem, and 
provide further motivation for change. 

Decreasing Cues for Drinking 

Significant others also may engage in behaviors that 
cue further drinking. A wife who wants her husband to 
stop drinking may nag him repeatedly about the problems 
his drinking is causing, hoping that her concerns 
will motivate him to change. Or a husband may try to 
get his wife to stop drinking by limiting her access to 
alcohol or tightly controlling their money. Such behaviors 
may have an unintended and negative effect, 
eliciting anger or defensiveness from the person with 
the drinking problem, and leading to further drinking. 
Helping spouses/partners learn to identify such behaviors, 
recognize the results of these actions, and find al



Alcohol Use Disorders 

ternative ways to discuss concerns about drinking may 
be helpful. 

Support for Abstinence 

Significant others can provide many kinds of support to 
clients. Support may involve helping a client to implement 
behavior change, discussing urges to drink, supporting 
a client’s plan to avoid high-risk situations for 
drinking, or (upon the request of the client) assisting in 
the implementation of other coping skills that support 
sobriety. 

Relationship Change 

For many clients, interactions with their spouses/partners, 
children, parents, or close friends cue drinking. 
Thus, treatment that focuses on changing these interpersonal 
relationships is another way that significant 
others may become involved. These interventions 
may include couple or family therapy, or parent skills 
training. Data (McCrady et al., 2009; McCrady, Stout, 
Noel, Abrams, & Nelson, 1991) suggest that a focus on 
changing the couple relationship during conjoint alcoholism 
treatment results in greater stability of drinking 
outcomes, fewer separations, and greater couple satisfaction. 


Accessing New Social Systems 

Some clients have either no social support system or one 
that strongly supports heavy drinking. For such clients, 
it is important to access new systems that either reinforce 
abstinence or are incompatible with heavy drinking. 
Self-help groups are one potential source of such 
support. Because many religious groups are against the 
use of alcohol, serious involvement in such a group also 
may support abstinence. Many group activities are incompatible 
with drinking: Running, hiking, or cycling 
groups are examples. Unfortunately, alcohol can be involved 
in almost any activity, and therapist and client 
need to look carefully at activity groups to determine 
whether the group norm includes drinking. 

In summary, decisions about the social context of alcoholism 
treatment are complicated. The initial assessment 
should involve at least one significant other. The 
results of the assessment should reveal persons who are 
most available for treatment, and who might be sources 
of support and reinforcement. For some clients with no 

readily accessible supports, new support systems need 
to be developed. 

Long‑Term Maintenance 

Relapse Prevention 

Marlatt and Gordon’s (1985) RP model and Witkiewitz 
and Marlatt’s (2004) revised RP model are comprehensive 
treatment models; Epstein and McCrady’s (2009) 
cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) manual provides 
specific RP exercises in the last several treatment sessions. 
Many elements of the RP treatment model already 
have been described—identifying high-risk situations 
for drinking, developing alternative strategies to 
cope with high-risk situations, enhancing self-efficacy 
for coping, dealing with positive expectancies about 
the use of alcohol, and facilitating the development of 
a balanced lifestyle. An additional and important part 
of the RP model is addressing the possibility of relapse, 
and developing preventive and responsive strategies related 
to relapse. 

Clients are told that use of alcohol after treatment is 
not uncommon, and treatment addresses this possibility. 
Two basic strategies are used. First, a client is helped 
to develop a list of signs of an impending relapse, including 
behavioral, cognitive, interpersonal, and affective 
signs. If a client’s spouse/partner is part of the 
treatment, he/she contributes to the list. After this list 
is developed, a set of possible responses, should these 
signs arise, is developed. Most important is for the client 
to recognize that these warning signs should trigger 
action rather than inaction and fatalistic cognitions 
about the inevitability of relapse. A second set of strategies 
involves response to drinking or heavy drinking. 
The clinician attempts to address the possibility of the 
AVE by calling attention to the possibility that a client 
may have catastrophic thoughts if he/she drinks and 
helping him/her rehearse alternative thoughts. Marlatt 
and Gordon (1985) also suggested a series of behavioral 
steps: Introduce a behavioral delay (1–2 hours) between 
an initial drink and any subsequent drinks; get out of 
the immediate drinking situation; conduct a functional 
analysis of the drinking situation during that time; review 
possible negative consequences of drinking; and 
call someone who might be helpful. Some research 
evidence supports the use of such RP approaches. For 
example, we found in our own research (McCrady, Epstein, 
& Hirsch, 1999) that including RP procedures as 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

part of conjoint alcoholism treatment was successful 
in reducing the length of relapse episodes compared 
to conjoint CBT without RP. O’Farrell, Choquette, and 
Cutter (1998), who incorporated RP techniques into 
their couple therapy treatment by providing additional 
therapy sessions over the 12 months after initial treatment, 
reported less frequent drinking among couples 
who received the additional therapy. 

Maintaining Contact with Clients 

Time-limited treatment is appropriate and effective for 
many clients, and there is good evidence of long-term, 
sustained improvement following a course of outpatient 
treatment (Project MATCH Research Group, 1998). 
However, periods of relapse are common. The clinical 
strategies I have described for RP are intended to minimize 
periods of problem use and to maximize positive 
outcomes. For some clients, however, alcohol dependence 
must be viewed as chronic, relapsing disorder 
(McLellan et al., 2000). As with other chronic health 
problems, such as diabetes or rheumatoid arthritis, 
acute care models that treat individuals and send them 
on their way may be inappropriate and ineffective. An 
alternative strategy provides longer-term, low-intensity 
contact over an extended time interval (McKay et al., 
2011). 

During the initial treatment of a client with a history 
of severe alcohol dependence, multiple treatment 
episodes, and difficulty maintaining successful change, 
the clinician may elect to set a different expectancy 
with that client—that some form of contact will be ongoing 
and long-term. 

Lee, a 54-year-old married man, came to treatment 
with problems with alcohol dependence and agoraphobia. 
Treatment focused on both disorders, and he was 
successful in becoming abstinent from alcohol and in 
gradually increasing the distances that he could drive 
by himself. Lee’s home was an hour’s drive from my 
office, and treatment had gone on for almost 12 months 
before he could drive to my office without his wife 
accompanying him. By the end of the year, we were 
meeting every 2 to 3 weeks. Given that Lee had been 
abstinent for a year and was functioning well, we discussed 
the possibility of termination. His response was 
instructive: 

lee: Doctor, I’ve been drinking a long, long time. One 

year is just a drop in the bucket in comparison. I 

think that I need to keep seeing you. 

tHeraPist: Lee, I understand your concerns, but 
you’ve been doing well for quite a long time now. 
Maybe we should just cut down more on how often 
you come in. How about an appointment in a month, 
and making it a bit shorter—a half-hour instead of 
an hour? 

lee: I think that’s a good idea. Let’s try it. 

I gradually tapered the frequency and length of my 
sessions with Lee, and saw him twice per year, 15 
minutes per session, for the last 3½ years of his 5-year 
course of treatment. He described the importance of 
the sessions: “I just know I’ll have to see you and tell 
you what I’ve been doing. It keeps me honest.” 

Management of Complicating Conditions 

As I described earlier in the chapter, clients with 
AUDs may present with myriad other complicating 
conditions. The clinician must assess and develop a 
treatment plan for the multiple needs of such clients. 
At a minimum, clinicians should consider possible 
problems related to housing, transportation, income, 
occupation/employment, the legal system, the family, 
child care, medical conditions, and comorbid psychological 
disorders. Knowledge of services and agencies 
in the local community and the development of working 
relationships with a range of agencies are essential 
to the treatment of complicated clients. Rose, Zweben, 
Ockert, and Baier (2013) provide a comprehensive 
framework for interfacing with other health and social 
systems. 

The Role of Self‑Help Groups 

Types of self-help groups were described in an earlier 
section of this chapter. Various therapeutic strategies 
may facilitate involvement in a self-help group, when 
appropriate. The clinician should first assess whether 
a client may be a good candidate for self-help group 
involvement. Clients with very high social anxiety or 
social phobia, clients who believe that a person should 
take care of problems alone, and those with a history 
of negative experiences with self-help groups may be 
poorer candidates. Conversely, affiliative clients, those 
who are used to solving problems with assistance from 
others, those who are particularly anxious and concerned 
about their drinking, those whose social support 
systems strongly support continued heavy drink



Alcohol Use Disorders 

ing, and those with more severe alcohol dependence are 
particularly good candidates for AA. Persons who are 
interested in the social support aspects of self-help but 
explicitly reject some of the constructs associated with 
AA (e.g., powerlessness or spirituality) may be best 
served by referral to an alternative self-help group. 

As with all aspects of the therapy, the clinician should 
use a client-centered approach to the introduction of 
AA or other self-help groups. Such an approach suggests 
a dialogue between client and therapist, acknowledgment 
and discussion of the client’s perceptions and 
concerns, and development of a mutually agreed-upon 
plan. Because many clients have misconceptions about 
AA and are unfamiliar with some of the alternative 
organizations, the clinician should be prepared to describe 
the organizations and answer questions. It also 
is helpful for the clinician to have some basic publications 
from each group available in the office. At times, 
I may encourage a reluctant client to try a few meetings 
to sample firsthand what actually occurs. We negotiate 
a very short-term agreement for a specified number of 
meetings in a specified length of time (e.g., six meetings 
in 3 weeks); we agree that if the client continues to 
be negative or reluctant after trying the groups, then we 
will abandon this idea; and we discuss the client’s experiences 
and perceptions of the self-help group meeting 
in each therapy session. I use behavioral sampling with 
other aspects of therapy as well: Clients often cannot 
visualize how a strategy might work without trying it— 
be it a relaxation technique, an AA meeting, or an assertive 
response—and I encourage clients to be open to 
new strategies. In AA, newcomers may be told, “Your 
best thinking got you here,” which suggests that their 
own coping strategies have been ineffective. Behavioral 
sampling is based on this same construct. 

Therapist Variables 

As with any form of therapy, the therapist’s relationship 
and the therapeutic stance he/she assumes with 
the client are important. Empathy, active listening, 
instillation of hope, flexible application of therapeutic 
principles and techniques, and establishment of a sense 
that therapist and client are working toward mutually 
agreed-upon goals are essential. Research suggests 
that in contrast to a confrontational style, an empathic, 
motivational style is associated with better treatment 
outcomes, and that confrontational behaviors by the 
therapist tend to elicit defensive and counteraggressive 
behaviors by the client (Miller, Benefield, & Tonigan, 

1993; Miller & Rollnick, 2002). Such responses are 
hardly conducive to a constructive therapeutic alliance. 

Working with a client with an AUD often is difficult 
because of both the client’s behavior during treatment 
and his/her history of drinking-related behaviors that 
the therapist may find repugnant or upsetting. The client 
may lie about or minimize drinking during treatment. 
If the spouse/partner is also involved in the treatment, 
the therapeutic relationship becomes even more 
complicated. 

By treating a client with a drinking problem along 
with a spouse/partner who wants that client to stop or 
decrease drinking, the therapist is allied de facto with 
the spouse/partner. The partner may attempt to enhance 
his/her alliance with the therapist by echoing the 
therapist’s comments, expressing anger at the client’s 
behavior, being confrontational, or, alternatively, being 
submissive and allowing the client to be verbally aggressive 
or dominant. 

Certain therapist attitudes and behaviors appear to 
be conducive to successful treatment. First is a sense 
of empathy with the client. The therapist must develop 
some understanding of the client’s subjective experience 
of entering therapy and the difficulty of admitting 
behaviors that are personally embarrassing and often 
not socially sanctioned. In addition, the therapist needs 
to have some appreciation of the incredible difficulties 
involved with long-term change in drinking behavior. 
He/she may develop this appreciation by attempting to 
change his/her own deeply ingrained behavior pattern 
by attending meetings of some self-help group (e.g., 
AA, SMART Recovery) and listening carefully to clients. 


A second important therapist skill is the ability 
to distinguish between the person and the drinkingrelated 
behavior. The client needs to be able to describe 
drinking-related actions without feeling either that the 
therapist is repulsed or that the therapist condones or 
accepts such behaviors. This is a delicate balance to 
achieve, especially when a client describes drinking 
episodes in a joking manner that may hide embarrassment 
or disgust with the behavior. The client’s motivation 
to change may be enhanced by discussing negative, 
drinking-related behaviors and experiencing the negative 
affect associated with thinking about those actions. 
The therapist also should communicate a sense of hope 
to the client by anticipating positive changes that might 
be associated with changes in drinking, and by emphasizing 
that it is possible to change. Thus, the implied 
message to the client is as follows: 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

“You have done many things when drinking that are 
distressing to you and to the people around you. The 
fact that you are in treatment is a statement that you 
want to change. It is important to talk about things 
you have done when drinking because being aware 
of them will strengthen your desire to stop drinking 
and to stop doing these things. Making changes 
will take time and a lot of work on your part, but I 
believe that you will be successful if you stick with 
treatment.” 

In other words, the therapist’s message is positive 
about change, but negative about drinking-related behavior. 


A third important therapist quality is integrity. Both 
because of their discomfort and their reinforcement 
history, it is difficult for some clients to honestly report 
their drinking episodes, failed homework assignments, 
or their feelings and attitudes about being in treatment. 
The therapist can acknowledge how difficult it 
is to be honest given that lying was probably adaptive 
in the past, but he/she must make it clear that part of 
therapy involves learning how to be honest. The therapist 
also must provide a positive model of integrity. 
He/she should not ignore the smell of alcohol on a client’s 
breath, and he/she should review the homework 
assigned each week. Attending to the client’s behavior 
teaches the client the importance of following through 
on commitments and increases the chances that therapist 
and client will be able to identify problems and 
blocks to progress in treatment. 

The therapist also must set clear expectations about 
both the client’s and his/her own responsibilities to the 
therapy, and must be able to set appropriate limits. The 
therapist should set clear expectations for the client: 
coming to scheduled sessions on time, calling if unable 
to attend, paying the bill for therapy, coming in sober, 
and completing assigned homework. The therapist also 
should make his/her own commitment to therapy clear, 
by being at sessions on time, being reasonably available 
by telephone, providing coverage when away, and providing 
treatments with demonstrated empirical support 
for their effectiveness. Being clear about expectations 
for the client’s behavior during therapy emphasizes the 
therapist’s commitment to therapy as a serious process. 

Client Variables 

Only a few client characteristics are consistent predictors 
of treatment outcome (Haaga, McCrady, & Lebow, 

2006). Clients who have positive expectancies about 
the outcomes of treatment tend to have better outcomes. 
Additionally, clients with greater readiness to change 
have more positive outcomes. Finally, clients with more 
severe problems have poorer outcomes. Both treatment 
expectancies and readiness to change can be influenced 
by the therapist. 

The clinician must be aware of and sensitive to a 
number of issues that persons with drinking problems 
bring to treatment. The client’s emotional experience, 
his/her beliefs, attitudes, and physical state (described 
in the section on treatment settings), and the social context 
of drinking (described in the section on the social 
context of drinking) are all important aspects of the 
therapeutic plan. 

A person has a variety of reactions to the initial realization 
that his/her drinking is causing problems. Most 
commonly, as negative consequences accumulate, an 
individual begins to feel out of control and ashamed 
of the behavior. The person’s actions may be unacceptable 
to his/her self-definition. Thus, financial or work 
irresponsibility, neglecting family members, engaging 
in physical violence, or verbal abuse all may be 
actions about which the individual feels intense guilt 
and self-blame. The prospect of admitting these actions 
to a stranger is frightening and embarrassing, making 
it difficult for a client to discuss drinking-associated 
problems. Because many clients ascribe their problems 
to weakness or lack of willpower, and believe that if 
they were only “stronger” these events would not occur, 
they blame themselves. Thus, clients are unusually 
sensitive to implied criticisms from the therapist. The 
therapist can attenuate this difficulty by making empathic 
comments while asking questions, letting clients 
know that their actions are common among people who 
drink heavily, and listening to clients’ descriptions of 
drinking-related actions in an accepting manner. Clients 
also hold a number of beliefs and attitudes about 
alcohol and their ability to change that make change 
difficult. People with AUDs have positive expectancies 
about the effects of alcohol on feelings and behavior, 
and they hold these more strongly than do people without 
drinking problems. They may attribute their drinking 
to reasons external to themselves and believe that 
they are not personally responsible for either drinking 
or changing. They may have low self-efficacy beliefs 
about their ability to change their drinking or to handle 
alcohol-related situations without drinking, or they 
may have unrealistically high self-efficacy beliefs that 
are not grounded in actuality. Finally, if people stop 


Alcohol Use Disorders 

drinking and then consume alcohol again, cognitive 
dissonance may occur; they may experience the AVE 
(Marlatt & Gordon, 1985), characterized by an excessively 
negative reaction to initial alcohol consumption, 
and a self-perception that they have “blown” their abstinence 
and will inevitably relapse to the previous drinking 
pattern. 

case stuDy 

In the preceding sections, I have presented case examples 
to illustrate the application of parts of our treatment 
model. In this section, I present a complete outpatient 
therapy case to illustrate a number of the issues 
described earlier in the context of ongoing treatment. 
The couple was part of a research project evaluating 
different approaches to the maintenance of change following 
conjoint behavioral alcoholism treatment (Mc-
Crady et al., 1999). 

Couples in the study had to have been married or 
cohabitating for at least 6 months; neither partner could 
have a primary problem with the use of illicit drugs or 
show evidence of gross cognitive impairment or psychosis; 
and only the male partner could show evidence 
of alcohol abuse or dependence. All couples were seen 
by a therapist for 15–17 sessions of weekly outpatient 
treatment, and agreed to a baseline assessment and 18 
months of posttreatment follow-up. 

Carl and Maria were married, and both were 32 years 
old. They came to treatment because of Carl’s drinking. 
Maria was of average height, had long, black, wavy hair 
and was heavy. Carl was also of average height, had 
blond hair, and was slim but showed the beginnings of a 
“beer belly.” Both were neat and attractive. The couple 
had been married 5 years and had known each other for 
12 years. They had two boys, ages 2 and 3. Both came 
from intact families, although Carl’s father had died a 
number of years previously. Carl’s family was primarily 
Polish; Maria’s was Italian. 

At the time of treatment, Carl and Maria had been 
separated for 5 months. He was living with his mother 
in her home; Maria was renting a one-bedroom apartment 
in a poor community, where she lived with the 
two boys. Maria was a trained cosmetologist; Carl was 
an electrician who worked out of the union hall. Carl 
was not working at the time because he did not want to 
establish a pattern of support for Maria or the children 
in case she filed for divorce. In addition, if he did not 
work for a certain period of time, Carl would be able to 

withdraw his money from the union’s pension plan, and 
he thought that would be an easy way to obtain money. 
Maria was not working because she had decided that 
Carl would have to babysit while she worked, and she 
did not think that he would be reliable about coming 
to her apartment to care for the children. She was supported 
by Aid to Families with Dependent Children 
(AFDC); Carl worked odd jobs “under the table.” Both 
were high school graduates. 

The couple came to treatment at Maria’s urging. She 
was very concerned about Carl’s drinking and cited it 
as the primary reason for their marital separation. 

Behavioral Assessment 
and Case Conceptualization 

Carl and Maria were assessed using several approaches. 
Their assessment was somewhat more extensive than is 
usual in clinical practice because of their involvement 
with the treatment research project. However, the main 
elements of the assessment are applicable to clinical 
practice as well. 

Drinking Assessment 

To assess his drinking, we used a clinical interview to 
ask Carl about his drinking history and perceptions 
of his current drinking. A handheld Breathalyzer was 
used at the beginning of each session to assess his current 
BAL. In addition, we used two structured interviews, 
the TLFB (Sobell & Sobell, 1995) and the Alcohol 
section of the Composite International Diagnostic 
Interview—Substance Abuse Module (CIDI-SAM; 
Robins et al., 1988), to obtain a more complete picture 
of his drinking. Maria was present for all interviews 
and contributed additional information. 

The TLFB inquires about drinking behavior on each 
day in a set window of time before treatment. For this 
study, we asked about Carl’s drinking in the prior 6 
months, cueing his recall of drinking by noting other 
salient events in his and Maria’s lives, such as social 
events, medical appointments, holidays, and other celebrations. 
The TLFB revealed that Carl had drunk alcohol 
virtually every day of the previous 6 months. His 
only abstinent day was when he and some friends were 
arrested for attempted breaking and entering. His preferred 
beverages were beer and vodka, and he reported 
that the most he drank on any single day was about 
32 drinks. His usual consumption was in the range of 
10–12 drinks daily. Carl met DSM-IV (the system in 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

effect at the time of assessment) and DSM-5 criteria for 
a diagnosis of severe alcohol dependence with physiological 
dependence. He had been drinking since high 
school and reported having his first problems as a result 
of alcohol at the age of 25. Carl had experienced a variety 
of problem consequences of his use: three arrests 
for DWI, one arrest for breaking and entering, warnings 
from job supervisors for intoxication on the job, 
problems in his relationship with his wife, and the feeling 
that he had neglected his responsibilities to his wife 
and sons. He had experienced numerous blackouts and 
reported many signs of physical dependence, including 
morning drinking, a sense of “panic” when he thought 
he would not be able to obtain a drink when he wanted 
one, and drinking throughout the day. However, Carl 
said that he had never experienced any of the physical 
symptoms of alcohol withdrawal. He also reported 
no health or emotional problems associated with his 
drinking. When asked about his goals for treatment, 
Carl indicated that his own preference was to cut down 
and to drink moderately, but that his wife insisted on 
abstinence, and he was willing to work toward that 
goal. 

We used two assessment techniques to identify antecedents 
to Carl’s drinking, the DPQ (Menges et al., 
2008) and self-recording cards. The DPQ was used to 
assess Carl’s and Maria’s perceptions of drinking antecedents. 
Carl completed the DPQ by checking off all 
antecedents that applied to his drinking in the previous 
6 months, and Maria completed the measure as well, 
to indicate her views of his drinking. They also were 
asked to indicate what they thought were the most influential 
antecedents. Both perceived environmental 
influences as being most important to Carl’s drinking, 
citing as the most salient settings bars and his home, 
afternoons when he was not working, any celebratory 
occasions, and being around others who were drinking. 

The second most important set of drinking cues pertained 
to their relationship, with Carl citing arguments, 
anger, feeling nagged, or having a good time together 
as antecedents. The third area of concern that both Carl 
and Maria cited was physiological antecedents, primarily 
restlessness and fatigue. 

Carl used daily self-recording cards throughout the 
treatment to record drinks and drinking urges. Reviewing 
the information he recorded and discussing events 
associated with drinking or drinking urges made it 
clear that being with heavy-drinking friends was an 
important component of Carl’s drinking. The selfrecording 
cards also clarified factors associated with 

his feelings of “restlessness.” When Carl and Maria 
were together and the children were being active, if he 
wanted to leave or go somewhere, then he would get 
restless and irritable, and want to drink to “take the 
edge off.” Finally, it was apparent that Carl felt like 
drinking whenever Maria reminded him of a commitment 
that he had made (even something simple, such as 
bringing a book to her apartment), when she tried to get 
him to commit to any responsible course of action, or 
when he felt “trapped.” 

We used questionnaires and self-recording cards 
to assess how Maria coped with Carl’s drinking. She 
recorded her perceptions of his drinking each day on 
a Likert scale (None, Light, Moderate, or Heavy) and 
recorded her daily marital satisfaction as well. Her responses 
antecedent to and consequent to drinking episodes 
were discussed in the therapy sessions. In addition, 
both partners completed a modified version of the 
Coping Questionnaire (Orford et al., 2005). 

Data from these assessment sources made it apparent 
that Maria often questioned Carl about his actions, 
threatened him, or pleaded with him not to drink. She 
had reacted to his drinking in a number of negative 
ways—by separating from him, calling the police, and 
refusing to have sex with him. At the same time, she 
had made serious efforts to support him and encourage 
his abstinence by doing positive things with Carl when 
he did not drink, doing nice things for him, or talking 
about positive things they could do together if he did 
not drink. 

Marital Relationship 

We assessed the couple’s relationship by administering 
the ACQ (Margolin et al., 1983) and the DAS (Spanier, 
1976), and by viewing a videotape of the couple discussing 
a problem in their relationship. Maria had a 
number of major concerns about their relationship. In 
addition to Carl’s drinking, she was concerned about 
his apparent lack of responsibility, citing his unwillingness 
to work, to care for the children, or to be independent 
of his mother. In general, Maria felt that Carl could 
not be relied upon for concrete or emotional support. A 
second concern that she expressed was their role definitions. 
She felt that Carl dictated her role to her, and 
that she allowed him to do so. She often felt angry and 
resentful as a result. Finally, she cited Carl’s mother as 
a problem, describing her as an “enabler” who rescued 
Carl from his problems and made no demands upon 
him. She stated that when she and Carl first dated, they 


Alcohol Use Disorders 

liked to drink, stay out late, ride motorcycles, and have 
a good time, but she felt that it was now time to “move 
forward” with their lives and “get somewhere.” 

Carl had fewer marital concerns. He disliked Maria’s 
“nagging” him or discussing his drinking, stating 
at one point, “If I had a different wife, I wouldn’t have 
a drinking problem.” He also disliked her “persistence” 
in wanting to discuss topics at length and her “attitude 
change” when he drank. 

A videotape of their interactions revealed several 
communication problems. Carl and Maria interrupted 
each other frequently and did not listen to each other’s 
comments. Each made frequent sarcastic and biting 
comments about the other, usually stating these with a 
smile and a funny comment. Maria complained about 
her excessive responsibilities, and Carl criticized her 
for not fulfilling her responsibilities but refused to acknowledge 
any responsibilities of his own. 

Despite these considerable marital problems, they 
enjoyed each other’s company, shared many activities 
and pleasures (e.g., fishing, going to parks with the 
children), and had a very positive sexual relationship. 
Maria said of their relationship, “We get along great 
when I don’t demand anything.” 

Behavioral Formulation 

Carl’s drinking appeared to have developed in a social 
context, with virtually all his drinking occurring 
within social groups with similar drinking patterns. 
The pattern was reinforced by these positive social interactions, 
both with friends and (early in their relationship) 
with Maria. He had developed significant tolerance 
for alcohol, so that he could consume increasingly 
large amounts, resulting in a pattern of daily drinking 
with some signs of physical dependence on alcohol. 
For Carl, alcohol provided a number of positive consequences: 
He enjoyed the tastes and sensations associated 
with drinking, the social context of drinking, and 
the feelings of relaxation that drinking engendered. 
Although he had accumulated a number of significant 
negative consequences of drinking, none had affected 
his internal perceptions of himself or of alcohol. From 
his perspective, negative consequences were imposed 
on him by others—the police, job supervisors, and his 
wife. In addition, Carl had been able to avoid responsibility 
for his actions in many areas of his life. When he 
did not work, he was able to live with his mother, who 
shielded him from the negative consequences of not 
working by providing shelter and food for him. When 

Carl’s wife made demands that he experienced as aversive, 
he avoided or ignored her. To some degree, his 
problems with alcohol were accentuated by their different 
developmental stages: Maria was ready to move to a 
more adult stage of life, with increased responsibilities 
and long-term goals; Carl, in contrast, wanted to maintain 
the lifestyle and behavior patterns of his early 20s. 

Despite Carl’s externalizing attributions for his problems 
and his tendency to avoid negative consequences 
and responsibility, his wife and children were important 
to him, and he did not want to lose them from his 
life. Therefore, he came to treatment to maintain these 
desired reinforcers, but not necessarily to make the behavior 
changes his wife saw as necessary for them to 
have a successful long-term marriage. 

As treatment progressed (see below), Carl engaged 
in a variety of maneuvers to maintain the relationship 
but avoid behavior change, and his wife, and at times 
the therapist, reinforced these behaviors. Maria had a 
limited repertoire of effective ways to obtain positive 
reinforcers for herself. She appeared to expect most 
positive feelings to come from external sources, and 
nagging and criticizing were the only verbal behaviors 
she used to try to get what she wanted. She reinforced 
Carl’s drinking by continuing to have contact with 
him but engaged in aversive negative verbal behavior 
at the same time. She placed responsibility for her 
happiness with Carl, stating that she could not work 
(something she enjoyed a great deal) until he stopped 
drinking and was more responsible, and that she could 
not lose weight until he stopped drinking and she was 
less upset. 

As a couple, Carl and Maria lacked the verbal skills 
to discuss these very major problems. Aversive control, 
avoidance of responsibility, and lack of empathic communication 
characterized their interactions. 

Preparing the Client for Change 

Carl and Maria were seen together for all phases of the 
evaluation. In the initial evaluation, both spouses were 
asked to describe their perceptions of Carl’s drinking, 
their relationship, and how each had attempted to cope 
with Carl’s drinking. By seeing the couple together, I 
communicated my view that the drinking was intimately 
connected to their relationship, and that each spouse 
would need to examine his/her own behavior to effect 
positive changes. At the end of the evaluation, I provided 
them with feedback about the main difficulties 
that I perceived (as summarized earlier), and oriented 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

them to the plan for treatment. In discussing the treatment 
plan, I covered the following: 

“We have asked you to come to treatment as a couple. 
This is because drinking affects many areas of 
your life, including your marriage and your family. I 
know from what you have said, Maria, that you have 
tried many different ways to cope with Carl’s drinking, 
and that you have been angry and frustrated at 
times. It is clear that you have tried to help, but it 
seems, Carl, that you mostly have resented it when 
Maria has said anything about your drinking. During 
treatment we will look at your drinking, how you 
have tried to cope with it, and how the two of you are 
getting along as a couple. Right now the two of you 
are separated, and you have a lot of concerns about 
your relationship. As we go along in the therapy, I 
will help you improve your communication, and I 
will ask you to try new ways to spend time together 
and discuss problems. The therapy will focus on 
three main topics—your drinking, Carl, how you, 
Maria, have coped with it, and how to cope in ways 
that work better for both of you, and for your relationship 
with each other.” 

In addition to this overall orientation, which both 
Carl and Maria felt captured their goals for the treatment, 
we discussed Carl’s drinking goals in more detail 
and made plans for how to achieve those goals. As 
indicated earlier, Carl’s preferred drinking goal was 
moderate drinking. However, Maria felt strongly that 
she wanted him to abstain, and he had agreed to that 
goal prior to coming to treatment. Since he had been 
drinking daily and showed evidence of tolerance to alcohol, 
I was concerned that he would not be able to stop 
drinking without assistance. I therefore discussed with 
him the possibility of being detoxified under medical 
supervision: 

“I am concerned, Carl, that it will be difficult for you 
to stop drinking on your own. You drink every day 
and have been drinking a lot. On the questionnaires, 
you indicated that you ‘panic’ if you think that you 
will not be able to get any alcohol, and you typically 
drink throughout the day. All of these things suggest 
to me that you may be ‘hooked’ on alcohol, and that 
your body will have a strong reaction to going without 
any alcohol at all. The easiest way to get through 
the first few days without drinking is to check into 

a hospital detoxification program, and I would like 
you to consider it.” 

Carl had a very negative reaction to the thought of 
being hospitalized. He was afraid of being “locked up,” 
and said, “I know that I would go crazy. I can’t stand 
being confined. After 24 hours I would just have to 
leave. It’s not a good idea.” I was most interested in engaging 
Carl in treatment, so I thought it inappropriate 
to try to force Carl to enter a detoxification center. I was 
certain that if I made brief hospitalization a prerequisite 
to further treatment, he would leave treatment completely. 
Therefore, we developed a plan to achieve abstinence. 
The plan had two major components: (1) Carl 
was to come to therapy sessions sober, and his BAL 
would be verified by breath alcohol test reading; and 

(2) Carl would set goals to reduce his drinking gradually, 
with a target date for abstinence 6 weeks hence. If 
he was not able to achieve either goal, then we would 
reevaluate the need for supervised detoxification. He 
was amenable to this agreement, as was Maria. 
Process of Treatment 

The course of treatment is described sequentially 
to provide the reader with the clearest picture of the 
progress and pitfalls of a fairly typical therapy case. 
The treatment covered several major areas: (1) helping 
Carl to reduce, then stop his drinking; (2) teaching 
Carl skills to maintain abstinence; (3) enhancing Carl’s 
perception of his drinking as problematic; (4) teaching 
Maria more constructive coping strategies; (5) teaching 
the couple how to engage in positive interactions; 
and (6) teaching the couple mutual problem-solving 
techniques. In addition, as treatment progressed, we 
focused on some other areas of individual behavioral 
change for Maria. 

Intake and Sessions 1–2 

At the initial intake session, Carl had a BAL of greater 
than 400 mg%. Although he did not show gross signs of 
intoxication, he was belligerent, and the clinician doing 
the intake did not feel that he could conduct a reasonable 
intake interview. He suggested that Carl receive 
medical attention because his BAL was so high, but 
Carl refused, and the clinician rescheduled the intake. 
At the rescheduled appointment, Carl was sober and 
able to provide information, to give informed consent 


Alcohol Use Disorders 

for the research aspects of the program, and to schedule 
the baseline data collection session. 

At the first treatment session, however, Carl again 
had an elevated BAL (120 mg%). He acknowledged 
only having had “a couple of beers” and insisted that 
he was fine. We briefly discussed Carl’s and Maria’s 
concerns and goals, but I suggested that we would not 
be able to have a very productive session with Carl’s 
BAL so high. (My general policy is to reschedule a 
treatment session if the client’s BAL is greater than 50 
mg%.) Carl agreed to come to the next session sober 
and to have no more than four drinks per day. I gave 
Carl and Maria self-recording cards, on which I asked 
them to record drinks, drinking urges, and marital satisfaction 
on a daily basis. Carl was given one card for 
each day and was asked to record each drink he actually 
consumed, to note urges to drink not followed 
by drinking, and to note on the back of the card the 
situations in which he drank or had urges to drink (see 
Figure 13.3). 

Maria received one card to use for the entire week. I 
asked her to write on the card a daily estimate of Carl’s 
drinking (None, Light, Moderate, or Heavy) and also to 
record her estimate of the strength of his urges to drink 
that day. She also made a daily rating of her marital 
satisfaction (see Figure 13.4). 

When Carl and Maria came to the second session, 
his BAL was again elevated, at 60 mg%. He reported 
drinking about four beers during the day. We continued 
the discussion of detoxification, and Carl said that he 
felt he was addicted to alcohol. He said that he would 
consider detoxification, and we scheduled a phone conversation 
to discuss detoxification further. After we 
spoke twice by phone, Carl again decided that he did 
not want to be hospitalized. He did not use the selfrecording 
cards during these first 2 weeks, although 
Maria completed his cards for him while they drove 
to the treatment session. I did not feel that I had a clear 
picture of Carl’s drinking, but it was clear that he was 
continuing to drink daily. 

Sessions 3–5 

Carl came to the third session with a BAL of 0 mg%. 
He again reiterated his desire to stop drinking without 
hospitalization, and we worked out a plan for him to 
reduce his number of drinks gradually to zero over a 
6-week time period. In addition to setting drinking 
goals, we began to discuss a behavioral-analytic view 

of drinking. To introduce the couple to a behavioral 
way of thinking about their drinking, I said: 

“Together we are going to observe carefully and 
analyze all the factors that seem to be part of your 
drinking. I think that we can look at your drinking 
and figure out what kinds of situations lead you to 
feel like drinking. If we can figure this out, then we 
can work together to come up with alternatives for 
these situations. We will be using these sheets, called 
‘triggers’ sheets, to analyze your drinking. Let’s go 
through one of these together.” 

I then asked Carl to identify a recent drinking situation. 
He indicated that he liked to drink when he went 
fishing. As we spoke, I completed the boxes on the 
“triggers” sheet, illustrated in Figure 13.7. Carl had a 
fairly nonpsychological view of his drinking. He described 
his thoughts as “I want to get some beer” and 
his feelings as “happy.” He viewed drinking when fishing 
as having positive consequences—“I have a blast.” 
He felt that the only negative consequences came from 
Maria, who would be angry when he came home. 

Carl and Maria grasped the behavioral analysis 
quickly and found it a comfortable way to conceptualize 
his drinking. As homework, I then asked both 
of them to complete the DPQ and bring it to the next 
treatment session. I gave them additional self-recording 
cards to use for the week. 

Carl also came to the fourth session sober but reported 
heavy drinking over the weekend. The graph 
of his weekly alcohol consumption during treatment is 
reproduced in Figure 13.8. Carl’s and Maria’s average 
weekly marital satisfaction ratings are reproduced in 
Figure 13.9. Carl expressed no concern about his continued 
heavy drinking, and showed no evidence that he 
was trying to cut down. 

“I am glad that you have come to the last two sessions 
sober—I know that’s not easy for you, and it does 
show that you want treatment to succeed. However, 
I am concerned that you have not cut down at all 
between sessions. If anything, your drinking seems 
a bit heavier. It’s not clear to me whether you don’t 
really want to cut down, or whether you just don’t 
know how.” 

Carl said that it was hard to cut down, but that he was 
committed to stop drinking because he wanted to have 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 


figUre 13.7. “Triggers” sheet. 


figUre 13.8. Carl’s weekly alcohol consumption. Areas marked “a” represent missing self-recording data. 


Alcohol Use Disorders 


figUre 13.9. Carl and Maria’s weekly marital satisfaction. Areas marked “a” represent missing self-recording data. 

Maria and the boys back again. We then discussed a 
number of potential strategies to help him avoid drinking, 
such as sleeping (his suggestion) or having alternative 
beverages available in the house (my suggestion), 
or going back to work (Maria’s suggestion). He was reluctant 
to commit to any plans, and Maria challenged 
whether he was really willing to stop drinking. 

To respond to Carl’s ambivalence, I suggested that 
we examine consequences of his drinking other than 
Maria’s disapproval and the couple’s arguments about 
his drinking. Carl was unable to think of any other adverse 
consequences. I asked him about his legal problems 
from the DWIs and the arrest for breaking and 
entering, but Carl said that he did not believe alcohol 
had anything to do with the latter charge, and that DWI 
laws were “ridiculous.” He also indicated that he was 
still driving, even though he did not have a driver’s license, 
and that he would continue to drive even if his 
license was revoked for 10 years (a real possibility, 
given that he had had three DWIs in less than 10 years, 
with two in the same month). Carl expressed a similar 
lack of concern about any other aspects of his drinking 
but again said that he was willing to stop because 
of his commitment to the marriage and his children. 
I made a list of the negative consequences that he or 
Maria had reported at various times and asked him to 
review the list at least twice daily, and to think about 
which of these consequences were of concern to him. 

Carl reported looking at the list “once or twice” between 
sessions, but he was relatively indifferent to the 
content. 

Despite my concern about Carl’s relative lack of motivation 
to change, I decided to proceed with a behavioral 
analysis of his drinking. I thought that if we could 
identify a discrete set of antecedents to drinking, and if 
Carl could successfully avoid drinking in some of these 
situations some of the time, his motivation to change 
might increase as his self-efficacy increased. We discussed 
two other drinking situations in the session 
and, as homework, I had him complete two behavioral 
chains at home. A complete summary of the behavioral 
analysis of his drinking is provided in Figure 13.10. 

Carl came to the next treatment session with a BAL 
of 118 mg% and reported drinking heavily for the last 
several days prior to the treatment session. After a 
lengthy discussion, he agreed to go for detoxification. 
Carl said he was afraid of the hospitalization and concerned 
that he would not be able to be abstinent after 
detoxification. I tried to emphasize that the detoxification 
was only the first step in treatment, and that we 
would be working together to help him learn ways of 
coping without drinking. 

He also expressed his belief that life would not be 
fun if he did not drink. Maria oscillated between encouraging 
Carl to get detoxified and saying to me that 
he was only agreeing to the detoxification to get out 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 


figUre 13.10. Sample behavioral analysis of Carl’s drinking. 


Alcohol Use Disorders 

of my office. Because he was so concerned, I had him 
call the detoxification center from my office to ask any 
questions he had. He did so, and scheduled himself for 
admission the next day. 

Sessions 6–8 

Carl did not admit himself for detoxification and stated 
again that he could not face being “locked up.” He was 
still drinking daily, making minimal efforts to decrease 
his drinking. I suggested outpatient detoxification and 
gave him the phone number of a physician colleague 
who supervised outpatient detoxification, but I had little 
expectation that he would follow through with that 
referral either. Carl continued to express willingness to 
be in treatment and to change his drinking, and I decided 
to continue despite my doubts about whether he 
had sufficient incentives to change. We completed the 
behavioral analysis of his drinking during the sixth session 
and identified several of Maria’s actions that were 
antecedents to his drinking, including reminding him 
about responsibilities, her slow pace when they had an 
appointment and there was a lot to do to get themselves 
and their children ready to go out, and her comments 
about his drinking. 

At one point during Session 6, Carl said, “You know, 
Maria has a real temper. You should ask her what she 
did to me at the beach.” Maria responded immediately 
by saying, “Show Barbara your arms.” Carl rolled up 
his sleeves, revealing a number of scratches and bruises 
covering his lower forearms. Maria then explained that 
she had been intensely frustrated with Carl because of 
his drinking, and often grabbed him, scratched him, or 
tried to hit him in the chest or abdomen when she was 
angry. The behavior had started in the last 4 months, 
and she found it very upsetting. She also indicated her 
concern that she might become abusive toward her 
children and admitted that she sometimes used physical 
punishment when she was angry at them. Although 
Maria’s anger and frustration were not surprising and 
are common reactions of partners of people with alcoholism, 
the physical aggression, particularly in the 
absence of any physical abuse from Carl, was less 
usual. We discussed her behavior toward the children 
in great detail because I was concerned about whether 
there was any evidence of child abuse. She reported, 
and Carl confirmed, that she had never bruised, cut, 
or injured the children in any way, and that they had 
never had to take either of the children to a physician 
or emergency room because of her discipline. Both re


ported the belief that physical punishment, in the form 
of “swats on the bum” or physically removing the child 
from a dangerous situation, was an appropriate form of 
discipline. However, Maria felt that she did not always 
discipline the children rationally, and that she would 
occasionally hit them on the arm, or pull too hard when 
removing them from a situation. From the couple’s 
reports, I did not believe that Maria was abusing the 
children, but I thought it was important to address her 
concerns in the therapy. I instructed Maria to use the 
self-recording cards to write down any times in the next 
2 weeks when she felt that she was reacting too strongly 
to the children or when she was physically aggressive 
toward Carl. 

Over the next two sessions, Carl began to decrease 
his drinking substantially and was abstinent for each 
treatment session. Carl and Maria had begun to spend 
more time together, and they reported that their time together 
was more positive. They had a family barbecue 
and went fishing at the beach with the children. 

Maria had been faithful in recording her reactions 
to her children, noting two times each week when she 
either slapped one of the children on the arm or felt 
that she grabbed him too hard. We discussed the antecedents 
to these incidents and identified several salient 
aspects: Maria was tired, the child was tired, and she 
attempted to tell him to do something when she could 
not enforce it (she was across the room or had her hands 
full). In each situation, she repeated her verbal instructions 
to the boy several times to no avail, then felt angry 
and stomped across the room and grabbed him. We 
discussed alternative strategies, and I emphasized the 
importance of being able to follow through on a verbal 
instruction immediately rather than allowing herself to 
get frustrated. She quickly picked up on my suggestions 
and also expressed relief at being able to discuss her 
concerns. After the 2-week period, Maria reported no 
further instances of excessive physical reaction to the 
boys, and reported feeling more in control of herself 
as a parent again. Carl’s observations confirmed her 
reports. 

At the same time that we discussed Maria’s problems 
with disciplining the children, we began to implement 
some self-management planning techniques for Carl. I 
suggested to Carl that it would be easier not to drink 
if he had ideas about how to handle certain triggers 
without alcohol. He could avoid situations or rearrange 
them to minimize the importance of alcohol in the situation. 
We used a self-management planning sheet to assist 
in the process (see Figure 13.11). 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

Trigger 
Plan 
Pluses 
Minuses 
How 
Hard 
1. 
2. 


figUre 13.11. Sample self-management planning sheet. 

We selected fishing as a topic for self-management 
planning because it was a high frequency, high-drinking 
activity for him. Carl had a number of ideas about how 
to fish without alcohol. These included taking his older 
son, taking his wife, or inviting an older friend who 
was an excellent fisherman and did not drink at all. 
In addition, Carl thought that if he bought soft drinks 
the night before he went fishing and filled his cooler 
with the sodas before he left the house, he would be 
less tempted to stop by the liquor store at the end of his 
block. For homework, I asked Carl to implement this 
plan, and to develop another self-management plan for 
getting together with a friend without drinking. 

Carl implemented the fishing plan successfully and 
also planned to ask his friend Scott to play tennis, 
then go to a fast-food restaurant to eat because alcohol 
would not be available there. Although Carl saw no obstacles 
to implementing this plan, he never used it, and 
could provide no reasons for not following it up. He did, 
however, tell Scott that he was trying not to drink, and 
his friend reacted positively and supportively. 

The other major topic of these several sessions was 
reinforcement for changes in Carl’s drinking. Because 
Carl was so ambivalent about changing his drinking, 
I thought it particularly important that he experience 
some positive consequences for decreased drinking 
and for abstinence. I also wanted to give Maria some 
positive rather than coercive ways to interact with Carl 
about his drinking. In introducing this topic, I suggested 
that they both should think about ways to make 
abstinence and reduced drinking more positive. I first 
suggested that Maria might give Carl positive feedback 
when he was not drinking, but he reacted quite nega


tively to this suggestion, saying, “I would just think it 
was another one of her sneaky ways to try to pressure 
me to stop. I don’t want her to say anything.” In continuing 
with this discussion, I asked whether there was 
anything that Maria could do that would make abstinence 
worthwhile to him, and Carl suggested that she 
could refrain from talking about alcohol and spend 
time with him without being “picky.” They decided on 
several mutually enjoyable activities to share when he 
was not drinking, such as sharing a shrimp dinner, and 
on having Maria tell Carl when she was enjoying their 
time together. They were able to implement these plans 
successfully, and although Carl drank while they were 
together, the amount was substantially less on these occasions. 


Sessions 9–11 

By this point in the treatment, Carl had reduced his 
drinking to approximately three to six drinks per day, 
but he had not abstained from drinking at all. His reports 
of urges to drink had also begun to decrease. 
Maria reported high marital satisfaction almost every 
day (a rating of 7 on a 1- to 7-point scale), and they were 
spending most of their free time either at her apartment 
or at the home of Carl’s mother. However, in the therapy 
sessions they began to argue more frequently, with their 
conflict revolving around two major topics—Maria’s 
desire to move to North Carolina and her feeling that 
Carl was not emotionally supportive of her. I began to 
implement some structured communication training 
with them, teaching them skills that included allowing 
the other to finish before speaking, reflective listening, 


Alcohol Use Disorders 

and making specific positive requests. These sessions 
were supplemented with handouts about communication. 
After reading the first handout, which covered 
basic topics, such as the value of being polite and respectful 
of one’s spouse, and some of the sources of bad 
communication, they came into the session absolutely 
surprised at the notion that calling each other names 
(e.g., “idiot,” “asshole,” or “shithead”) could have any 
negative impact on their relationship. They had begun 
to use positive rather than negative communication at 
home and were pleased with the impact it had on their 
conversations. 

Although we were making progress in the treatment, 
I was concerned that Carl was still drinking every day, 
and I relayed this concern to him. Carl stated that he believed 
he could now stop, and he agreed to be abstinent 
for 2 days in the following week. The first week that 
he agreed to this contract, Carl did not want to discuss 
strategies for abstinence, and he was unsuccessful. The 
second week we discussed very specific plans for how 
he would abstain. He planned to be with Maria and the 
children for part of each day, and he decided not to buy 
more beer to have in his mother’s house those days. In 
addition, he would stock up on soft drinks and plan to go 
to bed early. I also suggested that he might use Maria as 
a support in his attempts to abstain. I often encourage a 
client to find someone with whom to discuss urges, and 
the partner can be a good source of support. He again 
was resistant to involving Maria, saying, “I wouldn’t tell 
her that I wanted to drink—all I’d get is a lecture.” I suggested 
that he usually disliked her comments because 
they were unsolicited, but in this situation, he would be 
in charge because he would be the person concerned 
about his drinking. He responded positively to this reframing. 
I then asked him whether there was anything 
Maria could say that would be helpful to him, and he 
suggested that she tell him it was his choice. Maria 
indicated that it would be difficult not to lecture, but 
she agreed to a role play. They imagined that they were 
driving to the beach, and Carl said, “I want to stop to 
pick up a six-pack on the way down.” Maria answered, 
“It’s your choice if you want to, but we could stop to get 
some sodas instead, if you want.” Carl was amazed at 
how much he liked her response, and although Maria 
acknowledged that it was very difficult to be that neutral, 
she liked feeling that it was not her responsibility to 
prevent him from drinking. They agreed to try out such 
a discussion once during the coming week. 

Carl was not successful in maintaining any abstinent 
days, although he did implement most of the rest of the 

plans and drank only one beer on each of the 2 target 
days. However, he did not tell Maria about any of his 
urges to drink. He again expressed little concern about 
not meeting his goals. During the session, Carl and 
Maria announced that they were going to North Carolina 
for a 2-week trip. Carl knew a contractor who had 
offered him work there, and Maria was intrigued with 
the possibility of moving to an area with a lower cost 
of living and more rural environment in which to raise 
the children. She stated that she would not move while 
Carl was still drinking, but they both decided that a trip 
to explore the possibilities was appealing. 

Sessions 12–15 

Carl and Maria returned from their 2-week trip very 
enthusiastic about North Carolina. They believed that 
work was available, the cost of living was clearly lower, 
and both of them liked the area they had visited. Maria 
said again that she would not move unless Carl had been 
abstinent for a considerable length of time because she 
did not want to leave her family if she could not depend 
on Carl. He again said that he would stop drinking. I 
had taken advantage of the break in the therapy to review 
all of my progress notes and to think about the 
couple with a bit more detachment. It was clear to me 
that although Carl had agreed to abstinence because 
of Maria’s pressure, he wanted instead to reduce his 
drinking. However, he had dealt with this conflict by 
providing verbal reassurances that his behavior would 
change, without accompanying behavior changes. He 
had implemented only a few of the behavioral plans 
that we had developed, and I did not think that the lack 
of implementation reflected a skills deficit. I had decided 
to point out Carl’s behavioral inconsistencies at 
this treatment session. 

To initiate this discussion, I told Carl and Maria that 
I wanted to discuss their progress so far. I emphasized 
the positive changes that they had made so far: Carl had 
decreased his drinking substantially; he had developed 
some skills to assist him in drinking less; their communication 
had begun to improve; they were spending 
time together that was mutually enjoyable; and they 
had begun to consider possible long-term plans together. 
I noted, however, that Carl had made a series of 
promises about his drinking on which he had not followed 
through. I read them several passages from my 
progress notes, noting Carl’s initial target date for abstinence, 
and his broken agreements about detoxification 
and abstinent days. I suggested two alternative explana



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

tions to them: Either Carl did not want to stop drinking 
completely but felt that he had to agree to abstinence to 
keep Maria happy or he really could not stop drinking 
and needed further assistance to do so. By framing my 
explanations this way, I tried to avoid labeling Carl as 
dishonest or unmotivated to change. I also suggested 
that Maria had helped Carl to keep drinking by reporting 
high marital satisfaction even though he was still 
drinking, and that perhaps reduced drinking really was 
acceptable to her as well. Both reacted quite strongly 
to my feedback. Carl said, “At first I didn’t want to 
stop, but now it doesn’t seem that bad. I’m not drinking 
enough now for it to mean anything, so I’ll just quit. It’s 
no big deal, and I don’t want to disappoint you.” Maria 
said, “I always feel like Carl is just saying whatever he 
has to say to get me or you off his back. But I have been 
so much happier since he cut down that I kind of lost 
sight of that fact that he’s still drinking. I am afraid to 
move anywhere with him while he’s still drinking at 
all. It was so bad before, I don’t want to go back to that.” 

After this conversation, Carl denied that he preferred 
moderate drinking and announced that he was going to 
“quit for good.” Over the next 2 weeks, Carl had one 
drinking day each week—one beer the first week and 
two beers the second week. Although we discussed a 
variety of behavioral coping strategies, such as developing 
behavioral alternatives for drinking situations, 
rehearsing strategies for refusing drinks, and using 
various strategies for coping with urges, Carl deemphasized 
their importance. Instead, he focused on cognitive 
coping strategies: When he had urges to drink, he 
would think about reasons not to drink (“It’s not worth 
it—Maria and the kids are more important”). Or he 
would use delay tactics (“I won’t have anything right 
now—if I still feel like drinking at 5:00 [or some other, 
later time during the day], then I’ll have a beer”). Or 
he would deemphasize the positive aspects of alcohol 
(“One or two beers won’t do anything for me, and I 
don’t want to get blasted”). 

Carl and Maria also began to discuss their long-term 
goals. I asked them to write down how they would like 
their lives to be in 5 years. Carl wrote down the following3: 


Comfortable place to live for Maria and this kids. Good 
schools, backyard. Get finances in order; save money, 
consolidate bills, improve credit. Maintain stable income 
ie. steady construction work or other. Obtain a 
loving relationship with Maria. Self improvement: 
manage money better, listen to Maria more objectivly, 

secure steadier employment. Maria: better self discipline, 
controll temper, improve self confidence, weight 
loss, less pestimistic in dialy matters. ie. scared of bugs, 
traffic, mishaps, etc. 

Maria wrote down remarkably similar 5-year goals: 

Five years from now—37 years old; Jonathan 8 years, 
Marc 7 years. We are living in North Carolina in a 
rented house. I’m working, Carls working the boys are 
in school. We have two cars. Carl is 5 yrs sober. I’m 
4 years thin. We are two yrs away from getting credit 
back from filing bankruptcy. Some nights we will be together 
as a family to relax or to go to a baseball or soccer 
game of Jonathan’s or Marc’s. Other nights I will be 
out to socialize or run errands. Other nights Carl will 
do the same. We will be somewhat financialy comfortable. 
Three things I want out of life: 

Maria: Carl: 
calmness, thinness, motivation, sobriety, 
to feel secure, a car, responsability, 
money, independence, contentedness 
control over my life 

Because Carl and Maria’s goals were so similar, I 
asked them if I could read them aloud. Both were amenable 
to this suggestion, and I did so. They reacted 
quite positively and felt encouraged; because their longterm 
goals were so similar, they could work together to 
achieve these goals. I began to teach them skills related 
to assertiveness and problem solving, discussing ways 
to implement these skills both in their relationship and 
in other interpersonal situations. 

Sessions 16–18 

Carl abstained from drinking from Session 15 to the 
end of the treatment. He reported a few urges to drink, 
but these soon decreased. However, he discussed very 
strong reactions to not drinking. He felt sad, saying 
that he missed drinking and felt that he had lost 
something important to him. He also said that it was 
frustrating because he always had been able to drink 
when he felt bad, but now he could not do so. I tried 
to reframe his feelings for him, noting that his ability 
to recognize that he missed alcohol was an important 
step toward being able to reorganize his life without 
it, and that his reaction suggested that he was serious 
about his intentions not to drink. Carl seemed to find 
the reframing helpful, but he continued to find abstinence 
uncomfortable. 


Alcohol Use Disorders 

As Carl remained abstinent, his marital satisfaction 
ratings decreased. Previously Carl had reported fairly 
high marital satisfaction, but as he stopped drinking 
he became increasingly unhappy. When I asked him 
about his ratings, he said that he felt they were “going 
nowhere” in terms of reconciling. We had begun assertion 
and problem-solving training, and I suggested 
that Carl could use these skills to express his feelings 
to Maria more directly. They had a positive discussion 
during the session about his feelings and about wanting 
to reconcile, and her concerns about how difficult that 
would be, with each using some of the positive skills 
on which we had worked. Both agreed that they now 
wanted to live together again, but it would be difficult 
to develop a plan to do so. We used structured problemsolving 
techniques over two treatment sessions to develop 
a plan. The major impediment to reconciliation 
was financial. Maria was receiving welfare, but if either 
she or Carl began to work, they would receive less 
public assistance. However, to be able to live together, 
they would have to save sufficient money for a security 
deposit and first month’s rent. They finally decided that 
Maria would begin to work a few hours a week as a 
hairdresser, working “under the table,” and that Carl 
would care for the children while she worked. If that 
worked well, then Carl would begin to look for work 
again; once both were working, they would move in 
with his mother for a limited period of time to save 
money for the deposits and rent, then either obtain an 
apartment together in New Jersey or find a trailer to rent 
in North Carolina and move. They also used problemsolving 
techniques to develop a plan to deal with their 
other debts. 

Termination 

Because Carl and Maria were part of a clinical research 
study, we had to terminate treatment after 18 sessions 
(including the sessions when he was intoxicated). They 
had made significant progress during treatment: Carl 
had been abstinent for more than a month; Maria had 
learned more effective ways to discipline the children 
and no longer reported concerns about being overly 
punitive to them; the couple’s relationship was significantly 
improved; and they had a constructive plan for 
reconciliation. I was concerned that Carl was still uncomfortable 
with abstinence, and I thought that he had 
acquired only a few effective coping strategies to deal 
with triggers for drinking. We had not worked directly 
on Carl’s style of avoiding responsibility except by fol


lowing through on his commitment to abstinence and 
long-term goal setting. Whether Carl would implement 
his part of these agreements was relatively untested. 
The couple was fairly comfortable with termination 
but asked about possible follow-up treatment, inquiring 
specifically about AA or other support groups that 
focused on couples or on behavioral approaches to 
change. I referred them to SMART, and to a couples’ 
AA group. The constraints of the clinical research protocol 
precluded any longer-term treatment with me, 
even though I thought continued treatment would be 
beneficial. 

Comment 

Carl and Maria were a fairly typical couple. Carl’s 
ambivalence about change, his entry into treatment 
solely because of an external agent, and his resistance 
to many behavioral interventions are fairly representative. 
I believe that he began to engage in treatment 
when he stopped feeling that he was the sole focus of 
the treatment, after Maria began to discuss her aggressive 
behavior and feelings. The second critical point in 
treatment was addressing his continued drinking. I was 
willing to allow them to renegotiate for a goal of moderate 
drinking, but I did not think it therapeutic for Carl 
to feel that he could verbally agree to abstinence but 
then avoid the agreement. Addressing Carl’s behavior 
directly forced him either to be assertive and renegotiate 
treatment goals or to follow through on his commitment. 


The role of behavioral skills training in facilitating 
abstinence was less important with Carl than with 
some clients. He tried various skills introduced during 
the treatment but relied primarily on cognitive coping 
strategies. The role of reinforcement was probably 
more important in understanding his changed drinking 
behavior. Carl’s marital relationship was important to 
him at the beginning of treatment, and focusing in the 
therapy on ways to improve that relationship increased 
its reinforcement value to him. Maria’s consistency in 
saying that they could reconcile only if he were abstinent, 
in discussing long-term goals for the relationship, 
and in seeing the possible positive life they could live in 
North Carolina all contributed. 

Finally, my relationship with the couple probably 
contributed to the positive changes they made. I found 
them a likable, appealing couple despite their difficulties. 
At times, I would tease or cajole Carl into compliance, 
and he commented at the end of the treatment, 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

“At first I didn’t know if I liked you or not, but then I 
decided you were kind of cute, and then I realized that 
you weren’t going to let up on me, so I decided that 
I’d give it a try.” I tried to reinforce Maria’s ability to 
take care of herself, and I suspect that she saw me as a 
female role model in some ways. She often asked me 
personal questions (whether I was married, how old my 
son was), and gave me a desk calendar as a thank-you 
gift at termination. Our research suggests that our more 
experienced therapists are more successful at keeping 
clients in treatment (Epstein, McCrady, Miller, & 
Steinberg, 1994; Raytek, McCrady, Epstein, & Hirsch, 
1999), and I suspect that being able to deal with these 
complex relationships is one skill that our more experienced 
therapists have acquired more fully. 

Typical Problems 

The problems presented in this case are fairly typical— 
coming to treatment sessions intoxicated, continued 
drinking during treatment, ambivalence about change, 
noncompliance with assignments, and discovering new 
and major problems as the therapy progresses. Lying 
and failing to come to scheduled treatment sessions are 
other typical obstacles that clients with drinking problems 
sometimes present. By working with Carl and 
Maria together, I was able to minimize these particular 
difficulties because Maria was highly motivated for 
treatment and very responsible about keeping scheduled 
appointments. Also, by having them both record 
Carl’s drinking and drinking urges, I had a clearer picture 
of his drinking and was able to maintain a clear 
idea of our progress (or lack thereof). 

cliNical PreDictors of success 
or failure 

A number of factors predict the success or failure of 
therapy. However, before I address these factors, it is important 
to discuss definitions of “success.” In any treatment, 
a minority of clients maintain long-term, uninterrupted 
successful change (abstinence or nonproblem 
drinking). The proportion varies with the demographic 
characteristics of the population, and persons who are 
married, have stable employment, a stable residence, 
and no comorbid psychopathology have the best treatment 
outcomes. In addition, a person’s posttreatment 
environment plays an important role (Moos, Finney, & 
Cronkite, 1990) in determining long-term outcomes. 

Observations of the long-term instability of drinking 
outcomes have led many to consider alcoholism as a 
chronic, relapsing disorder, and to reconceptualize 
“success” as a process rather than a static outcome; 
that is, the client who learns not only effective skills to 
avoid drinking or heavy drinking but also ways to cope 
with relapses by minimizing their length and severity 
should be considered “successful” as well. In treatment 
outcome studies, investigators look at percentage 
of abstinent or moderate drinking days and length of 
periods of abstinence compared to periods of heavy 
drinking as ways to assess relative rather than absolute 
“success.” From the individual clinician’s perspective, 
certain client characteristics and behaviors bode well 
for the course of treatment. The client who has important 
incentives to change (either internal or external) 
and some recognition of a relationship between his/her 
drinking and life problems is easier to treat. Complying 
with early homework assignments, coming to sessions 
sober, and being honest about behavior outside of the 
treatment are also positive indicators. However, clinician 
behavior is another important predictor of success. 
Various studies have pointed to different aspects of clinician 
behavior —empathy, specific goal setting and 
treatment planning, developing drinking goals with the 
client rather than imposing goals, and providing the client 
with options for treatment—as all being associated 
with better compliance with treatment. 

coNclusioN 

Providing treatment to persons with drinking problems 
is a complex and continuously fascinating process. The 
clinician is faced with decisions about matching each 
client to the appropriate level of care, the setting for 
treatment, and treatment modalities and techniques. 
Diagnostic skills to identify concomitant medical, 
psychological, psychiatric, and cognitive problems are 
challenged by these clients. Therapy requires knowledge 
of a range of treatment techniques, an ability to 
be able to form a positive therapeutic relationship with 
sometimes frustrating and difficult clients, and the ability 
to “think on your feet.” 

From the briefest, one-session treatments to motivate 
heavy drinkers to reduce their drinking to the 
complex and longer treatment provided to individuals 
with severe alcohol dependence, treatment is never dull 
or routine. The clinician has a large body of empirical 
literature to guide the selection of treatments and a 


Alcohol Use Disorders 

significant clinical literature as well to illustrate clini


cal techniques and problems. And although many per


sons with drinking problems change successfully on 

their own or with minimal assistance, treatment also 

can provide an effective means for persons to change a 

major life problem. 
So this chapter concludes as it began—as a “sales 

pitch” for clinicians to be knowledgeable about and re


ceptive to providing thoughtful, informed treatment to 

persons with drinking problems. 

notes 

1. A standard drink is equal to one 12-ounce beer, one 
5-ounce glass of wine, or a 1.5-ounce shot of 86-proof liquor. 
2. All dialogue in this chapter is paraphrasing of actual therapist 
or client comments. 
3. These verbatim transcripts include the clients’ spelling of 
all words. 
referenCes 

American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and 
statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.). Arlington, 
VA: Author. 

American Society of Addiction Medicine (ASAM). (2001). 
ASAM patient placement criteria for the treatment of psychoactive 
substance use disorders (2nd ed., rev.). Chevy 
Chase, MD: Author. 

Annis, H. M., Graham, J. M., & Davis, C. S. (1987). Inventory 
of Drinking Situations (IDS): User’s guide. Toronto: 
Centre for Addiction and Mental Health. 

Chaney, E. F., O’Leary, M. R., & Marlatt, G. A. (1978). Skills 
training with alcoholics. Journal of Consulting and Clinical 
Psychology, 46, 1092–1104. 

Cisler, J. M., Amstadter, A. B., Begle, A. M., Resnick, H. 
S., Danielson, C. K., Saunders, B. E., et al. (2011). PTSD 
symptoms, potentially traumatic event exposure, and binge 
drinking: A prospective study with a national sample of 
adolescents. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 25, 978–987. 

Cohn, A. M., Graff, F. S., Epstein, E. E., McCrady, B. S., 
Cook, S., Schneider, M., et al. (2010, June). Alcohol use 
outcomes following “cold turkey” or graduated reduction 
among women with an alcohol use disorder enrolled in 
treatment. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the 
Research Society on Alcoholism, San Antonio, TX. 

Cox, G. B., Walker, R. D., Freng, S. A., Short, B. A., Meijer, 
L., & Gilchrist, L. (1998). Outcome of a controlled 
trial of the effectiveness of intensive case management for 
chronic public inebriates. Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 
59, 523–532. 

Cunningham, J. A., Sobell, L. C., Sobell, M. B., & Gaskin, 

J. (1994). Alcohol and drug abusers’ reasons for seeking 
treatment. Addictive Behaviors, 19, 691–696. 
Donovan, D. (2013). Evidence-based assessment: Strategies 
and measures in addictive behaviors. In B. S. McCrady & 

E. E. Epstein (Eds.), Addictions: A comprehensive guidebook 
(2nd ed., pp. 311–352). New York: Oxford University 
Press. 
Epstein, E. E., & McCrady, B. S. (2009). A cognitivebehavioral 
treatment program for overcoming alcohol use 
problems: Therapist guide. New York: Oxford University 
Press. 

Epstein, E. E., McCrady, B. S., Miller, K. J., & Steinberg, M. 

L. (1994). Attrition from conjoint alcoholism treatment: 
Do dropouts differ from completers? Journal of Substance 
Abuse, 6, 249–265. 
Filstead, W. (1991). Two-year treatment outcome: An evaluation 
of substance abuse services for adults and youths. 
Park Ridge, IL: Parkside Medical Services. 

Fink, E. B., Longabaugh, R., McCrady, B. S., Stout, R. L., 
Beattie, M., Ruggieri-Authelet, A., et al. (1985). Effectiveness 
of alcoholism treatment in partial versus inpatient settings: 
Twenty-four month outcomes. Addictive Behaviors, 
10, 235–248. 

Finney, J. W., Moos, R. H., & Timko, C. (2013). The course of 
treated and untreated substance use disorders: Remission 
and resolution, relapse and mortality. In B. S. McCrady & 

E. E. Epstein (Eds.), Addictions: A comprehensive guidebook 
(2nd ed., pp. 108–131). New York: Oxford University 
Press. 
Foy, D. W., Miller, P. M., Eisler, R. M., & O’Toole, D. H. 
(1976). Social skills training to teach alcoholics to refuse 
drinks effectively. Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 37, 
1340–1345. 

Frankenstein, W., Hay, W. M., & Nathan, P. E. (1985). Effects 
of intoxication on alcoholics’ marital communication and 
problem solving. Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 46, 1–6. 

Green, K., Worden, B., Menges, D., & McCrady, B. S., 
(2008). Assessment of alcohol use disorders. In J. Hunsley 
& E. Mash (Eds.), A guide to assessments that work 
(pp. 339–369). New York: Oxford University Press. 

Haaga, D. A. F., McCrady, B., & Lebow, J. (2006). Integrative 
principles for treating substance use disorders. Journal of 
Clinical Psychology, 62, 675–684. 

Hallgren, K. A., Greenfield, B. L., Ladd, B., Glynn, L. H., & 
McCrady, B. S. (2012). Evidence-based practices for the 
treatment of adults with alcohol use disorders. In P. Sturmey 
& M. Hersen (Eds.), Handbook of evidence-based 
practice in clinical psychology: Vol. II. Adult disorders 
(pp. 133–166). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. 

Helzer, J. E., Robins, L. N., Taylor, J. R., Carey, K., Miller, R. 
H., Combs-Orme, T., et al. (1985). The extent of long-term 
moderate drinking among alcoholics discharged from 
medical and psychiatric treatment facilities. New England 
Journal of Medicine, 312, 1678–1682. 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

Hesse, M. (2006). The Readiness Ruler as a measure of readiness 
to change polydrug use in drug abusers. Harm Reduction 
Journal, 3. Published online at www.harmreductionjournal.
com/content/3/1/3. 

Hester, R. K., Delaney, H. D., Campbell, W., & Handmaker, 

N. (2009). A web application for moderation training: Initial 
results of a randomized clinical trial. Journal of Substance 
Abuse Treatment, 37, 266–276. 
Institute of Medicine. (1990). Broadening the base of treatment 
for alcohol problems. Washington, DC: National 
Academy Press. 

Kosanke, N., Magura, S., Staines, G., Foote, J., & DeLuca, 

A. (2002). Feasibility of matching alcohol patients to 
ASAM levels of care. American Journal on Addictions, 
11, 124–134. 
Leite, de C., Seminotti, J. C., Freitas, N. F., & Drachler, M. 

P. de L. (2011). The Psychosocial Treatment Expectations 
Questionnaire (PTEQ) for alcohol problems: Development 
and early validation. European Journal of Psychological 
Assessment, 27, 228–236. 
Liepman, M. R. (1993). Using family influence to motivate 
alcoholics to enter treatment: The Johnson Institute Intervention 
approach. In T. J. O’Farrell (Ed.), Treating alcohol 
problems: Marital and family interventions (pp. 54–77). 
New York: Guilford Press. 

Longabaugh, R., McCrady, B., Fink, E., Stout, R., McAuley, 
T., & McNeill, D. (1983). Cost-effectiveness of alcoholism 
treatment in inpatient versus partial hospital settings: 
Six- month outcomes. Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 44, 
1049–1071. 

Longabaugh, R., Wirtz, P. W., Zweben, A., & Stout, R. L. 
(1998). Network support for drinking, Alcoholics Anonymous 
and long-term matching effects. Addiction, 93, 
1313–1333. 

Longabaugh, R., Wirtz, P. W., Zywiak, W. H., & O’Malley, 

S. S. (2010). Network support as a prognostic indicator 
of drinking outcomes: The COMBINE study. Journal of 
Studies on Alcohol and Drugs, 71, 837–846. 
Ludwig, A. M. (1985). Cognitive processes associated with 
“spontaneous” recovery from alcoholism. Journal of Studies 
on Alcohol, 46, 53–58. 

Magura, S., Staines, G., Kosanke, N., Rosenblum, A., Foote, 
J., DeLuca, A., et al. (2003). Predictive validity of the 
ASAM Patient Placement Criteria for naturalistically 
matched vs. mismatched alcoholism patients. American 
Journal on Addictions, 12, 386–397. 

Margolin, G., Talovic, S., & Weinstein, C. D. (1983). Areas 
of Change Questionnaire: A practical approach to marital 
assessment. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 
51, 921–931. 

Marlatt, G. A., & Donovan, D. M. (Eds.). (2005). Relapse 
prevention: Second edition: Maintenance strategies in 
the treatment of addictive behavior. New York: Guilford 
Press. 

Marlatt, G. A., & Gordon, J. R. (Eds.). (1985). Relapse pre


vention: Maintenance strategies in the treatment of addictive 
behaviors. New York: Guilford Press. 

Mayfield, D., McLeod, G., & Hall, P. (1974). The CAGE 
questionnaire: Validation of a new alcoholism instrument. 
American Journal of Psychiatry, 131, 1121–1123. 

McConnaughy, E. A., Prochaska, J. O., & Velicer, W. F. 
(1983). Stages of change in psychotherapy: Measurement 
and sample profiles. Psychotherapy: Theory, Research, 
and Practice, 20, 243–250. 

McCrady, B. S. (1992). A reply to Peele: Is this how you treat 
your friends? Addictive Behaviors, 17, 67–72. 

McCrady, B. S., & Epstein, E. E. (2009). Overcoming alcohol 
problems: A couples-focused program. New York: Oxford 
University Press. 

McCrady, B. S., Epstein, E. E., Cook, S., Jensen, N. K., & Hildebrandt, 
T. (2009). A randomized trial of individual and 
couple behavioral alcohol treatment for women. Journal of 
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 77, 243–256. 

McCrady, B. S., Epstein, E. E., & Hirsch, L. (1999). Maintaining 
change after conjoint behavioral alcohol treatment 
for men: Outcomes at six months. Addiction, 94, 1381– 
1396. 

McCrady, B. S., Horvath, A. T., & Delaney, S. I. (2003). Selfhelp 
groups. In R. K. Hester & W. R. Miller (Eds.), Handbook 
of alcoholism treatment approaches: Effective alternatives 
(3rd ed., pp. 165–187). Boston: Allyn & Bacon. 

McCrady, B. S., Longabaugh, R. L., Fink, E., Stout, R., Beattie, 
M., Ruggieri-Authelet, A., et al. (1986). Cost effectiveness 
of alcoholism treatment in partial hospital versus 
inpatient settings after brief inpatient treatment: Twelve 
month outcomes. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 
54, 708–713. 

McCrady, B. S., Owens, M., & Brovko, J. (2013). Couples and 
family treatment methods. In B. S. McCrady & E. E. Epstein 
(Eds.), Addictions: A comprehensive guidebook (2nd 
ed., pp. 454–481). New York: Oxford University Press. 

McCrady, B. S., Stout, R., Noel, N., Abrams, D., & Nelson, H. 

F. (1991). Effectiveness of three types of spouse-involved 
behavioral alcoholism treatment. British Journal of Addiction, 
86, 1415–1424. 
McCrady, B. S., & Tonigan, J. S. (in press). Recent research 
into twelve step programs. In: R. Ries, D. Fiellin, S. Miller, 
& R. Saitz (Eds.), Principles of addiction medicine (5th 
ed.). Baltimore: Lippincott/Williams & Wilkins. 

McKay, J. R., Van Horn, D., Oslin, D. W., Ivey, M., Drapkin, 

M. L., Coviello, D. M., et al. (2011). Extended telephonebased 
continuing care for alcohol dependence: 24-month 
outcomes and subgroup analyses. Addiction, 106, 1760– 
1769. 
McLellan, A. T., Grissom, G. R., Zanis, D., Randall, M., Brill, 
P., & O’Brien, C. P. (1997). Problem–service “matching” 
in addiction treatment: A prospective study in four programs. 
Archives of General Psychiatry, 54, 730–735. 

McLellan, A. T., Kushner, H., Metzger, D., Peters, R., Smith, 
I., Grissom, G., et al. (1992). The fifth edition of the Ad


###CUT###
Alcohol Use Disorders 

diction Severity Index. Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment, 
9, 199–213. 

McLellan, A. T., Lewis, D. C., O’Brien, C. P., & Kleber, H. D. 
(2000). Drug dependence, a chronic medical illness: Implications 
for treatment, insurance, and outcomes evaluation. 
Journal of the American Medical Association, 284, 
1689–1695. 

Menges, D., McCrady, B. S., Epstein, E. E., & Beem, C. 
(2008). Psychometric evaluation of the Drinking Patterns 
Questionnaire: A measure of high-risk drinking situations. 
Addictive Behaviors, 33, 1061–1066. 

Meyers, R. J., & Smith, J. E. (1995). Clinical guide to alcohol 
treatment: The community reinforcement approach. New 
York: Guilford Press. 

Miller, W. R., Benefield, R., G., & Tonigan, J. S. (1993). Enhancing 
motivation for change in problem drinking: A 
controlled comparison of two therapist styles. Journal of 
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 61, 455–461. 

Miller, W. R., Leckman, A. L., Delaney, H. D., & Tinkcom, 

M. (1992). Long-term follow-up of behavioral self-control 
training. Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 53, 249–261. 
Miller, W. R., Meyers, R. J., & Tonigan, J. S. (1999). Engaging 
the unmotivated in treatment for alcohol problems: A 
comparison of three strategies for intervention through 
family members. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 
67, 688–697. 

Miller, W. R., & Rollnick, S. (1991). Motivational interviewing: 
Preparing people to change addictive behavior. New 
York: Guilford Press. 

Miller, W. R., & Rollnick, S. (2002). Motivational interviewing: 
Preparing people for change (2nd ed.). New York: 
Guilford Press. 

Miller, W. R., & Tonigan, J. S. (1996). Assessing drinkers’ 
motivations for change: The Stages of Change Readiness 
and Treatment Eagerness Scale (SOCRATES). Psychology 
of Addictive Behaviors, 10, 81–89. 

Miller, W. R., Tonigan, J. S., & Longabaugh, R. (1995). 
The Drinker Inventory of Consequences (DrInC): An 
instrument for assessing adverse consequences of alcohol 
abuse. Rockville, MD: National Institute on Alcohol 
Abuse and Alcoholism. 

Miller, W. R., Walters, S. T., & Bennett, M. E. (2001). How 
effective is alcoholism treatment in the United States? 
Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 62, 211–220. 

Moderation Management. (2006). The MM limits. Retrieved 
September 21, 2006, from www.moderation.org/readings. 
shtml#mmlimits. 

Monti, P. M., Abrams, D. B., Binkoff, J. A., Zwick, W. R., 
Liepman, M. R., Nirenberg, T. D., et al. (1990). Communication 
skills training, communication skills training 
with family and cognitive behavioral mood management 
training for alcoholics. Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 51, 
263–270. 

Monti, P. M., Kadden, R. M., Rohsenow, D. J., Cooney, N. L., 
& Abrams, D. B. (2002). Treating alcohol dependence: A 

coping skills training guide (2nd ed.). New York: Guilford 
Press. 

Moos, R. H., & Billings, A. (1982). Children of alcoholics 
during the recovery process: Alcoholic and matched control 
families. Addictive Behaviors, 7, 155–163. 

Moos, R. H., Finney, J. W., & Cronkite, R. (1990). Alcoholism 
treatment: Context, process, and outcome. New York: 
Oxford University Press. 

Moos, R. H., Finney, J. W., & Gamble, W. (1982). The process 
of recovery from alcoholism: II. Comparing spouses 
of alcoholic patients and matched community controls. 
Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 43, 888–909. 

Morgenstern, J., Blanchard, K. A., McCrady, B. S., McVeigh, 

K. H., Morgan, T. J., & Pandina, R. J. (2006). A randomized 
field trial examining the effectiveness of intensive 
case management for substance dependent women receiving 
temporary assistance for needy families (TANF). 
American Journal of Public Health, 96, 2016–2023. 
Moyers, T. B., Martin, T., Houck, J. M., Christopher, P. J., & 
Tonigan, J. S. (2009). From in-session behaviors to drinking 
outcomes: A causal chain for motivational interviewing. 
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 77, 
1113–1124. 

Nathan, P. E., & McCrady, B. S. (1987). Bases for the use of 
abstinence as a goal in the behavioral treatment of alcohol 
abusers. Drugs and Society, 1, 109–132. 

O’Farrell, T. J., Choquette, K. A., & Cutter, H. S. G. (1998). 
Couples relapse prevention sessions after behavioral marital 
therapy for male alcoholics: Outcomes during the three 
years after starting treatment. Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 
59, 357–370. 

Ojehegan, A., & Berglund, M. (1989). Changes in drinking 
goals in a two-year outpatient alcoholic treatment program. 
Addictive Behaviors, 14, 1–10. 

Orford, J., & Keddie, A. (1986). Abstinence or controlled 
drinking in clinical practice: A test of the dependence and 
persuasion hypotheses. British Journal of Addiction, 81, 
495–504. 

Orford, J., Templeton, L., Velleman, R., & Copello, A. 
(2005). Family members of relatives with alcohol, drug 
and gambling problems: A set of standardized questionnaires 
for assessing stress, coping and strain. Addiction, 
100, 1611–1624. 

Oscar-Berman, M., & Marinkovi, K. (2007). Alcohol: Effects 
on neurobehavioral functions and the brain. Neuropsychology 
Review, 17, 239–257. 

O’Toole, T. P., Freyder, P. J., Gibbon, J. L., Hanusa, B. J., 
Seltzer, D., & Fine, M. J. (2004). ASAM Patient Placement 
Criteria treatment levels: Do they correspond to care 
actually received by homeless substance abusing adults? 
Journal of Addictive Diseases, 23, 1–15. 

Pabst, A., Baumeister, S. E., & Krause, L. (2010). Alcoholexpectancy 
dimensions and alcohol consumption at different 
ages in the general population. Journal of Studies on 
Alcohol and Drugs, 71, 46–53. 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

Paolino, T. J., Jr., McCrady, B. S., & Diamond, S. (1978). 
Some alcoholic marriage statistics: An overview. International 
Journal of the Addictions, 13, 1252–1257. 

Prochaska, J. O., & DiClemente, C. C. (2005). The transtheoretical 
approach. In J. C. Norcross & M. R. Goldfried 
(Eds.), Handbook of psychotherapy integration (2nd ed., 
pp. 147–171). New York: Oxford University Press. 

Project MATCH Research Group. (1997a). Matching alcoholism 
treatments to client heterogeneity: Project MATCH 
posttreatment drinking outcomes. Journal of Studies on 
Alcohol, 58, 7–29. 

Project MATCH Research Group. (1997b). Project MATCH 
secondary a priori hypotheses. Addiction, 92, 1671–1698. 

Project MATCH Research Group. (1998). Matching alcoholism 
treatments to client heterogeneity: Project MATCH 
three-year drinking outcomes. Alcoholism: Clinical and 
Experimental Research, 22, 1300–1311. 

Raytek, H. S., McCrady, B. S., Epstein, E. E., & Hirsch, L. S. 
(1999). Therapeutic alliance and the retention of couples 
in conjoint alcoholism treatment. Addictive Behaviors, 24, 
317–330. 

Robins, L. N., Wing, J., Wittchen, H. U., Helzer, J. E., Babor, 

T. F., Burke, J., et al. (1988). The prevalence of psychiatric 
disorders in patients with alcohol and other drug problems. 
Archives of General Psychiatry, 45, 1023–1031. 
Rollnick, S., Heather, N., Gold, R., & Hall, W. (1992). Development 
of a short “Readiness to Change” Questionnaire 
for use in brief opportunistic interventions. British Journal 
of Addictions, 87, 743–754. 

Roman, P. (2013). Treatment for substance use disorders in 
the United States: An organizational technology perspective. 
In B. S. McCrady & E. E. Epstein (Eds.), Addictions: 
A comprehensive guidebook (2nd ed., pp. 597–621). New 
York: Oxford University Press. 

Rose, S. J., Zweben, A., Ockert, D., & Baier, A. (2013). Interfaces 
of substance abuse treatment with other health 
and social systems. In B. S. McCrady & E. E. Epstein 
(Eds.), Addictions: A comprehensive guidebook (2nd ed., 
pp. 641–655). New York: Oxford University Press. 

Rosenberg, H. (1993). Prediction of controlled drinking by 
alcoholics and problem drinkers. Psychological Bulletin, 
113, 129–139. 

Rosenthal, R. N. (2013). Treatment of persons with dual diagnoses 
of substance use disorder and other psychological 
problems. In B. S. McCrady & E. E. Epstein (Eds.), Addictions: 
A comprehensive guidebook (2nd ed., pp. 659–707). 
New York: Oxford University Press. 

Rychtarik, R. G., Connors, G. J., Whitney, R. B., McGillicuddy, 
N. B., Fitterling, J. M., & Wirtz, P. W. (2000). 
Treatment settings for persons with alcoholism: Evidence 
for matching clients to inpatient versus outpatient care. 
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 68, 277– 
289. 

Rynes, K. N., McCrady, B. S., Morgan, T., Violette, N., & 

Pandina, R. (2012). Need-service matching predicts drug 
use outcomes in comprehensive treatment for mothers in 
the child welfare system. Unpublished manuscript. 

Saunders, J. B., Aasland, O. G., Babor, T. F., de la Fuente, J. 
R., & Grant, M. (1993). Development of the Alcohol Use 
Disorders Screening Test (AUDIT): WHO collaborative 
project on early detection of persons with harmful alcohol 
consumption—II. Addiction, 88, 791–804. 

Sisson, R. W., & Azrin, N. (1986). Family-member involvement 
to initiate and promote treatment of problem drinkers. 
Journal of Behavior Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry, 
17, 15–21. 

Skinner, H., & Allen, B. A. (1982). Alcohol dependence syndrome: 
Measurement and validation. Journal of Abnormal 
Psychology, 91, 199–209. 

Slaymaker, V., & Sheehan, T. (2013). The disease model. In 

B. S. McCrady & E. E. Epstein (Eds.), Addictions: A comprehensive 
guidebook (2nd ed., pp. 451–481). New York: 
Oxford University Press. 
Smith, J. E., & Meyers, R. J. (2004). Motivating substance 
abusers to enter treatment: Working with family members. 
New York: Guilford Press. 

Smith, P. H., Homish, G. G., Leonard, K. E., & Cornelius, J. 

R. (2012). Intimate partner violence and specific substance 
use disorders: Findings from the National Epidemiologic 
Survey on Alcohol and Related Conditions. Psychology of 
Addictive Behaviors, 26, 236–245. 
Sobell, L. C., & Sobell, M. B. (2003). Alcohol consumption 
measures. In J. P. Allen & V. B. Wilson (Eds.), Assessing 
alcohol problems: A guide for clinicians and researchers, 
second edition (pp. 75–99), Bethesda, MD: National Institute 
on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism. 

Sobell, L. C., & Sobell, M. B. (1995). Alcohol Timeline Followback 
users’ manual. Toronto: Addiction Research 
Foundation. 

Sobell, L. C., & Sobell, M. B. (2011). Group therapy for substance 
use disorders: A motivational cognitive-behavioral 
approach. New York: Guilford Press. 

Sobell, M. B., & Sobell, L. C. (2000). Stepped care as a heuristic 
approach to the treatment of alcohol problems. Journal 
of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 68, 573–579. 

Spanier, G. (1976). Measuring dyadic adjustment: New scales 
for assessing the quality of marriage and similar dyads. 
Journal of Marriage and the Family, 38, 15–28. 

Spear, S. F., & Mason, M. (1991). Impact of chemical dependency 
on family health status. International Journal of the 
Addictions, 26, 179–187. 

Spitzer, R. L., Williams, J. B. W., Gibbon, M., & First, M. B. 
(1996). Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV: Patient 
Edition (with Psychotic Screen—Version 1.0). Washington, 
DC: American Psychiatric Press. 

Stinchfield, R., & Owen, P. (1998). Hazelden’s model of treatment 
and its outcome. Addictive Behaviors, 23, 669–683. 
Straus, M., Hamby, S. L., Boney-McCoy, S., & Sugarman, 


Alcohol Use Disorders 

D. B. (1996). The Revised Conflict Tactics Scales (CTS2): 
Development and preliminary psychometric data. Journal 
of Family Issues, 17, 283–316. 
Sullivan, J. T., Sykora, K., Schneiderman, J., Naranjo, C. A., 
& Sellers, E. M. (1989). Assessment of alcohol withdrawal: 
The revised Clinical Institute Withdrawal Assessment 
for Alcohol scale (CIWA-Ar). British Journal of Addiction, 
84, 1353–1357. 

Thomas, E. J., Santa, C., Bronson, D., & Oyserman, D. 
(1987). Unilateral family therapy with the spouses of alcoholics. 
Journal of Social Service Research, 10, 145–162. 

Thomas, E. J., Yoshioka, M., & Ager, R. D. (1996). Spouse 
enabling of alcohol abuse: Conception, assessment, and 
modification. Journal of Substance Abuse, 8, 61–80. 

Tonigan, J. S., Miller, W. R., & Brown, J. M. (1997). The reliability 
of FORM 90: An instrument for assessing alcohol 
treatment outcome. Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 58, 
358–364. 

Vaillant, G. (1983). The natural history of alcoholism. Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press. 
Vaillant, G., & Milofsky, E. S. (1982). Natural history of male 

alcoholism: 4. Paths to recovery. Archives of General Psychiatry, 
39, 127–133. 

Walitzer, K. S., & Connors, G. J. (2007). Thirty-month 
follow-up of drinking moderation training for women: A 
randomized clinical trial. Journal of Consulting and Clinical 
Psychology, 75, 501–507. 

Witkiewitz, K., Donovan, D. M., & Hartzler, B. (2012). Drink 
refusal training as part of a combined behavioral intervention: 
Effectiveness and mechanisms of change. Journal of 
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 80, 440–449. 

Witkiewitz, K., & Marlatt, G. A. (2004). Relapse prevention 
for alcohol and drug problems: That was zen, this is tao. 
American Psychologist, 59, 224–235. 

Woodward, J. J. (2013). Alcohol. In B. S. McCrady & E. E. 
Epstein (Eds.), Addictions: A comprehensive guidebook 
(2nd ed., pp. 135–154). New York: Oxford University 
Press. 

Zimmerman, A., Lubman, D. I., & Cox, M. (2012). Tobacco, 
caffeine, alcohol and illicit substance use among consumers 
of a national community managed mental health service. 
Mental Health and Substance Use, 5, 287–302. 


CHaPter 14 

Drug Use Disorders 

stePheN t. hiGGiNs 
stacey c. siGMoN 
sarah h. heil 

in this chapter we follow the case of “Bill,” a 24‑year‑old individual with cocaine use 
disorder, who would ordinarily be considered to be among the most difficult types of 
patients for someone administering psychological interventions. As is typical with this 
population, Bill presented with not only cocaine but also alcohol use disorder; problems 
with anger management; heavy use of cigarettes and marijuana; suicidal ideation; and 
major interpersonal, social, and occupational problems (including a prohibition from 
visiting his 5‑year‑old daughter). The fact that stephen T. Higgins and his team of close 
associates have been able to create a treatment protocol for individuals such as Bill—a 
protocol with strong empirical support—is in itself a remarkable achievement. But only 
those most familiar with this approach have a good idea of the multifaceted nature of 
this brief semistructured strategy, which includes attention to the full range of addictive 
behaviors, as well as mood disturbances, interpersonal relationships, and problems in 
living. Without this comprehensive approach, there seems to be no question that these 
treatment strategies would not enjoy the success that they do. even clinicians or students 
not working directly with addictive behaviors will benefit from being familiar with this 
new generation of successful psychological approaches to drug use.—D. H. B. 

Drug use disorders represent a highly prevalent and 
costly public health problem in the United States and 
virtually all other industrialized countries. To get a 
sense of the scope of the U.S. problem, an estimated 

131.2 million persons 12 years and older (51.4%) report 
current alcohol use (past 30 days), 69.6 million (27.2%) 
report current tobacco use, and 22.7 million (8.9%) 
report current use of illicit drugs (United States Department 
of Health and Human Services [USDHHS], 
2012). Of course, not all current users experience adverse 
effects, but a sizable proportion incur substantial 
problems. An estimated 22.2 million (8.7%) Americans 
12 years and older meet formal Diagnostic and Statistical 
Manual of Mental Disorders, fourth edition, text 
revision (DSM-IV-TR; American Psychiatric Association, 
2000) diagnostic criteria for drug abuse or dependence 
within the past year, and 1.5 million (0.6%) 
report being treated for a drug use problem within the 
past year (USDHHS, 2012). The annual costs to the 

U.S. economy associated with these problems are estimated 
to exceed $600 billion (Bouchery, Harwood, 
Sacks, Simon, & Brewer, 2011; Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention, 2008; U.S. Department of Justice, 
2011). 
Clearly there is a tremendous need for effective treatments 
for drug use disorders. This chapter focuses on 
psychosocial treatments for illicit drug use disorders. 
Treatments for alcohol problems are covered by Mc


588 


Drug Use Disorders 

Crady (Chapter 13, this volume) and there are several 
excellent reviews available on treatments for tobacco 
use disorders (e.g., Kenford & Fiore, 2004; Schnoll & 
Lerman, 2006). Because the focus is on empirically 
based interventions, we largely cover behavioral and 
cognitive-behavioral therapies. That said, effective 
contemporary treatments for drug use disorders often 
entail combining psychological treatments with medications, 
and this is reflected in this chapter as well. We 
use a multielement intervention to illustrate details of 
treatment implementation, namely, the community reinforcement 
approach (CRA) plus vouchers intervention 
that our group developed for outpatient treatment 
of cocaine dependence. Last, the National Institute on 
Drug Abuse (NIDA, 2009) has published 13 principles 
of effective treatment for illicit drug abuse based on 
more than 35 years of research and, when applicable, 
we underscore those principles throughout the chapter 
(Table 14.1). 

DefiNiNG the cliNical DisorDer 

Before proceeding to discussions about treatment, we 
briefly discuss criteria for diagnosing drug use disorders. 
In the research discussed in this chapter we have 
used DSM-IV-TR (American Psychiatric Association, 
2000), and we plan to use DSM-5 (American Psychiatric 
Association, 2013) in future efforts. DSM-5, published 
in May 2013, contains one major change from 
DSM-IV-TR that merits mention (O’Brien, 2011). The 
abuse and dependence diagnostic categories featured 
in DSM-IV-TR were replaced in DSM-5 by a single 
“substance use disorder” spectrum that comprises 11 
symptoms. These symptoms, largely paralleling those 
found in DSM-IV-TR, are as follows: (1) use of substance 
in larger amounts or over a longer period than 
was intended; (2) a persistent desire or unsuccessful efforts 
to cut down or control substance use; (3) a great 
deal of time spent in activities necessary to obtain the 
substance; (4) craving; (5) a failure to fulfill major 
role obligations; (6) continued substance use despite 
having persistent or recurrent social or interpersonal 
problems; (7) cessation or reduction in important social, 
occupational, or recreational activities because of 
substance use; (8) substance use in situations in which 
it is physically hazardous, (9) continuation of substance 
use despite knowledge of having a persistent or recurrent 
physical or psychological problem that is likely to 
have been caused or exacerbated by the substance, (10) 

table 14.1. Principles of effective 
treatment 

1. No single treatment is appropriate for all individuals. 
2. Treatment needs to be readily available. 
3. Effective treatment attends to multiple needs of the 
individual, not just his/her drug use. 
4. An individual’s treatment and services plan must be 
assessed continually and modified as necessary to 
ensure that the plan meets his/her changing needs. 
5. Remaining in treatment for an adequate period of time 
is critical for treatment effectiveness (i.e., 3 months or 
longer). 
6. Counseling (individual and/or group) and other 
behavioral therapies are critical components of effective 
treatment for addiction. 
7. Medications are an important element of treatment 
for many patients, especially when combined with 
counseling and other behavioral therapies. 
8. Addicted or drug-abusing individuals with coexisting 
mental disorders should have both disorders treated in 
an integrated way. 
9. Medical detoxification is only the first stage of addiction 
treatment and by itself does little to change long-term 
drug use. 
10. Treatment does not need to be voluntary to be effective. 
11. Possible drug use during treatment must be monitored 
continuously. 
12. Treatment programs should provide assessment for 
HIV/AIDS, hepatitis B and C, tuberculosis and other 
infectious diseases, and counseling to help patients 
modify or change behaviors that place themselves or 
others at risk of infection. 
13. Recovery from drug addiction can be a long-term 
process and frequently requires multiple episodes of 
treatment. 
tolerance; and (11) withdrawal. The milder end of the 
disorder spectrum (two to three symptoms) is comparable 
to the less severe abuse category in DSM-IV-TR, 
and the higher end of the spectrum (six or more symptoms) 
to the more severe dependence category. All of 
our research discussed below has involved individuals 
who fell along the more severe or “dependence” end of 
this spectrum. 

Evidence does support a position that, on average, 
more severe drug use disorders are associated with 
poorer treatment outcome. Severity is influenced by 
frequency of use, amount of drug used and route of administration, 
and sociodemographics (e.g., educational 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

attainment), among other factors. There seems to be 
little doubt that these factors will be positively correlated 
with the number of untoward signs and symptoms 
exhibited following a period of repeated drug use, and 
to that extent merit careful attention in a diagnostic assessment. 
For these and other reasons, we have found 
DSM-IV-TR helpful in assessing the severity of cocaine 
and other drug use disorders, and anticipate the 
spectrum approach of DSM-5 to be even more helpful 
in that regard. 

assessMeNt 

A comprehensive assessment is an essential first step 
in effective clinical management of drug use disorders. 
This section outlines the assessment practices we 
used in our specialty clinic for individuals who met 
DSM-IV-TR criteria for cocaine dependence and what 
in DSM-5 would represent the more severe end of the 
cocaine use disorder spectrum. The assessment framework 
is relatively generic and can be readily applied 
to other types of drug use disorders by substituting the 
cocaine-specific information with pertinent information 
on whatever other type of drug use disorder is the 
presenting problem. 

All initial clinic contacts are handled by a receptionist, 
who establishes that the caller reports problems related 
to drug use, is age 18 years or more, and resides 
within the county in which the clinic is located. The 
CRA plus vouchers treatment that we use is intensive, 
requiring several clinic visits per week. Persons living 
outside the county are often unable to follow such 
a demanding schedule. A broader geographical range 
may be possible with other, less intensive interventions. 
The important matter is to have established the geographical 
range that is practical for the treatment being 
offered. Those who do not satisfy our basic inclusion 
criteria are referred to an appropriate alternative clinic. 
Those who meet the criteria receive an appointment for 
an intake assessment. 

Every effort is made to schedule the intake assessment 
interview as soon as possible (Principle 2, Table 
14.1). Scheduling the interview within 24 hours of clinic 
contact significantly reduces attrition between the 
initial clinic contact and assessment interview, which is 
a substantial problem among those with drug use disorders 
(Festinger, Lamb, Kirby, & Marlowe, 1996). Some 
patients cannot come in within 24 hours, so our secondary 
goal is to get them in within 72 hours. 

Clients are informed that the intake interview will 
take about 3 hours. This initial session is one of the 
most important. Clinic staff should be aware of the client’s 
potential uneasiness and try to make the person 
feel at ease. Being courteous, complimenting clients on 
taking this important first step toward change, respecting 
the fact that some clients might be physically ill or 
uncomfortable related to recent drug use and therefore 
being flexible with regard to tardiness, and so forth, can 
help. Accommodating the need for brief breaks, food or 
drink, or a brief phone call can help as well. Throughout 
all interactions we seek to be empathic and to convey 
a very upbeat, “You can do it” message. 

During the intake assessment, we collect detailed 
information on drug use; evaluate treatment readiness; 
and assess psychiatric functioning, employment/vocational 
status, recreational interests, current social supports, 
family and social problems, and legal issues (see 
Principle 3, Table 14.1). The following instruments that 
we use to obtain such information are listed in the order 
in which they are typically administered. Modifications 
can be readily made to our list depending on the population 
being treated. We offer it only to provide an example 
of what we have found to be an effective assessment 
package, along with associated clinical rationales. 

Self‑Administered Questionnaires 

We use several questionnaires that can be completed 
by the client upon arrival at the clinic for an initial intake 
assessment. The intake worker greets the client, 
introduces him/herself, brings the client into a private 
office, and briefly but carefully informs him/her about 
what to expect during the intake process. It is essential 
to ask about clients’ reading ability prior to having them 
complete self-administered questionnaires. If there is 
doubt about reading capability, we discreetly ask clients 
to read several questions aloud to get an indication 
of whether they can complete the forms without staff 
assistance. With poor readers, the questionnaires can 
be read aloud by a staff member in a private setting. 
This must be done with care and positive regard for 
the discomfort that poor readers may feel under such 
circumstances. Competent readers are given approximately 
45 minutes to complete the forms. 

We have clients complete a routine, brief demographics 
questionnaire. Obtaining a client’s current 
address and phone number is important, as is obtaining 
the number of someone who always knows the client’s 
whereabouts. This information is important for 


Drug Use Disorders 

purposes of outreach efforts during treatment should 
the client stop coming to scheduled therapy sessions or 
need to be contacted for other clinical purposes, and 
contacting clients for routine posttreatment follow-up 
evaluations. 

The Stages of Change Readiness and Treatment Eagerness 
Scale (SOCRATES; Miller & Tonigan, 1996) 
provides information about clients’ perceptions of the 
severity of their drug use problems and their readiness 
to engage in behavior to reduce their drug use. This 
questionnaire provides a quantitative index of motivation 
to change, which may be an important indicator of 
clients’ willingness to comply with certain treatment 
goals. We use three versions of the SOCRATES that 
refer to specific substances (i.e., cocaine, alcohol, and 
other drug use) because clients’ motivations to reduce 
substance use are often drug-specific. For example, almost 
all who seek treatment in our clinic are ready to 
act toward changing their cocaine use, but many are 
more ambivalent about changing their alcohol or marijuana 
use, which are the two other forms of drug use we 
deal with most frequently. Our approach is to reinforce 
action the patient is ready to take with regard to cocaine 
and to share empathically our empirical knowledge 
about the influence of other forms of drug use on the 
probability of successfully discontinuing cocaine use. 
Our recommendation is that at least short-term abstinence 
from all intoxicating substance use is the path 
with the greatest chance of success. Use of alcohol can 
directly increase the probability of cocaine use and predicts 
poor outcome. Use of marijuana, which does not 
predict poor outcome with regard to cocaine use per se, 
is associated with problems of its own. 

We use an adaptation of the Cocaine Dependency 
Self-Test (Washton, Stone, & Hendrickson, 1988) as an 
efficient means to collect specific information regarding 
the type of adverse effects of cocaine that clients 
have experienced. Systematically collected information 
on the adverse effects of drug use is important. Such information 
is useful in helping clients to problem-solve 
regarding the pros and cons of cocaine use as part of 
efforts to promote and sustain motivation for change 
during the course of treatment. 

A sizable proportion of clients with illicit drug use 
disorders are also problem drinkers, which makes assessment 
of that problem essential. As part of our alcohol 
assessment we use the Michigan Alcoholism 
Screening Test (MAST), a widely used, brief alcoholism 
screening instrument (Selzer, 1971). Considering 
that almost all clients entering treatment for cocaine 

abuse and dependence use alcohol and approximately 
60% meet DSM-IV-TR diagnostic criteria for alcohol 
dependence, the MAST is useful for flagging clients 
with alcohol problems. 

Depressed mood is another common problem among 
those presenting for treatment for drug use disorders. 
We use the Beck Depression Inventory–II (BDI-II; 
Beck, Steer, Ball, & Ranieri, 1996) to screen for depressive 
symptomatology and readminister it on a regular 
basis to monitor progress with those clients who 
score in the clinical range at intake. The average BDI-II 
scores of cocaine abusers entering treatment fall in the 
clinical range. For most clients, those scores decrease 
precipitously after 1 or 2 weeks in treatment. However, 
this is not true for all clients. Therefore, it is important 
to assess carefully and monitor depressive symptomatology, 
and to refer the client or intervene when 
symptoms do not remit. Assessing and monitoring for 
suicide risk are important as well. We do so using a 
protocol we developed in collaboration with our local 
mental health crisis service. 

The Symptom Checklist 90—Revised (SCL-90-R; 
Derogatis, 1983) is also used to screen for psychiatric 
symptomatology more broadly and is helpful in determining 
whether a more in-depth psychiatric evaluation 
is warranted. The SCL-90-R also can be easily readministered 
to monitor progress or change in psychiatric 
status. 

After clients complete these self-administered questionnaires, 
they are reviewed by clinic staff to be sure 
that all questions have been completed and that the information 
appears consistent. Any obvious inconsistencies 
are resolved with the client. 

Program Description 

We find it useful to break up the data-gathering aspects 
of the initial assessment between completion of the 
self-administered questionnaires and initiation of the 
structured interviews. We provide a brief description of 
the treatment program and its philosophy at this time. 
Clients are given the opportunity to ask questions or 
to express any concerns they may have. The goal here 
is to orient clients to what will happen in treatment, to 
create an atmosphere of optimism, and to help clients 
feel hopeful that they can succeed in treatment. This 
description and interaction is typically brief (10–15 
minutes). A therapist provides more detailed rationales 
and descriptions during this same intake session, but 
after the structured interviews are completed. When 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

asked questions about the treatment process, the intake 
worker provides brief answers and reassures the client 
that a therapist will soon be meeting with him/her to 
provide much more information about the program and 
how it works. 

In providing the brief description, the intake worker 
explains that our program is confidential and specifically 
designed for persons who have problems with cocaine. 
For obvious reasons, users of illicit drugs are 
often quite concerned about confidentiality. Clients are 
informed about the overall duration of treatment, the 
recommended frequency and duration of clinic visits, 
and the general foci and orientation of our treatment 
approach (i.e., lifestyle changes). We explain that the 
primary goals of such changes are that clients discontinue 
cocaine use and make positive changes that result 
in greater life satisfaction. Examples of what might 
occur during treatment are provided: 

“If you are interested in finding a job, the therapists 
will help you with the search, with a résumé, and 
with transportation and phone support, if necessary. 
If you would like to go back to school, we can help 
you obtain the applications, access funding and assistance, 
and even take you to an interview if you 
don’t have transportation. If you are having relationship 
problems, relationship counseling is available. 
If you don’t regularly participate in any fun activities, 
we have lots of suggestions and may even take 
you to some of these, like basketball, tennis, fishing, 
boating, arts and crafts classes, and so forth. 

“Also, we provide coping skills training. So if you 
have problems controlling anger, we can help with 
anger management. If you have money problems, 
we can assist you with financial management. If you 
have difficulty with behavior problems with your 
children, we can assist you in get some help with that 
problem. If you have trouble relaxing, we can work 
on relaxation skills and stress management, and so 
forth.” 

In addition, the intake worker provides a very brief description 
of our clinic’s incentive program: 

“You also will participate in our incentive program. 
How this works is that if you provide urine samples 
that are cocaine-free, you earn points that can be 
used to support your goals. What that means is, if 
you stay clean, you accumulate points that can be 
used to pay for activities such as going to the mov


ies, joining a gym, taking a class, buying a fishing 
rod, and so forth. Your therapist will tell you more 
about these things when you meet him/her after our 
interview.” 

Semistructured Interviews 

A semistructured drug history interview (developed in 
our clinic) is used to facilitate collection of information 
on current and past drug use. Such detailed information 
is essential for proper treatment planning. 

The goal in completing a drug use history is to obtain 
detailed information regarding the duration, severity, 
and pattern of the client’s drug use. The accuracy of 
the client’s report of drug use (amount and frequency) 
is facilitated by an effective technique for reviewing 
recent use (i.e., the Timeline Follow-Back Interview; 
Sobell & Sobell, 1992; for a review see Hjorthoj, 
Hjorthoj, & Nordendoft, 2012). Using a calendar as a 
prompt, clients are asked to recall on a day-by-day basis 
the number of days they used in the past week and the 
amount used per occasion. Grams are typically the best 
metric for determining amount of cocaine used. The 
same assessment is conducted for the past 3 weeks and 
as far back in time as needed for diagnostic reasons. 
This technique results in a good overview of the client’s 
pattern of drug use during the past 30 days. The 
intake worker asks for as much clarification as possible 
to obtain an accurate assessment of drug use history. 
Diagnoses of abuse and dependence are made later by 
master’s- or doctorate-level psychologists. 

The Addiction Severity Index (ASI; McLellan, Cacciola, 
Alterman, Rikoon, & Carise, 2006) is designed 
to provide reliable, valid assessments of multiple problems 
commonly associated with drug use, and a quantitative, 
time-based assessment of problem severity in 
the following areas: alcohol and drug use; employment; 
and medical, legal, family, social, and psychological 
functioning. The information obtained in the ASI is 
quite useful for developing treatment plans that include 
lifestyle change goals. It is also a useful instrument 
for assessing progress at follow-up, in that it is timebased 
and yields quantitative composite scores for multiple 
problem areas. Training on ASI administration is 
necessary to ensure that the intake worker conducts a 
reliable ASI interview (for information on training in 
the use of the ASI, see www.tresearch.org/training/ 
asi_train.htm). 

A Practical Needs Assessment Questionnaire (developed 
in our clinic) determines whether the client has 


Drug Use Disorders 

any pressing needs or crises that may interfere with initial 
treatment engagement (e.g., housing, legal, transportation, 
or child care). The intake worker asks specific 
questions regarding current housing, child care, 
legal circumstances, medical issues, and other matters 
that might be of current and serious concern to the client. 
Detailed information is collected on any identified 
crisis. The rationale here is to identify matters that may 
need immediate clinical attention. The lives of many 
individuals entering treatment for drug dependence are 
in chaos. The probability of engaging and keeping such 
clients in treatment may be compromised if swift assistance 
relative to certain acute needs is not provided, 
typically in the form of referrals to community agencies 
for assistance. 

After completing these interviews, the intake worker 
informs clients that they will be meeting with their 
therapist in a few minutes. During a brief break (5–10 
minutes), the intake worker completes an intake summary 
sheet for the therapist taking on this new case, 
along with all of the supporting intake information. The 
intake worker meets briefly with the therapist to review 
the case. Patients are then introduced to their therapists. 
We try never to allow a patient to leave the intake interview 
without a brief meeting with a therapist, so that 
he/she can depart with the feeling that treatment has 
begun, and with concrete plans for abstaining from cocaine 
use until the next clinic visit. 

In many ways this initial meeting is an orientation 
session to establish rapport with the client and provide 
further rationales for our treatment approach. Doing 
so permits clients to develop clear expectations about 
treatment. We continue with the “can do” approach, acknowledging 
how hard the client and clinic staff will 
have to work to succeed, but conveying a very confident 
message that success can be achieved by working 
together. The therapist and patient collaboratively 
begin formulating an initial treatment plan during this 
session. Clients are oriented to the rigorous urinalysis 
testing regimen that is a central component of this 
treatment. If it appears that a medication is indicated, 
initial steps are taken toward implementing the relevant 
medical protocols for making that happen. With the 
cocaine-dependent population, we routinely use a regimen 
of clinic-monitored disulfiram therapy to address 
problem drinking, which also reduces cocaine use 
(Carroll, Nich, Ball, McCance, & Rounsaville, 1998). 
Recently we have begun using a regimen of clinicmonitored 
naltrexone therapy because the prevalence 
of prescription opioid abuse has increased. 

Behavioral aND coGNitive‑Behavioral 
theraPies for illicit DruG 
use DisorDers 

Conceptual Framework 

Behavioral and cognitive-behavioral therapies are 
based largely on the concepts and principles of operant 
and respondent conditioning, and social learning 
theory. Within this conceptual framework, drug use is 
considered learned behavior that is maintained, at least 
in part, by the reinforcing effects of the pharmacological 
actions of drugs in conjunction with social and 
other nonpharmacological reinforcement derived from 
the drug-abusing lifestyle (Higgins, Heil, & Lussier, 
2004). The reliable empirical observation that abused 
drugs function as reinforcers in humans and laboratory 
animals provides sound scientific support for that position 
(Griffiths, Bigelow, & Henningfield, 1980; Higgins 
et al., 2004). Cocaine, other psychomotor stimulants, 
ethanol, opioids, nicotine, and sedatives serve as 
reinforcers and are voluntarily self-administered by a 
variety of species. Moreover, through respondent and 
operant conditioning, environmental events that previously 
have been paired with drug use reliably lead 
to drug-seeking behavior. Physical dependence is not 
necessary for these drugs to support ongoing and stable 
patterns of voluntary drug seeking and use in otherwise 
healthy laboratory animals or humans. Commonalities 
do not end there. Effects of alterations in drug availability, 
drug dose, schedule of reinforcement, and other 
environmental manipulations of drug use are consistent 
and generalize across different species and types 
of drug abuse (Griffiths et al., 1980; Higgins et al., 
2004). These commonalities support a theoretical position 
that reinforcement and other principles of learning 
are fundamental determinants of drug use, abuse, and 
dependence. 

Within this conceptual model, then, drug use is considered 
a normal, learned behavior that falls along a 
frequency continuum ranging from patterns of little use 
and few problems to excessive use and many untoward 
effects, including death. The same processes and 
principles of learning are assumed to operate across the 
continuum. All physically intact humans are assumed 
to possess the necessary neurobiological systems to experience 
drug-produced reinforcement; hence, they develop 
patterns of drug use, abuse, and dependence. Said 
differently, individuals need not have any exceptional 
or pathological characteristics to develop drug abuse 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

or dependence. Clearly, genetic or acquired characteristics 
(e.g., family history of substance dependence, 
other psychiatric disorders) can affect the probability 
of developing drug abuse or dependence (i.e., they are 
risk factors), but this model assumes that such special 
characteristics are not necessary for these disorders to 
emerge. 

Treatment is designed to assist in reorganizing the 
physical and social environments of the user. The goal 
is to weaken systematically the influence of reinforcement 
derived from drug use and the related drug-using 
lifestyle, and to increase the frequency of reinforcement 
derived from healthier alternative activities, especially 
those that are incompatible with continued drug 
use. Below we describe the basic categories of empirically 
tested and efficacious behavioral and cognitivebehavioral 
therapies for achieving these overarching 
goals (Carroll & Onken, 2005). 

Prototypical Behavioral 
and Cognitive‑Behavioral Interventions 
and Empirical Support for Efficacy 

At least four empirically based prototypical behavioral 
and cognitive-behavioral interventions are used in the 
treatment of illicit drug use disorders (Carroll & Onken, 
2005). First is cognitive-behavioral/relapse prevention 
therapy, which has been shown to be effective with cocaine, 
methamphetamine, and other types of drug use 
disorders (e.g., Carroll et al., 1994; Rawson et al., 2004; 
Reback & Shoptaw, in press). Typically this approach 
entails functional analysis training through which clients 
learn to identify environmental antecedents and 
consequences that influence their drug use. Functional 
analysis is typically accompanied by skills training on 
how to rearrange one’s environment to alter the probability 
of drug use by either avoiding high-risk settings 
or managing them effectively when contact cannot be 
avoided. Cognitive strategies are often used to identify 
and modify unrealistic expectations about drug use, to 
cope with craving for drug use, and to change thinking 
patterns that increase the likelihood of drug use. 
Social skills training is often incorporated when clients 
have used drugs to cope with social anxiety or when 
particular skills deficits limit clients’ access to alternative, 
healthier sources of reinforcement (e.g., Monti, 
Rohsenow, Michalec, & Abrams, 1997). Systematic 
training is included to prevent relapse, with sufficient 
emphasis that the terms “cognitive-behavioral therapy” 
and “relapse prevention therapy” are often used inter


changeably. There is good evidence that this approach 
is efficacious in treating illicit drug use disorders (for 
a meta-analysis, see Irvin, Bowers, Dunn, & Wong, 
1999). 

Second, contingency management is an efficacious 
behavioral treatment strategy commonly used 
to treat cocaine, opiate, and other types of illicit drug 
use disorders (Higgins, Silverman, & Heil, 2008), as 
well as other behavioral health problems (see Supplemental 
Issue of Preventive Medicine on “Incentives 
and Health”; Higgins, Silverman, Sigmon, & Naito, 
2012). With contingency management, reinforcing and 
punishing consequences are systematically used to increase 
abstinence from drug use or to improve other 
therapeutic goals, such as treatment attendance or medication 
compliance (Higgins et al., 2008). A particular 
form of contingency management, wherein clients 
receive vouchers that are exchangeable for retail items 
contingent on objective evidence of recent abstinence 
from drug use, has become a common intervention for 
clients with illicit drug use disorders. We know of at 
least two meta-analyses supporting the efficacy of contingency 
management with methadone maintenance 
patients (Griffith, Rowan-Szal, Roark, & Simpson, 
2000) and in the treatment of drug use disorders more 
generally (Lussier, Heil, Mongeon, Badger, & Higgins, 
2006). 

Third, motivational interviewing, an efficacious intervention 
with problem drinkers (Vasilaki, Hosier, & 
Cox, 2006), is being used more frequently to treat illicit 
drug use disorders as well. Motivational interviewing 
is a brief intervention designed to facilitate behavior 
change by helping clients to identify personal values 
and goals, to examine whether drug use may conflict 
with those values and goals, and to explore how to resolve 
any ambivalence or conflict between personal 
goals and values, and ongoing drug use (Miller & Rollnick, 
2002). Results on the use of motivational interviewing 
with illicit drug use disorders are still mixed 
(e.g., Martino, Carroll, & Rounsaville, 2006; Smedslund 
et al., 2011). 

Fourth, behavioral couple therapy has been effective 
in the treatment of illicit drug use disorders, although it 
has not been as extensively investigated as alcohol use 
disorders (Carroll & Onken, 2005; O’Farrell & Clements, 
2012). Therapy typically emphasizes improved 
communication skills. Couples are taught how to negotiate 
for change in each other’s behavior to make the 
relationship more reinforcing. A contract wherein the 
designated client agrees to abstain from drug use and/ 


Drug Use Disorders 

or to comply with a recommended medication regimen 
is typically involved. There is also evidence that 
behavioral family counseling has efficacy with adolescents 
who have illicit drug use disorders (e.g., Azrin, 
Donohue, Besalel, Kogan, & Acierno, 1994) as do other 
family therapy interventions (e.g., Henggeler, Pickrel, 
Brondino, & Crouch, 1996; Liddle et al., 2001). 

It is a common practice to provide multielement 
treatments for illicit drug use disorders that incorporate 
many of the specific interventions we have outlined 
(e.g., Bellack, Bennett, Gearson, Brown, & Yang, 
2006). Indeed CRA plus vouchers, which we use to treat 
cocaine dependence, incorporates all of the interventions 
outlined earlier except for family therapies with 
adolescents. Below we describe the CRA plus vouchers 
intervention and its implementation in the treatment of 
cocaine dependence. With regard to efficacy, the metaanalysis 
supporting the efficacy of vouchers was noted 
earlier (Lussier et al., 2006). A meta-analysis supports 
the efficacy of CRA, with and without vouchers, in the 
treatment of drug use disorders (Roozen et al., 2004), 
and a randomized trial has demonstrated that the CRA 
component is an active element of the CRA plus vouchers 
treatment (Higgins et al., 2003). 

CRA plus Vouchers 

The recommended duration of CRA plus vouchers 
therapy is 24 weeks of treatment and 24 weeks of aftercare 
(Budney & Higgins, 1998). The influence of 
treatment duration has not yet been examined experimentally 
with this or other efficacious psychosocial 
treatments for drug use disorders, but a duration of 3 or 
more months of care is generally recommended (Principle 
5, Table 14.1). 

CRA therapy in this model is delivered in individual 
sessions, although CRA has been delivered effectively 
in a group therapy format with alcohol-dependent clients 
(Azrin, 1976). As we noted earlier, the treatment 
involves two main components: CRA and vouchers. 

The Community Reinforcement Approach 

Before we get into the specific elements of CRA, more 
general characteristics of the therapy style are worth 
mentioning. Therapists try to be flexible in appointment 
scheduling and goal setting, which we believe 
facilitates treatment retention and progress toward target 
goals. Particularly in the early stages of treatment, 
therapists try to work around client’s schedules and 

generally make participation in treatment convenient. 
We try to tolerate tardiness to sessions and early departure 
from sessions, to be flexible in the time of day that 
sessions are scheduled, and we even meet with clients 
outside the office, if necessary. With especially difficult 
clients, improvements in these areas become part of the 
treatment plan. 

Therapists must exhibit empathy and good listening 
skills. They need to convey a sincere understanding 
of the client’s situation and its inherent difficulties. 
Throughout treatment, therapists avoid making value 
judgments, and instead exhibit genuine empathy and 
consideration for the difficult challenges that clients 
face. 

Last, CRA requires both therapists and patients to 
develop an active, make-it-happen attitude throughout 
treatment. Active problem solving is a routine part of 
the therapeutic relationship. Within ethical boundaries, 
therapists are committed to doing what it takes to facilitate 
lifestyle changes on the part of clients. Therapists 
take clients to appointments or job interviews. They 
initiate recreational activities with clients and schedule 
sessions at different times of day to accomplish specific 
goals. They have clients make phone calls from their office, 
and they search newspapers for job possibilities or 
ideas for healthy recreational activities in which clients 
might be able to participate. In summary, the motto of 
CRA therapists is “We can make it happen,” and they 
try their best to model that approach for patients. 

CRA is delivered in twice-weekly 1- to 1.5-hour 
therapy sessions during the initial 12 weeks and onceweekly 
sessions of the same duration during the final 
12 weeks of treatment. Sessions focus on the following 
seven general topics, depending on the needs of the individual 
client. 

First, clients are instructed in how to recognize antecedents 
and consequences of their cocaine use, that 
is, how to functionally analyze their cocaine use. They 
are also instructed in how to use that information to 
reduce the probability of using cocaine. A twofold message 
is conveyed to the client: (1) His/her cocaine use is 
orderly behavior that is more likely to occur under certain 
circumstances than others, and (2) by learning to 
identify the circumstances that affect his/her cocaine 
use, the client can develop and implement plans to reduce 
the likelihood of future cocaine use. Our methods 
for teaching functional analysis are based on the work 
of Miller and Muñoz (e.g., 2005) and McCrady (Chapter 
13, this volume), whose methods are used widely in 
substance abuse treatment. 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

Using the form shown in Figure 14.1, we help clients 

analyze instances of their own cocaine use. We explain 

the following: 

“A functional analysis allows you to identify the immediate 
causes of your cocaine use. You have probably 
noticed that in certain situations you use cocaine, 
whereas in others you do not. The situations around 
us can powerfully control cocaine use, particularly if 
we are unaware of their influence. 

“Some of the situations that can influence cocaine 
use are people you are with, places you go, time of 
day, the amount of money you have with you, how 
much alcohol you have consumed, and how you are 
feeling. The first step in understanding your cocaine 
use is to identify the situations in which you are 
likely to use. We call that identifying your ‘triggers.’ 
You will also want to identify consequences of your 
use; that is, identify the immediate, usually positive 
consequences (getting high, having fun), and the delayed, 
often negative consequences (blowing your 
money, unwanted sexual encounters, fights with your 
spouse). As you identify triggers and consequences, 
you will discover certain patterns to your cocaine 
use that are important targets for intervention.” 

Clients are assigned the task of analyzing at least 

three recent episodes of cocaine use. Learning to ana


lyze one’s cocaine use is emphasized during initial 

treatment sessions, but the exercise is used throughout 
the treatment process to help clients understand and 
modify any lapses to cocaine use, as well as to address 
problems with cocaine craving. 

In conjunction with functional analysis, clients are 
taught self-management plans for using the information 
revealed in the functional analyses to decrease 
the chances of future cocaine use. Using the selfmanagement 
planning sheet shown in Figure 14.2, clients 
are counseled to restructure their daily activities to 
minimize contact with known antecedents of cocaine 
use, to find alternatives to the positive consequences of 
cocaine use, and to make explicit the negative consequences 
of cocaine use. 

A key part of self-management planning that is implemented 
with most clients is drug-refusal training. 
Most cocaine abusers who are trying to quit cocaine 
use continue to have contact, either planned or inadvertent, 
with individuals who are still using. Turning down 
cocaine or opportunities to go places where cocaine 
is available is more difficult than most clients anticipate. 
We approach this as a special case of assertiveness 
training (e.g., McCrady, Chapter 13, this volume; 
Meyers & Smith, 1995). The key components of effective 
refusal are shown in Table 14.2. Therapists should 
explain the rationale for drug-refusal skills training, 
engage the client in a detailed discussion of the key elements 
of effective refusal, assist the client in formulating 
his/her own refusal style (incorporating the key ele-

Consequences

Thoughts 
Trigger 
and 
feelings 
Behavior 
Positive 
Negative 


figUre 14.1. Form for functional analysis of substance use. 


Drug Use Disorders 

Trigger Plans ± Consequences 
Difficulty 
(1–10) 
1. a 
b 
c 
d 
e. 

figUre 14.2. Self-management planning sheet. From Budney and Higgins (1998). 

ments), and role-play some scenes in which the client 
is offered cocaine. The role-played situations should 
be very specific and realistic for the client in terms of 
people, times of day, location, and so forth. Client and 
therapist should alternate roles, so that the former has 
the opportunity to practice while receiving constructive 
feedback, and the latter has the opportunity to model 
effective refusal skills. 

Second, all clients receive instruction in developing 
a new social network that supports a healthier lifestyle 
and getting involved with enjoyable recreational activities 
that do not involve cocaine or other drug use. 
Systematically developing and maintaining contacts 

table 14.2. Components of effective 
refusal 

1. No should be the first thing you say. 
2. Tell the person offering you drugs or asking you to go 
out not to ask you now or in the future if you want to do 
cocaine. Saying things like “maybe later,” “I have to get 
home,” or “I’m on medication,” and so forth, just make it 
likely that he or she will ask again. 
3. Body language is important: 
a. Making good eye contact is important; look directly 
at the person when you answer. 
b. Your expression and tone should clearly indicate that 
you are serious. 
4. Offer an alternative, if you want to do something else 
with that person. Make sure that it is something that is 
incompatible with cocaine use (taking your children for a 
walk or to the park, going to work out, etc.). 
5. Change the subject to a new topic of conversation. 
with “safe” social networks and participation in ”safe” 
recreational activities remain a high priority throughout 
treatment for the vast majority of clients. Specific 
treatment goals are set, and weekly progress on specific 
goals is monitored (Principle 4, Table 14.1). 

Clearly, plans for developing healthy social networks 
and recreational activities must be individualized depending 
on the circumstances, skills, and interests 
of clients. For clients who are willing to participate, 
self-help groups (Alcoholics Anonymous or Narcotics 
Anonymous) can be an effective way to develop a new 
network of associates that supports a sober lifestyle. 
A clinic staff member often accompanies a client to 
his/her first self-help meeting or two. By no means do 
we focus exclusively on or mandate self-help involvement. 
We assist clients with getting involved in a wide 
variety of social groups that reinforce a healthy lifestyle 
(e.g., church groups). Clinic staff members accompany 
clients who are trying new, healthy activities. 
Some clients wish to reinitiate activities in which they 
engaged prior to becoming involved with cocaine use, 
or have clear ideas about activities they would like to 
pursue. We assist those clients in renewing or initiating 
participation in those activities. Many others either 
never engaged in recreation as adults without drug 
involvement or are simply unable to identify any activities 
they would currently like to pursue. We often 
have these clients complete a leisure interest inventory 
to prompt ideas about activities they might have liked 
previously or otherwise want to explore. We encourage 
clients to sample new activities even if they are unsure 
whether they will find them enjoyable. As we describe 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

below, vouchers may be used to support costs of initiating 
recreational and other activities that support a 
healthy lifestyle. 

Third, various other forms of individualized skills 
training are provided, usually to address some specific 
skills deficit that may influence directly or indirectly 
a client’s risk for cocaine use (e.g., time management, 
problem solving, assertiveness training, social skills 
training, and mood management). For example, essential 
to success with the self-management skills and 
social/recreational goals discussed earlier is some level 
of time management skills. All clients are given daily 
planners to facilitate planning. Because clients may 
lose or forget their planners, providing photocopies 
to cover the next week of treatment is a good strategy. 
Therapists provide the following rationale: 

“This part of your treatment involves learning to plan, 
schedule, and prioritize the events and activities in 
your life. Solving your cocaine problem requires 
making substantial lifestyle changes; it is important 
to develop efficient ways to do this. Some patients 
say they don’t like to plan—they like to be spontaneous. 
But if they don’t find a way to schedule and 
organize their lives, they often get overwhelmed and 
don’t achieve their goals.” 

With most clients, time management in some form is 
worked on throughout treatment. The importance of 
writing down a schedule of activities that help to promote 
cocaine abstinence between therapy sessions is 
emphasized in each session. Planning for “high-risk” 
times is particularly important. Use of “to do” lists, 
daily planning, and prioritizing activities is addressed. 

As other examples of skills training, we implement 
protocols on controlling depression (Lewinsohn, 
Muñoz, Youngren, & Zeiss, 1986; Muñoz & Miranda, 
2000) with those clients whose depression continues 
after they discontinue cocaine use (see Principle 
8, Table 14.1). We sometimes implement social skills 
and relaxation training with individuals who report 
social anxiety about meeting new people, dating, and 
so forth (Rodebaugh, Holaway, & Heimberg, 2004). 
Many clients report persistent problems with insomnia 
following discontinuation of drug use. With them we 
often implement a protocol based on those developed 
by Morin (2004). We often work with clients regarding 
money management. With many clients this might 
simply involve helping them arrange direct deposit for 
their paycheck, so that they are not tempted to use be


cause they have a large sum of cash on hand. For others, 
this might involve a plan to get out of debt, which 
can help to reduce stress. Because clients often have so 
many problems that could benefit from our assistance, 
we follow a rule of only treating those problems that we 
feel directly or indirectly affect the probability of initial 
and longer-term cocaine abstinence for individual 
clients. Here we rely heavily on functional analysis and 
other available information regarding the client’s cocaine 
use. For problems that do not appear to be related 
to cocaine use but warrant professional attention, we 
generally make a referral. We work very hard to keep 
treatment focused on resolving the problem of cocaine 
use, and not being sidetracked by other pressing problems 
that may have no direct or indirect effect on the 
presenting problem of cocaine dependence. 

Fourth, unemployed clients are offered Job Club, 
which is an efficacious method to help chronically unemployed 
individuals obtain employment (see the Job 
Club manual; Azrin & Besalel, 1980). The majority of 
people who seek treatment for cocaine dependence are 
unemployed, so we offer this service to many of our 
clients. We assist others in pursuing educational goals 
or new career paths. A meaningful vocation is fundamental 
to a healthy lifestyle, and we recommend goals 
directed toward vocational enhancement for all clients. 
Rules that we follow for several common types of vocational 
problems are outlined in Table 14.3. 

Fifth, clients with romantic partners who are not 
drug abusers are offered behavioral couple therapy, an 
intervention designed to teach couples positive communication 
skills and how to negotiate reciprocal contracts 
for desired changes in each other’s behavior. We 
attempt to deliver relationship counseling across eight 
sessions, with the first four sessions delivered across 
consecutive weeks and the next four delivered on alternating 
weeks. We introduce this aspect of therapy with 
the following rationale: 

“As you well know, an important area of your life that 
is negatively affected by cocaine problems is your 
relationship with your partner. Those close to the 
person with the problem are typically most adversely 
affected by the problem. Many partners of cocainedependent 
individuals have tried many times to 
help their mate to stop using. Strategies for trying 
to help vary. Anger and frustration usually build up, 
and feelings of hopelessness and helplessness arise. 
Sometimes attempts to help are met with resentment 
and anger from the partner with the problem. 


Drug Use Disorders 

table 14.3. examples of goals set 
in Vocational Counseling 

For the unemployed client: 

•• 
Eight job contacts per week. 
•• 
Develop a resume. 
•• 
Send out two resumes with a cover letter per day. 
•• 
Go to the job service twice per week. 
•• 
Enroll in a job training program. 
•• 
Enroll in a vocational exploration program. 
•• 
Take a job-skills-related class. 
•• 
Consider and collect information on educational 

possibilities. 

For the client who works “too many” hours or has irregular 
schedule: 

•• 
Keep work hours between 35 and 50 hours per week. 
•• 
Establish a more regular schedule. 
•• 
Explore alternative work schedules. 

For the person working in a “high risk” for drug use 
environment or the dissatisfied employee: 

•• 
Consider a job change. 
•• 
Submit applications for alternative employment while 
continuing to work. 
•• 
Modify the work environment to reduce risk of drug 

use or improve working conditions. 
•• 
Enroll in a career exploration class. 
•• 
Enroll in job-skills or alternative, career-related 

educational classes. 

“In this part of treatment, we focus on how cocaine 
use has affected your relationship and how we 
can work to increase the positive aspects of your relationship. 
We also discuss ways that your partner 
can assist you in achieving and maintaining abstinence. 
We hope to be able to help you both deal more 
effectively with this cocaine problem. 

“We have found that where there are drug abuse 
problems, there are usually communication problems. 
Usually, we see communication that is filled 
with anger, silence, apathy, or resentment, and many 
times partners try to get their needs met outside the 
relationship. By the time patients come to see us, 
there is little, if any, enjoyment left in the relationship.” 


The intervention involves a related series of exercises. 
Partners independently rate their current level of 
happiness across household responsibilities, child rearing, 
social activities, money, communication, sex and 
affection, academic progress, personal independence, 

partner’s independence, general happiness. These ratings 
are shared and discussed, then rerated weekly to 
monitor progress. Next, a system of “daily reminders 
to be nice” (i.e., express appreciation and affection toward 
one’s spouse) is implemented. The obvious goal 
is to get the partners to take the time to be positive 
with each other. Each partner is expected to engage 
in a daily practice of “nice” gestures toward his/her 
spouse and to keep a daily compliance record of his/ 
her own behavior—not the spouse’s compliance. That 
information is reviewed and shared during sessions. 
After some level of positive interaction is established, 
partners independently identify what a “perfect relationship” 
would entail in terms of the key elements of 
their relationship mentioned earlier—what that perfect 
relationship would look like. Finally, the partners begin 
to work on using positive communication skills to negotiate 
for reciprocal changes in each other’s behavior 
to move toward that “perfect relationship.” The terms 
“positive” and “reciprocal” are fundamentally important 
here. Requests are stated exclusively in positive 
terms, and both members have to be willing to make 
changes. 

Sixth, HIV/AIDS education is provided to all clients 
in the early stages of treatment, along with counseling 
that addresses any specific needs or risk behavior of the 
individual patient (Herrmann et al., 2013). We address 
with all clients the potential for acquiring HIV/AIDS 
from sharing injection equipment and through sexual 
activity. This involves at least two sessions. First, clients 
complete an HIV/AIDS knowledge test. They next 
watch and discuss with their therapist a video on HIV/ 
AIDS. Points emphasized by therapists during the discussion 
are shown in Table 14.4. Clients are also provided 
HIV/AIDS prevention pamphlets and free condoms 
(if desired). The HIV/AIDS knowledge test is 
repeated, and any remaining errors are discussed and 
resolved. Finally, clients are given information about 
being tested for HIV antibodies and hepatitis B and C, 
and are encouraged to get tested (Principle 12, Table 
14.1). Those interested in testing are assisted by clinic 
staff in scheduling an appointment. 

Seventh, all who meet DSM-IV-TR diagnostic criteria 
for alcohol dependence or report that alcohol use is 
involved in their use of cocaine are offered disulfiram 
therapy (see Principle 7, Table 14.1), which is an integral 
part of the CRA treatment for alcoholism (Meyers 
& Smith, 1995), and decreases alcohol and cocaine 
use in clients who are dependent on both substances 
(Carroll et al., 1998). Clients generally ingest a 250-mg 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

table 14.4. Points emphasized 
in discussions of HiV/aids 

1. The fastest-growing risk group for HIV/AIDS is made 
up of people who use intravenous (IV) drugs and their 
sexual partners. At the start of the epidemic, this group 
made up just a small proportion of those getting infected, 
but these numbers are increasing rapidly at the present 
time. Not just gay men get infected! 
2. Review the three ways that HIV is transmitted: (a) 
through sexual contact with an infected person, (b) 
through blood (as in needle sharing), and (c) from 
infected mothers to their babies during pregnancy or at 
the time of birth. Explain that the most efficient way for 
HIV to be transmitted is through blood (blood contains 
the highest concentration of the virus) and that sharing 
needles (“works”) is an “easy” way for the virus to get 
from the system of one person to that of another. 
3. Emphasize the point that people who are infected with 
HIV do not necessarily look sick and might not even 
know they are infected. You cannot tell by looking at 
someone whether that person has the virus. 
4. If clients are currently using IV drugs, point out that 
the only safe thing to do if they tend to share needles 
is to use new needles or to clean them, if they are still 
using. Review the steps necessary for appropriate syringe 
cleaning. 
5. Unprotected sexual intercourse with the exchange of 
body fluids (blood, vaginal fluids, semen, preejaculatory 
fluid) is also an efficient means of giving or receiving 
the virus. Sex can be made safer by using latex condoms 
for each and every sexual encounter (this includes oral, 
vaginal, and anal sex). 
6. Point out that alcohol and other drug use contribute to 
risk because of (a) possible suppression of the immune 
system, and (b) impaired judgment, which can lead to 
increased risk taking (e.g., drug use, unsafe sex). 
daily dose, observed by clinic staff on urinalysis test 
days, and, when possible, by a significant other on the 
other days. We encourage clients to sign a disulfiram 
contract, shown in Figure 14.3. Disulfiram therapy is 
only effective when implemented with procedures to 
monitor compliance with the recommended dosage of 
medication. We find that having staff monitor compliance 
on days that clients report to the clinic works very 
well. Having a significant other monitor compliance on 
the other days works well if the appropriate person is 
available to do so at the frequency needed. When that 
is not possible, we sometimes adopt a practice of having 
the client ingest a larger dose (500 mg) on days when 

he/she reports to the clinic and skip dosing on the intervening 
days. 

Use of substances other than tobacco and caffeine 
is discouraged as well in CRA therapy. Anyone who 
meets DSM-IV-TR criteria for physical dependence on 
opiates is referred to an adjoining service located within 
our clinic for methadone or other opioid replacement 
therapy (see Bickel, Amass, Higgins, Badger, & Esch, 
1997). We recommend marijuana abstinence because 
of the problems associated with its abuse, but we have 
found no evidence that marijuana use or dependence 
adversely affects treatment for cocaine dependence 
(Budney, Higgins, & Wong, 1996). Importantly, we 
never dismiss or refuse to treat a client due to other 
drug use. We recommend cessation of tobacco use but 
usually not during the course of treatment for cocaine 
dependence. That practice may change as new research 
begins to demonstrate that smoking cessation can be 
successfully integrated into simultaneous treatment for 
other substance abuse or dependence disorders. 

Upon completion of the 24 weeks of treatment, 
clients are encouraged to participate in 6 months of 
aftercare in our clinic, which involves at least a oncemonthly 
brief therapy session and a urine toxicology 
screen. More frequent clinic contact is recommended if 
therapist or client deem it necessary. These clinic visits 
might be considered booster sessions that monitor progress 
and address problems with cocaine use or other aspects 
of the lifestyle changes initiated during treatment. 
They also allow for a gradual rather than abrupt ending 
of the client’s involvement with the clinic. 

Voucher Program 

As we noted earlier, the voucher program is a contingency 
management intervention designed to increase 
retention and abstinence. Many cocaine- and other 
drug-dependent individuals arrive in treatment with 
their lives in disarray. A reasonable assumption is 
that some time will be needed to assist these individuals 
in stabilizing and restructuring their lives, so that 
naturalistic sources of reinforcement for abstinence can 
exert some influence over their behavior. A protected 
environment is an option, but the voucher program 
is deemed a less expensive alternative. The goal is to 
have this incentive program play a major role during 
the initial 12 weeks of treatment, during which time 
CRA therapy is ongoing as well. CRA assists clients 
in restructuring their lifestyle, so that naturalistic rein



Drug Use Disorders 

I, 
, 
agree 
to 
take 
disulfiram 
at 
the 
regularly 
scheduled 
time 
outlined 
below. 
I 
agree 
to 
do 
this 
for 
days. 
After 
this 
time,I 
agree 
to 
talk 
to 
my 
therapist 
and 
to 
discuss 
whether 
or 
not 
to 
continue 
taking 
disulfiram. 
I 
also 
agree 
to 
have 
the 
person 
designated 
below 
witness 
the 
administration 
of 
the 
disulfiram 
each 
time 
it 
is 
scheduled. 


I, 
administration 
of 
disulfiram. 
, 
agree 
to 
be 
present 
and 
witness 
each 
take-home 
Time: 
Days: 
Where: 
In 
response 
to 
scheduled, 
I 
agree 
to 
taking 
of 
disulfiram. 
taking 
disulfiram 
as 
asa 
means 
of 
reinforcing 
the 


Patient’s 
Signature 
Partner’s 
Signature 


Therapist’s 
Signature 
Date 


figUre 14.3. Disulfiram contract. 

forcers are in place to sustain cocaine abstinence once 
the vouchers are discontinued. 

The voucher program is implemented in conjunction 
with a rigorous urinalysis monitoring program (see 
Principle 11, Table 14.1). We ask patients to sign an 
Abstinence Contract (Figure 14.4), which describes the 
voucher program and the urinalysis testing schedule. 
Urine specimens are collected from all participants according 
to a Monday, Wednesday, and Friday schedule 
during Weeks 1–12 and a Monday and Thursday schedule 
during Weeks 13–24 of treatment. Specimens are 
screened immediately via an onsite enzyme multiplied 
immunoassay technique (EMIT, Syva Company, San 
Jose, CA) to minimize delays in delivering reinforcement 
for cocaine-negative specimens. To decrease the 
likelihood of submitting bogus specimens, all specimen 
collection is observed by a same-sex staff member, and 
that staff member always reserves the right to request 
another specimen if he/she has any concerns regarding 
the integrity of a specimen. All specimens are screened 
for benzoylecgonine, a cocaine metabolite, and each 

week one randomly selected specimen also is screened 
for the presence of other drugs of abuse. Breath alcohol 
levels (BALs) are assessed at the time urine specimens 
are collected. Failure to submit a scheduled specimen 
is treated as a cocaine-positive result. Participants are 
informed of their urinalysis and BAL results within 
several minutes after submitting specimens. 

Urine specimens collected during Weeks 1–12 that 
test negative for benzoylecgonine earn points that are 
recorded on vouchers and given to participants. Points 
are worth the equivalent of $0.25 each. Money is never 
provided directly to clients. Instead, points are used to 
purchase retail items in the community. A staff member 
makes all purchases. The first negative specimen 
is worth 10 points at $0.25/point or $2.50. The value 
of vouchers for each subsequent, consecutive negative 
specimen increases by 5 points (second = 15 points, 
third = 20 points, etc.). To further increase the likelihood 
of continuous cocaine abstinence, the equivalent 
of a $10 bonus is earned for each three, consecutive negative 
specimens. A specimen that is cocaine-positive 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

This is an agreement between (the client) and 

 (the therapist) to help the client maintain abstinence from cocaine. By 
this agreement I direct my therapist to establish a schedule for collecting urine specimens from me for 24 weeks. I will 
provide urine samples three times per week on a Monday, Wednesday, and Friday schedule during the first 12 weeks of 
treatment. During the second 12 weeks of treatment (Weeks 13–24), urine samples will be collected two times per week 
on a Monday and Thursday schedule. A clinical staff member of my same sex will observe the urination. Half of each 
urine sample will be submitted for immediate analysis and half will be saved at the clinic. Samples will be assayed for a 
variety of drugs of abuse, among which are cocaine, amphetamines, opioids, marijuana, and sedatives. 

Each specimen collection requires 3.0 ounces of urine. If the quantity is insufficient for analysis, that will be considered a 
failure to provide a scheduled sample. 

If I travel out of town due to an emergency, I will inform my therapist in advance of leaving. My therapist is authorized to 
verify such absences with . If I require hospitalization, my therapist 
will arrange to collect urine in the hospital. If I am sick and do not require hospitalization, I will still arrange to produce 
scheduled urine specimens. If I have difficulty with transportation, or inclement weather makes it difficult to travel, I will 
work out (with the assistance of the clinical staff) a way to get to the clinic for urine collection. On certain major holidays 
the clinic will be closed. My therapist and I will mutually agree to altered urine schedules on these occasions. 

If for appropriate medical reasons a prescription for one of the drugs which sometimes is abused is written, I will supply 
my therapist with copies of that prescription. The appearance of that drug in the urine will not be counted as a relapse 
to drug use. I hereby direct my therapist to communicate by mail or telephone with the prescribing physician or dentist 
when my therapist deems that action to be appropriate. 

Cocaine-Free Urines: For each cocaine-negative urine sample collected during Weeks 1–12 of treatment, points will be 
earned. Each point is worth the monetary equivalent of $0.25, although they may not be exchanged directly for cash. A 
voucher stating the earned point value will be presented to me following the collection of a cocaine-negative sample. This 
voucher will specify the number of points earned for that day, as well as the cumulative points earned to date and their 
monetary equivalent. 

During the first 12 weeks of treatment, the first cocaine-free urine sample will earn 10 points, with each consecutive 
cocaine-free sample collected thereafter earning an increment of 5 points above the previously earned amount. For 
example, if 10 points are received on Wednesday for a cocaine-free urine sample, Friday’s cocaine-free sample will earn 
15 points, Monday’s will earn 20, and so on. As an added incentive to remain abstinent from cocaine, a $10 bonus will 
be earned for each week of three consecutive cocaine-negative urine samples collected at our clinic. Assuming there are 
no cocaine-positive urine samples collected, the monetary equivalent of $997.50 can be earned during the first 12 weeks 
of treatment. Since a major emphasis in our program is on lifestyle changes, primarily increasing activities that effectively 
compete with drug use, the money earned on this incentive system must be used toward social or recreational goods 
and activities agreed upon by my therapist and myself. A list of acceptable uses of vouchers has been developed for this 
purpose and will be shared with me. During the second 12 weeks of treatment, the incentive program will be changed. 
Rather than earning vouchers for cocaine-negative samples, I will be earning lottery tickets for clean samples. 

For the entire 24 weeks of treatment, immediately after the urinalysis test results indicate that the urine sample is 
cocaine-negative, the following will happen. The vouchers (Weeks 1–12) or lottery tickets (Weeks 13–24) will be 
delivered. Following the presentation of each voucher, I will be asked if I would like to “purchase” any goods or services. 
Vouchers may be used at any time during the 24-week program. Earned vouchers cannot be taken away from me under 
any circumstances. The procedure for dealing with cocaine-positive urine samples is discussed below. 

Cocaine-Positive Urines: All urine samples will be screened for drug use. A record will be kept of all drugs screened 
positive, although this contract will be in effect for cocaine only. For each cocaine-positive urine sample collected I will 

(continued) 

figUre 14.4. Sample abstinence contract. 


Drug Use Disorders 

not receive a voucher. In addition, the voucher earned for the next cocaine-free urine sample will be reset to 10. To 
reset the voucher value to where it was prior to the cocaine “slip,” I must provide five consecutive cocaine-free samples. 
The fifth “clean” sample will then earn me the same monetary equivalent as that earned for the sample preceding the 
cocaine-positive one, and the system outlined earlier will continue to be in effect (i.e., each clean sample will earn 5 
points more than the previous one). 

Failure to Provide a Urine Sample: Failure to provide a urine sample on the designated date (without prior approval of 
my therapist) will be treated as a cocaine-positive sample and the procedures noted earlier will be in effect. Although 
clinic staff will make an attempt to obtain the sample by coming to my home (with my permission, of course), cocainenegative 
urine samples collected in this manner will not earn voucher points, nor will they reset my voucher value to 10. 
In effect, cocaine-negative samples collected outside of our clinic (except in the case of hospitalization) are “neutral.” On 
the other hand, if clinic staff obtain a sample from me outside of the clinic, and the sample is cocaine-positive, it will be 
treated in the manner outlined above for cocaine-positive urine samples. 

My signature below acknowledges that I agree to the urinalysis monitoring system outlined above. This system has been 
carefully explained to me, and I understand the outcome of providing both cocaine-negative and cocaine-positive urine 
samples while I am a client at the clinic. 

Client 

Date Therapist 

figUre 14.4. (continued) 

or failure to submit a scheduled specimen resets the 
value of vouchers back to the initial $2.50, from which 
they can escalate again according to the same schedule. 
Submission of five consecutive cocaine-negative 
specimens following submission of a positive specimen 
returns the value of points to where they were prior to 
the reset. Points cannot be lost once they are earned. 

Patients and therapists jointly select retail items to be 
purchased with points. The items commonly obtained 
are quite diverse, including YMCA passes, continuing 
education materials, fishing licenses, gift certificates to 
local restaurants, hobby materials, and so forth. Therapists 
retain veto power over all purchases. Purchases 
are only approved if therapists deem them to be in concert 
with individual treatment goals of increasing drugfree, 
healthy activities. 

The voucher program is discontinued at the end of 
Week 12. During Weeks 13–24, participants receive a 
single $1.00 Vermont State Lottery ticket per cocainenegative 
urinalysis test. Across the 24 weeks of treatment, 
patients can earn a maximum of $997.50 in 
vouchers during Weeks 1–12 and $24 in lottery tickets 
during Weeks 13–24. No material incentives are 
delivered during the recommended 6-month aftercare 

period. There is strong evidence that vouchers worth 
only several hundred dollars over the 12-week course 
of treatment are efficacious, although the magnitude of 
the treatment effect decreases significantly as the size 
of the incentive decreases (Lussier et al., 2006). 

Getting Therapy Under Way 

The therapist has many tasks to accomplish during 
the first two sessions (Week 1) of treatment, in addition 
to simply getting to know the client and developing 
rapport. These sessions are critical to enhancing 
motivation and setting the tone for treatment. Hence, 
we provide detailed descriptions of the specific tasks to 
accomplish during initial therapy sessions. 

As discussed earlier, urinalysis and cocaine use test 
results are the first areas addressed. By starting the session 
with a direct assessment of cocaine use, the therapist 
provides a clear message that the focus of this treatment 
is the cocaine use disorder. 

After a discussion of cocaine use and voucher earnings, 
the therapist should make sure that the client has 
completed all the intake materials. Here the therapist 
can also answer any new questions the client may have. 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

If practical needs, such as housing, transportation, 
or child care, are issues for treatment attendance, these 
needs should be a primary focus of the first session. 
Therapists should do everything possible to assist clients 
in finding solutions to these problems. 

The therapist should discuss alternative activities or 
strategies for coping with high-risk situations for cocaine 
use, especially situations that are likely to arise 
during the upcoming week. As discussed earlier, having 
the client use appointment books or photocopies 
provided by the clinic is very helpful for scheduling 
alternative plans or activities. The next session should 
also be scheduled, and the client should record the day 
and time in the appointment book. 

The therapist should begin to formulate a comprehensive 
treatment plan with specific goals and methods. 
He/she might introduce this task in the following 
way: 

“A treatment plan will allow us to write down the 
things you and I think are important to accomplish 
and how we plan to go about trying to accomplish 
them. We will use the plan to keep us focused on the 
task at hand—that is, making lifestyle changes that 
will help you stop using cocaine and other drugs, and 
also increase your satisfaction with other important 
areas of your life. The treatment plan will be developed 
through a cooperative effort between you and 
me. It is important that you think the goals we set 
are important and will help you achieve what you 
want in life. My job in this process is to assist you in 
coming up with meaningful, effective goals, and to 
offer advice based on my knowledge and experience 
with treating persons with cocaine and other drug 
problems.” 

The therapist should then present ideas about which 
areas of the client’s life need changes. For each suggested 
change, it is important that the therapist provide 
a rationale that draws from the information collected 
from the client, as well as from research findings and 
clinical experience. An open discussion and exchange 
of ideas should then follow. 

If the client is reluctant to participate, the therapist 
should ask for his/her thoughts on each potential area 
for change. The therapist can facilitate client participation 
with questions such as “What do you think?”; 
“Do you have any thoughts on this?”; “Does this make 
sense to you?”; “Do you think this is important?”; 
and “Is this type of change possible?” It is important 

for therapist and client to agree on which areas of life 
present problems and should be changed. If a client disagrees 
with the therapist’s opinion, those areas should 
be dropped and discussed later in treatment if they continue 
to pose problems. 

After the areas for change are agreed upon, therapist 
and client should discuss each one. Therapists should 
use active listening skills (reflection and empathy) and 
try to keep the focus on the specific areas. They should 
inform clients that they will focus on these problem 
areas in each session. Progress and problems are openly 
discussed, and additions or deletions to the plan are 
decided upon by therapist and client together. 

Next, therapist and client together decide the order 
in which these problem areas should be addressed, always 
remembering that to increase cocaine abstinence 
is the primary goal. Mutual agreement is important, 
and a therapist may need to compromise to achieve 
such agreement. 

Specific goals should then be set for each problem 
area. It is important that the therapist provide a rationale 
for setting specific goals: 

“Setting specific goals is important. They will help us 
stay focused on the primary changes we agreed are 
important for stopping your drug use and achieving 
a more satisfying life without drugs. Specific goals 
also provide a way to measure progress. This can be 
very important because many times progress can be 
slow. You may feel you are getting nowhere. In reality, 
you may be progressing in making changes, but 
you don’t feel much different. Information about specific 
goals will help us both see more clearly whether 
we are heading in the right direction, even if the 
progress is slow. 

“This information can also show when you are not 
progressing as we planned and can lead us to either 
reconsider the goal or find other ways to meet the 
goal. Keeping track of progress on specific goals 
also provides us with a reminder to reward or praise 
you for the hard work you are doing. Lifestyle changes 
are often difficult to make. We would also like you 
to learn to pat yourself on the back and take credit if 
you are doing well.” 

These goals should be quantifiable, so that progress 
can be graphed. Targets for change should be set in the 
priority areas listed in the treatment plan and categorized 
as primary or secondary behavior change goals. 
Examples of typical goals are as follows: 


Drug Use Disorders 

•• 
Five job contacts per week or making an appointment 
for vocational rehabilitation. 
•• 
Engaging in three recreational activities each 
week during high-risk times. 
•• 
Spending 4 hours each week engaging in fun ac


tivities with a family member or friend. 
•• 
Attending class one night each week. 
•• 
Doing 2 hours of homework toward obtaining a 

general equivalency diploma (GED). 

•• 
Planning and doing activities with a person who 
does not use drugs on nights when one typically 
used cocaine. 

A therapist and client should mutually decide on 
these goals. Basic principles of effective goal setting 
should be followed: 

•• 
Set relatively low goals at first, so that the client 
can experience success early. 

•• 
Thoroughly analyze all possible barriers to achieving 
selected goals, so that unrealistic goals are 
avoided. 

•• 
Make sure that the client understands how a goal 
relates to the overall treatment plan. 

It is essential to maximize the probability that the 
client will carry through and achieve the desired behavior 
change. The therapist’s responsibility is to use 
the appropriate counseling style and behavioral procedures 
to increase the probability of compliance with a 
targeted behavior. 

The treatment plan should be updated regularly because 
treatment planning is a process of constant reevaluation, 
assessment, and change based on objective 
indices of progress (Principle 4, Table 14.1). The client 
and therapist together should review, discuss, and assess 
the treatment plan frequently as goals are achieved 
or as interventions fail, or as new information becomes 
available. These changes should also be reviewed at the 
regular clinical supervision meeting. 

Implementing the treatment plan, monitoring progress, 
and modifying and updating the treatment plan 
according to client needs, progress, and problems are 
the “meat” of the remainder of treatment. 

Clinical Supervision 

Doctorate-level psychologists who have expertise in 
behavioral psychology and substance abuse treatment 
provide supervision in our clinic. Supervisors provide 

significant input into treatment plans and selection of 
targets for behavior change. The supervisor provides 
guidance about how to monitor progress. 

Supervision is provided weekly in sessions that usually 
last 2–3 hours, during which all cases are reviewed. 
Therapists update the supervisor and other clinic therapists 
on each patient’s progress based on specific treatment 
goals and whether progress has been made since 
the last supervision meeting. Progress is presented 
graphically for all goals. 

A supervisor’s style in this model should include a 
balance of support, feedback, problem solving, and instruction. 
Considering that CRA plus vouchers requires 
an active therapeutic approach that can be effortful, the 
supervisor must serve as a stable source of support, encouragement, 
and direction in implementing the treatment 
plan. 

We follow a fixed protocol in reviewing cases. First, 
review begins with examination of a graph of the patient’s 
cocaine urinalysis results from the start of treatment. 
Second, we review use of alcohol or any other 
drugs that are being targeted for change. Then we review 
attendance at therapy sessions, primary goals for 
lifestyle changes, and secondary goals for the same. 
Once those treatment targets have been reviewed and 
modified as necessary, any recent crises or relevant 
clinical issues, such as suicidal ideation or newly identified 
problem behaviors, are discussed. 

At any point in treatment, treatment goals and targets 
may be changed. Changes in goals may be precipitated 
by achievement of prior goals, failure to make any 
progress toward a specific goal, and clear indication 
that the goal is not functionally related to cocaine use. 

iMPleMeNtiNG the cra Plus vouchers 
treatMeNt: a case stuDy 

In this section we review the case of a client treated in 
our clinic with the CRA plus vouchers treatment. We 
chose this case because it illustrates well a number of 
different aspects of using this treatment approach. Outcome 
was quite good but certainly not perfect, which is 
to be expected with this population. The case also illustrates 
the multifaceted problems with which cocainedependent 
clients present. 

Bill, a 24-year-old, single (never married), European 
American male, was self-referred to the clinic for 
help with problems with cocaine use. He had been living 
with a friend, who also used cocaine, until several 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

weeks prior to the intake interview, when Bill moved 
in with his parents. He had a 5-year-old daughter who 
lived with an estranged romantic partner. The client 
currently was without legal visitation rights with his 
daughter because of her mother’s concerns over Bill’s 
record of drug use. 

Bill, a high school graduate, had been employed 
full-time in a retail business for the past 3 years. He 
reported that most of the individuals with whom he associated 
were drug abusers. Bill reported a history of 
healthy social and recreational activities, including golf 
and skiing, but he had not engaged in those activities 
with regularity for a number of years. 

He had a history of involvement with the criminal 
justice system, with one conviction for a weapons offense. 
Bill was incarcerated for 3 months related to that 
charge but was not under criminal justice supervision at 
the time he sought treatment. 

Presenting Complaint 

Bill reported being on a 3-day binge prior to intake and 
wanted help with stopping cocaine use. He reported 
numerous prior attempts to stop on his own, but with 
minimal success. Bill reported being “fed up” with 
how he felt after bingeing episodes of cocaine use and 
was concerned about the financial problems his cocaine 
use caused. He also expressed serious concerns that 
his drug use and related lifestyle had resulted in the 
strained relationship with his child and ex-girlfriend 
that interfered with his getting visitation privileges. 

Assessment 

Cocaine Use 

Bill met DSM-IV-TR criteria for cocaine dependence. 
He reported a 6-year history of intranasal cocaine use. 
In his most recent use, 7 days prior to intake, Bill used 

10.5 grams of cocaine at home with friends, reporting 
that this was his typical pattern of use. At intake, Bill 
reported three episodes of cocaine use during the prior 
30 days, with each episode lasting approximately 48 
hours, usually during weekends. He typically used cocaine 
with friends at bars or at friends’ houses. 
His cocaine use was often preceded by spending 
time in bars or working excessive hours, or by certain 
moods that included feeling bored, depressed, anxious, 
or upset. Bill reported a number of serious consequences 
as a result of his cocaine use, including physical and 

financial problems; a relationship breakup; and psychiatric 
symptoms such as depression, anxiety, suicidal 
ideation, and violent impulses. 

Other Drug Use 

Bill’s first use of alcohol was at age 16. He reported 
a pattern of weekly binge drinking, during which he 
would ingest 13–15 shots of hard liquor. He reported 
drinking 5 days out of the past 30 days. Bill’s first use 
of cannabis was at age 14. He reported 10 years of daily 
use and having used cannabis on 30 of the prior 30 
days. He reported limited prior use of amphetamines 
and hallucinogens but no regular or current use of those 
substances. A regular cigarette smoker, Bill smoked approximately 
20 cigarettes per day. Bill reported no previous 
treatment episodes for substance abuse. 

Bill also met DSM-IV-TR criteria for alcohol, cannabis, 
and nicotine dependence. 

Other Psychiatric Problems 

Bill reported a history of depression and suicidal ideation. 
He also noted problems with anger management, 
which he agreed had been a significant problem for 
him, and for which he had previously received counseling. 
His BDI score was 23 at intake (Beck, Ward, 
Mendelson, Mock, & Erbaugh, 1961), but he reported 
no suicidal ideation. 

Motivation to Change 

Bill’s score on the SOCRATES at intake indicated a 
strong commitment to cocaine abstinence. He expressed 
a moderate commitment to alcohol abstinence 
but agreed to disulfiram therapy for the duration of 
treatment. He noted plans to return to social drinking 
after completion of treatment. He was uninterested in 
discontinuing marijuana use, which he did not consider 
a problem, and was not currently interested in discontinuing 
cigarette smoking. 

Conceptualization of the Case 

Bill worked long hours, sometimes holding several jobs 
simultaneously. That practice left little time for other 
types of activities and, as might be expected, he reported 
minimal involvement in any form of ongoing recreational 
activities. Aside from work, then, there were 
few alternative sources of reinforcement to compete 


Drug Use Disorders 

with the reinforcing effects of Bill’s cocaine and other 
drug use. These situations typically snowball, so that 
cocaine and related drug abuse monopolize more and 
more the person’s activities. In this case, Bill’s practices 
of working long hours, frequenting bars, and using 
drugs, and his difficulties with anger management, 
were sufficient to destroy his relationship with his romantic 
partner, thereby greatly restricting his time with 
his daughter. Losing those relationships further eliminated 
any competing sources of reinforcement and also 
freed up additional time and resources to allocate to the 
bar and cocaine use scenes. While we deemed Bill’s 
long work hours to have likely increased his vulnerability 
to the drug-abusing lifestyle, his full-time employment 
also likely provided some protection against 
cocaine gaining even greater control over his behavior. 
Full-time employment is a positive prognostic variable 
with this and other treatments for cocaine dependence, 
as is the use of an intranasal route of cocaine administration, 
which was Bill’s preferred route. 

Treatment Plan 

Cocaine abstinence was the first priority in Bill’s treatment 
plan and is always the main focus in this treatment 
approach. Next, we recommended alcohol abstinence 
due to the close relationship between Bill’s cocaine and 
alcohol use. As mentioned earlier, Bill was unwilling to 
change his use of marijuana despite the rationales we 
provided regarding both the benefits of doing so and 
potential adverse consequences of continuing to smoke. 
Our clinical approach was to look for opportunities 
during the course of treatment to reinforce any movement 
toward reducing or discontinuing marijuana use, 
but not to make Bill’s reluctance to change this problem 
behavior a point of contention. Reestablishing a regular 
pattern of involvement in healthy recreational activities, 
especially activities that might substitute for cocaine 
and alcohol use on weekends, was a high-priority 
goal. The therapist provided the following rationale to 
Bill as to why we deemed participation in these activities 
to be a high priority: 

tHeraPist: Many times, when cocaine or other drugs 
become a regular part of someone’s life, they stop 
doing many of the nondrug activities they used to 
enjoy. That seems to be true in your case. You used 
to do lots of healthy recreational activities, but after 
getting into cocaine use you got away from those 
other activities. 

Bill: No doubt. It’s funny, too, because I’m not even 
sure how that happened. Just gradually got off into 
different things. Never really stopped liking the 
other stuff. Just seems like I sort of drifted away 
from them. 

tHeraPist: That’s a pretty common report. You have 
a lot going for you though, Bill. You have a history 
of doing these healthier activities and having liked 
them. That’s a strength that you’ll be able to build 
upon during treatment. 

Bill: Good, haven’t felt like I’ve had too many strengths 
lately. But how do we do this? What’s the connection 
to my cocaine use? 

tHeraPist: Healthy social and recreational activities 
are important in people’s lives. They provide something 
positive to look forward to after work, a way to 
decrease boredom and to feel healthy, and a chance 
to be with people you like. Such activities can play 
an important part in becoming and staying cocaine 
free. When you give up using drugs, you have to do 
something else during the times you used to use. If 
the things you do are not satisfying or enjoyable, or 
you don’t do anything but sit around and feel lonely 
or bored, you are more likely to use drugs. That is 
why we have a specific treatment component to assist 
you in developing a regular schedule of healthy 
social and recreational activities. 

Bill: Yeah, that could be important for me. I don’t find 
it easy to hang out around the house. I get bored, 
pretty antsy. 

tHeraPist: OK, lets go right to work on these now. We 
gave you a daily planner. Lets plan some activities 
to do between today and your next clinic visit. We 
really have to think carefully about Friday night because 
that’s a high-risk night for you. We’ll be doing 
a lot of this throughout therapy. 

Another high priority was to assist Bill in finding 
an alternative source of employment that would permit 
him to have a more reasonable work schedule, and that 
paid well enough that he would not feel compelled to 
hold several jobs simultaneously. To increase further 
Bill’s involvement in activities that were incompatible 
with the cocaine-using lifestyle, we assisted Bill in 
petitioning for visitation privileges with his daughter. 
Regarding other psychiatric problems, we decided to 
monitor Bill’s BDI scores weekly to see whether they 
followed the precipitous decline that typically occurs 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

with cocaine-dependent patients within a couple of 
weeks of entering treatment. Because anger management 
had been a problem for Bill previously in dealing 
with his estranged partner, and because he would 
have to interact with her if he was to obtain visitation 
privileges, we deemed anger-management treatment 
appropriate. 

Below we outline the progress made in implementing 
this treatment plan. 

Cocaine Abstinence 

Contingent vouchers, as the primary intervention for 
promoting initial abstinence, were made available to 
Bill according to our standard 12-week protocol. Functional 
analysis was also implemented with Bill during 
Sessions 1 and 2. Circumstances that increased the 
likelihood that Bill would use were being at a bar or 
at certain friends’ houses, using alcohol, ending a particularly 
long work week, and experiencing depression 
or boredom. He identified going to the movies or to a 

safe friend’s house, hunting, fishing, and skiing as circumstances 
that decreased his likelihood of using. That 
information was updated and used throughout Bill’s 
course of treatment in self-management planning and 
in planning for social and recreational activities. 

Shown in Figure 14.5 is a cumulative record of Bill’s 
cocaine use and urinalysis results during the 24-week 
treatment. His only instance of use occurred 7 weeks 
into treatment. Bill reported being surprised by the results 
and said that he had smoked marijuana with several 
friends, and that perhaps some cocaine had been 
in the pipe. 

tHeraPist: Hi, Bill. How have things been going? 

Bill: Pretty good. 

tHeraPist: Look, the lab just called with your urinalysis 
results. You’re positive for cocaine. 

Bill: No way. That can’t be right. Wow, I haven’t used 

cocaine. Didn’t do much of anything over the week


end. 


figUre 14.5. Shown is a cumulative record of Bill’s urinalysis test results (Y axis) across 60 consecutive urinalysis 
tests (X axis) conducted during 24 weeks of treatment. 


Drug Use Disorders 

tHeraPist: That’s how the machine read the sample. 
Let’s talk more specifically about what you did over 
the weekend. Let’s review what did you on each of 
the days, and perhaps that will give us some insights 
into what might be going on. 

Bill: Just shut down the shop around midnight and 
went home and went to bed on Friday night. I worked 
Saturday morning. After I got off work, I hung out 
with some friends for a while. 

tHeraPist: No gym like you planned? 

Bill: Nah. Should have, but got sidetracked by running 
into some buddies I hadn’t seen in a while. 

tHeraPist: Any of those guys use cocaine? 

Bill: Yeah, one does, but he knows I’m in treatment. 
I used to use cocaine with him. He doesn’t do any 
cocaine around me now, though. 

tHeraPist: What exactly did you guys do? 

Bill: Just hung out at this one buddy’s house, played 
video games, and watched some television. We 
smoked a couple of bowls of pot. You know, I’m still 
smoking. Could be that the bowl we used had been 
used to smoke cocaine in recently. Bet that was it. 

tHeraPist: Could be. What is pretty clear is that by 
getting off track of what you had planned, you increased 
your vulnerability for problems. 

Bill: Yeah, I agree. I’m not sure I understand why I did 
that. I’ve been doing really well with sticking with 
my plans even when I run into the guys. Was supposed 
to get a ride to the gym from my mom, but 
it was a nice day, so I told her I’d walk. Saw these 
dudes, started talking, and just sort of bagged my 
plans for the gym. 

tHeraPist: I have no doubt about that. You’ve been 
doing a great job up to now with sticking with your 
plans. Bill, you’ve been doing terrific with abstaining 
from cocaine. That is not easy to do and you deserve 
a tremendous amount of credit for all of the 
work you’ve been doing. 

Bill: Shoot, kind of blew it here. 

tHeraPist: Important thing is to try to learn from 
what happened. As you know, my recommendation 
from the start of treatment has been to abstain from 
marijuana use. Marijuana has its own problems, 
plus it puts you into contact with other drug abusers, 
sometimes including cocaine users. 

Bill: I agree with that to some extent, but I don’t re


ally think that marijuana was the problem here. I’ve 
been smoking regularly since starting treatment and 
have been able to stay away from cocaine. What is 
different here is that I hung out all day instead of 
sticking with my plan to go to the gym. That’s where 
I screwed up. That’s the big difference from what I 
had been doing on the other weekends. 

tHeraPist: Good job with your analysis. Keep in mind 
though, if you weren’t still smoking, you wouldn’t 
have had any need to use a pipe—yours or theirs. 
Nevertheless, your point is well taken regarding 
what you did differently this weekend compared to 
the others since you’ve been in treatment. Sticking 
with the plans for alternative activities rather than 
just hanging out has really been working for you. I 
agree with you about that. The most important thing 
to do here is to learn from this situation and move on. 
What do you think you need to do to be sure you’ll 
be cocaine-negative on Wednesday? 

Bill: Well, I guess just keep doing what I’ve been 
doing—sticking to my plans: work, visit Mom, and 
I have a date tomorrow night. I’m scheduled to go 
to the gym tonight, and I’m definitely sticking with 
that. Being clean next time won’t be a problem. 

tHeraPist: How about minimizing your contact with 
any drug users, especially people you’ve used cocaine 
with in the past? We could even role-play how 
you might tell the guys how you have to be going, in 
case you run into them again. 

Bill: I guess I could do that. I don’t see most of those 
guys that often anyway. Yeah, sure. 

tHeraPist: Good. As you know, we have to go by the 
urinalysis results. So you won’t earn a voucher today 
and their value gets reset back to the original low 
value because of today’s positive result. However, if 
you can get back on track with providing negative 
samples, five consecutive negatives mean that the 
value of the vouchers get reset back to where they 
were before today’s positive. 

Bill: That’s fair enough. 

Our experience is that there is little need to quibble 
over a client’s denial of a single instance of cocaine use. 
If the client has resumed regular cocaine use, a pattern 
of positives will soon emerge. Instead, the therapist 
reviewed with Bill the risks of continuing to smoke 
marijuana while working on maintaining cocaine abstinence 
(continuing contact with drug-using friends, 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

high-risk places, using marijuana rather than other 
possible activities or way to relax). They also reviewed 
the importance of sticking with planned activities and 
prepared to role-play some social skills that Bill could 
use to resist changing his plans should he run into drugusing 
friends again. Bill was very insightful about how 
he had deviated from what had been working for him 
up to this point—planning activities and sticking to the 
plans—and the therapist reinforced his analysis. The 
matter of denying cocaine use was not pursued further. 
Bill and the therapist carried on with implementing the 
treatment plan, with the few modifications mentioned. 
There were no further instances of cocaine use during 
Bill’s 24 weeks of treatment. His record of documented 
cocaine abstinence was excellent. 

Alcohol Abstinence 

During the first session, the therapist discussed with 
Bill the rationale for disulfiram therapy: 

tHeraPist: Bill, we want to go over a few reasons for 
you to give disulfiram therapy and alcohol abstinence 
a try. First, your history indicates that if you 
drink, you are more likely to use cocaine. You’re not 
alone in that regard. The scientific evidence is very 
clear that for many individuals who seek treatment 
for cocaine dependence, alcohol and cocaine use are 
closely linked. 

Bill: I don’t want to get drunk any more. What about 
just a few drinks? Is that a problem, too? 

tHeraPist: Use of even modest doses of alcohol, even 
just a few drinks, can significantly decrease your 
chances of successfully abstaining from cocaine use. 
Our experience, and the experience in other clinics 
around the country, is that you can make greater 
progress with cocaine abstinence by using disulfiram 
and abstaining from alcohol use than if you 
continue to drink. 

Bill: How long are you suggesting I take the medicine? 
Are you saying I can never drink again? 

tHeraPist: I’m not saying that you’ll have to take this 
medicine forever or for years, or anything of that nature, 
or even that you can never go back to drinking. 
We can cross those bridges a ways down the road. 
But for now, if you want to give yourself the best 
chance to succeed with quitting cocaine, I recommend 
that you give disulfiram therapy a sincere try. 

Bill: I’m not sure how much of a problem drinking is 
for me. I know it’s caused some problems, but I’m 
just not so sure. 

tHeraPist: Bill, the second thing I wanted to emphasize 
is that you also reported a history of depression 
and suicidal ideation. Substance use, particularly alcohol 
use, is a depressant and can worsen depressive 
symptoms and suicide risk. A period of abstinence 
may help a good deal with those problems. And still 
another point to consider is that agreeing to disulfiram 
therapy represents a concrete demonstration of 
your commitment to drug abstinence and substantial 
lifestyle changes. This would be helpful in general, 
but it could also be helpful in your pursuit of visitation 
privileges with your daughter. 

Bill: Hey, I’m looking to make some progress here. 
When I’ve tried to quit cocaine on my own, it’s not 
worked for beans. Maybe it’s because I kept drinking, 
I’m not sure. I can’t continue like this. How 
about I take the medicine during treatment? That’s 
a pretty good commitment. What did you say, treatment 
is for 24 weeks? Lets say I’ll go on the medicine 
for that amount of time. 

Bill agreed to disulfiram therapy for the duration of 
treatment. A schedule was set up for Bill to ingest a 
250-mg dose three times per week, under the observation 
of clinic staff, and to ingest the same dose under 
the observation of his father at home on alternating 
days. 

In addition to disulfiram therapy, the therapist 
worked with Bill on a functional analysis of his alcohol 
use, similar to the preceding process for cocaine. 
They reviewed specific circumstances under which Bill 
was more likely or less likely to drink, and listed the 
negative consequences he had previously experienced 
from his alcohol use. The therapist and Bill then began 
to develop a plan for finding alternative ways to relax 
that did not involve the bar or drinking, as well as to 
rehearse how to refuse alcohol when it was offered, and 
how to identify times that Bill might be tempted to have 
a drink. 

Bill was compliant with disulfiram therapy throughout 
treatment. He reported only one instance of alcohol 
use while on disulfiram therapy, when he did not take 
the medication on a Sunday morning and drank two 
beers at home that afternoon. On Monday, the therapist 
did a functional analysis with Bill to identify what set 


Drug Use Disorders 

up the occasion for him to drink, and what had happened 
with his father serving as disulfiram assurance 
monitor. The therapist and Bill reviewed again his history 
of alcohol use and the negative consequences he 
had experienced in the past. Bill recommitted to alcohol 
abstinence and resumed disulfiram therapy. 

When the end of the 24-week treatment approached 
(Week 23), Bill expressed a desire to “be able to have a 
drink if he wanted” and asked to discontinue disulfiram 
therapy, as planned. The therapist expressed his concerns 
about jeopardizing the substantial progress Bill 
had made. 

tHeraPist: So you’re due to end disulfiram therapy 
this week? 

Bill: Yep, stuck to it like I promised, but now I’d like to 
be able to drink if I want to, like having a beer after 
work to relax. Nothing major. 

tHeraPist: Bill, you’ve done really well so far with 
this current plan. Most folks are not as successful as 
you’ve been in stopping cocaine use. 

Bill: Oh, I agree. I just feel like I’ve done really well in 
treatment and now that it’s almost over, I’d like to be 
able to have that choice to drink if I want to. 

tHeraPist: How risky do you think going off disulfiram 
is going to be for you in terms of continuing 
your success with abstaining from cocaine? 

Bill: I really don’t think it’s going to be a problem. I’m 
feeling pretty confident about that. 

tHeraPist: Bill, that’s great. That sort of confidence is 
important to success. Let’s talk about some specifics 
though. Remember, your alcohol history is still with 
you. In the past you’ve had periods of binge drinking 
combined with cocaine use. What’s going to be different 
now from that past history? 

Bill: Well, first of all, I don’t plan on drinking like I 
used to. I’m not looking to get drunk. I’m not even 
sure I want to drink very often. Also, I’m not going 
to drink in bars. That’s how I’ve gotten into trouble 
in the past. And I’m not going to drink with the same 
old crowd. I just want to know that if I go out to dinner 
on a date or something and want to have a drink, 
I can do that. 

tHeraPist: You’ve given this careful consideration, 
which is good. Those kind of plans are important to 
continuing your success. Let’s talk a bit more about 
how you can reduce your risk as much as possible 

if you’re going to resume drinking. By that, I mean 
how often you drink, how much you drink per occasion, 
where and with whom you drink—more or 
less, anything you can do to protect yourself from 
excessive drinking and, subsequently, cocaine use. 
Does this sound reasonable to you? 

Bill: Yeah, sure, that sounds really good. 

At this time, the therapist began the clinic’s controlled 
drinking protocol (see Miller & Muñoz, 2005). 
Our primary clinical recommendation was abstinence, 
but Bill was not going to follow that recommendation. 
Hence, we felt that attempting systematically to provide 
him with some skills to decrease the likelihood of abusive 
or harmful drinking was indicated. The Miller and 
Muñoz approach aims to teach skills that enable the 
client to drink in a controlled manner. Some of these 
skills are the same as those involved with cocaine use, 
including functional analysis to identify the circumstances 
(location, people, times, feeling states) associated 
with heavy drinking. Others are specific to alcohol 
consumption (e.g., providing information about the alcohol 
content of common drinks, relationship between 
drinks consumed, body weight, and the blood alcohol 
curve). Bill and the therapist worked through some of 
the core elements of the controlled-drinking protocol 
during the final week of treatment, then covered the 
remaining parts during aftercare. Bill reported one instance 
of alcohol use during he final week of treatment. 
He had only two drinks and did not use cocaine. As we 
note below, Bill also has reported little drinking during 
posttreatment follow-up. 

Other Drug Use 

Bill continued the same pattern of marijuana use that 
he reported in the intake interview. He repeatedly asserted 
that marijuana use was not interfering with his 
other treatment goals. In turn, the therapist provided 
rationales for stopping or reducing marijuana use on 
numerous occasions but was not successful in initiating 
abstinence. 

Recreational Activities 

During the first several sessions, the therapist and Bill 
discussed the importance of developing new recreational 
activities. They decided on a goal of participating 
in four of these activities per week, as well as a 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

plan to sample some new activities in the company of 
clinic staff. The therapist reminded Bill that the vouchers 
he would be earning during treatment for cocaine 
abstinence could be used to help pay for these activities. 


During treatment, Bill consistently met his goal of 
four recreational activities per week. Those activities 
included movies, hunting, golf, and dinners at local 
restaurants. He used his vouchers to buy tickets to a 
performance at a local theater, greens fees to play golf, 
a gym membership, hunting and fishing licenses, and 
gift certificates to a local restaurant for dinner with a 
new girlfriend. 

Family/Social Support 

During the first few sessions, the therapist discussed 
with Bill the need to expand his social network to include 
family, friends, and other social contacts with 
non-drug-using people. Bill expressed a desire for increased 
contact with his daughter. Toward that end, Bill 
and his therapist completed a task analysis identifying 
the sequence of steps that would have to be taken to try 
to attain visitation privileges. These included requesting 
and completing legal forms from the court, the therapist 
helping Bill to discuss his wishes appropriately 
with his former partner, role plays in preparation for the 
court date, and accompanying Bill to court. 

Bill succeeded in obtaining visitation privileges. His 
goal then became twice-weekly contact with his daughter, 
which he maintained consistently throughout the 
remainder of treatment. 

Regarding other types of social support, Bill also 
increased contact with a couple of safe friends during 
the course of treatment. He also was able to meet several 
women through his new employment (discussed 
below), one of whom he began dating regularly. 

Employment/Education 

Bill came to treatment with a history of full-time employment, 
which is a good prognostic indicator in itself. 
However, his job upon entering treatment did not pay 
well and involved being around drinking. He expressed 
a desire to find a job that offered better pay, thereby allowing 
him to work fewer hours per week and to spend 
more time with his daughter, and to be at reduced risk 
for alcohol use. Therefore, Bill began participating in 
Job Club, coming to the clinic three times per week to 

go through local employment classifieds, complete a resume 
and cover letters with the help of staff, fill out job 
applications, and rehearse for job interviews. Bill successfully 
obtained a better paying job with fewer risks 
for alcohol use. Thereafter, his vocational goal was to 
focus on avoiding excessive hours. 

Bill also expressed concern regarding the extensive 
debt he had accumulated during this prolonged cocaine 
use. The therapist began the clinic’s money management 
protocol, including developing a budget for repayment 
of outstanding loans and skills for managing 
personal finances. Bill opened a savings account at a 
nearby bank and arranged for direct deposit of his paychecks. 
He used the phone in his therapist’s office to 
arrange payback plans with several debtors. Bill consistently 
made payments on his debt throughout treatment, 
which the therapist graphed weekly and, by the 
end of treatment, had eliminated all back debt and was 
now paying current bills. 

Bill had a long-term vocational goal of eventually 
opening his own retail business. He and his therapist 
completed a preliminary task analysis (see Sulzer-
Azaroff & Meyer, 1991) related to that goal. They 
agreed that taking accounting and computer courses 
would be a good start. The therapist helped Bill collect 
information from the local community college on the 
classes being offered. Bill requested financial aid applications 
from the community college for assistance 
with tuition, which his therapist helped him complete. 

Psychiatric Monitoring 

Recall that Bill’s BDI score at intake was 23. His BDI 
score had dropped precipitously by the second week of 
treatment, and reached a score of 2 by the end of treatment. 


Bill and his therapist worked through an anger management 
protocol for substance abusers (Monti, Kadden, 
Rohsenow, Cooney, & Abrams, 2002) that helped 
Bill identify situations that would likely make him 
angry, develop coping skills to deal better with those 
triggers, and role-play those coping skills to gain proficiency. 
The therapist had Bill document when potential 
anger-provoking situations arose outside of the clinic 
and how he handled them. The therapist reviewed that 
information weekly, provided social reinforcement for 
those situations that were handled well, and problemsolved 
and role-played alternatives when Bill needed 
assistance. 


Drug Use Disorders 

Summary of Treatment Progress 

Bill made substantial progress toward establishing a 
stable record of cocaine abstinence, eliminating problem 
drinking, increasing his involvement in social and 
recreational practices, improving his job situation, 
increasing his skill in managing anger, and improving 
his relationship with his daughter. The one area in 
which we were unable to make progress was Bill’s use 
of marijuana and associated involvement with the illicit 
drug abuse community. This progress is reflected in the 
pre- to posttreatment changes in ASI composite scores 
shown in Table 14.5. Composite scores range from 
0, representing No problems in the past 30 days to 1, 
representing Severe problems. Bill’s scores at the endof-
treatment assessment generally reflected substantial 
improvements. 

Follow-Up 

Following completion of the 24-week treatment protocol, 
Bill participated in a 6-month aftercare program 
and completed periodic follow-up assessments for 4 
years after treatment entry (see Table 14.5). Thus, we 
have a relatively good picture of his progress. 

Bill largely sustained the excellent progress he made 
during treatment toward resolving his cocaine-use 
problems. All urine toxicology tests conducted during 
follow-up were negative for cocaine use. He reported 
two instances of cocaine use during the 3.5-year 
follow-up period, but they were separated in time, and 
neither resulted in a full-blown relapse. He reported 
moderate use of alcohol throughout follow-up, with 

only one instance of drinking to intoxication. He continued 
to smoke marijuana regularly, as he had done 
during treatment. 

Regarding other areas of functioning, Bill sustained 
full-time employment throughout the follow-up period. 
There was an episode of criminal justice involvement 
at the 12-month assessment, which, according to Bill, 
was unrelated to substance abuse and was resolved 
before the later assessments. His depressive symptomatology 
remained well below intake levels throughout 
the follow-up period. Progress in other areas of functioning 
largely was sustained through follow-up, until 
the 48-month assessment, when a medical crisis arose. 
Bill developed a neuromuscular condition involving 
periodic episodes of full paralysis. He was also experiencing 
more routine but nevertheless painful dental 
problems. At the time of that assessment, Bill was still 
undergoing testing for the neuromuscular problem and 
did not have a diagnosis. This crisis had not precipitated 
a relapse back to cocaine or other drug abuse, which 
underscores the substantial progress Bill had made 
with those problems. The increases in ASI drug scale 
scores at that 48-month assessment were related to taking 
pain medication for the dental problems. Clearly, 
though, the medical conditions were having a destabilizing 
effect physically and psychologically. Although 
Bill recognized that the situation put him at increased 
risk for relapse, he did not deem the situation at that 
time to warrant reentry into treatment. Treatment staff 
commended Bill on his sustained progress in abstaining 
from cocaine and alcohol abuse, and reassured him 
that he could return to treatment if the need arose. 

table 14.5. asi subscale and bdi scores at intake, end of treatment, and Posttreatment 
follow-Up assessments 

Score Intake End of treatment 12 months 24 months 36 months 48 months 
ASI subscales 
Medical 0.42 0.09 0.09 0.18 0.00 1.00 
Employment 0.07 0.10 0.09 0.11 0.13 0.08 
Alcohol 0.13 0.00 0.06 0.00 0.05 0.11 
Drug (other than cocaine) 0.28 0.07 0.08 0.08 0.09 0.19 
Cocaine 0.66 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Legal 0.00 0.00 0.40 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Family/Social 0.22 0.10 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.22 
Psychological 0.36 0.00 0.09 0.09 0.18 0.53 
BDI 23 1 3 5 10 6 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

coNcluDiNG coMMeNts 

In this chapter we have presented the most up-to-date 
scientific information available on effective clinical 
management of illicit drug use disorders. In the process, 
we have tried to illustrate what have come to be considered 
principles of effective treatment for illicit drug 
use disorders in general, using cocaine dependence as a 
specific exemplar. We have emphasized one efficacious, 
multielement treatment approach but have underscored 
how it contains elements of all of the empirically based 
behavioral and cognitive-behavioral therapies except 
behavioral family therapy. We realize that limitations 
in resources and other practical constraints will prevent 
many clinicians from utilizing the treatment practices 
just as we have outlined them in this chapter. Costs for 
the treatment provided to Bill were covered exclusively 
through a research grant. However, we hope that this 
information offers insights into the important elements 
of effective treatment for illicit drug use disorders. We 
also hope that this information makes the job of clinicians 
who are out there in the trenches treating the 
drug-dependent population a little easier and, we hope, 
their practices more effective. 

aCknowledgMent 

Preparation of this chapter was supported in part by National 
Institute on Drug Abuse Grant Nos. DA09378, DA030534, 
and DA031928. 

referenCes 

American Psychiatric Association. (2000). Diagnostic and 

statistical manual of mental disorders (4th ed., text rev.). 

Washington, DC: Author. 
American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and 

statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.). Arling


ton, VA: Author. 
Azrin, N. H. (1976). Improvements in the community


reinforcement approach to alcoholism. Behaviour Re


search and Therapy, 14, 339–348. 
Azrin, N. H., & Besalel, V. A. (1980). Job Club counselor’s 

manual. Baltimore: University Park Press. 
Azrin, N. H., Donohue, B., Besalel, V. A., Kogan, E. S., & 

Acierno, R. (1994). Youth drug abuse treatment: A con


trolled outcome study. Journal of Child and Adolescent 

Substance Abuse, 3, 1–16. 

Beck, A. T., Steer, R. A., Ball, R., & Ranieri, W. (1996). 
Comparison of Beck Depression Inventories -IA and -II 

in psychiatric outpatients. Journal of Personality Assessment, 
67, 588–597. 

Beck, A. T., Ward, C. H., Mendelson, M., Mock, J., & Erbaugh, 
J. (1961). An inventory for measuring depression. 
Archives of General Psychiatry, 4, 561–571. 

Bellack, A. S., Bennett, M. E., Gearson, J. S., Brown, C. H., 
& Yang, Y. (2006). A randomized clinical trial of a new 
behavioral treatment for drug abuse in people with severe 
and persistent mental illness. Archives of General Psychiatry, 
63, 426–432. 

Bickel, W. K., Amass, L., Higgins, S. T., Badger, G. J., & 
Esch, R. A. (1997). Effects of adding behavioral treatment 
to opioid detoxification with buprenorphine. Journal of 
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 65, 803–810. 

Bouchery, E. E., Harwood, H. J., Sacks, J. J., Simon, C. J., & 
Brewer, R. D. (2011). Economic costs of excessive alcohol 
consumption in the U.S., 2006. American Journal of Preventive 
Medicine, 41, 516–524. 

Budney, A. J., & Higgins, S. T. (1998). The community reinforcement 
plus vouchers approach: Manual 2. National 
Institute on Drug Abuse therapy manuals for drug addiction 
(NIH Publication No. 98-4308). Rockville, MD: National 
Institute on Drug Abuse. 

Budney, A. J., Higgins, S. T., & Wong, C. J. (1996). Marijuana 
use and treatment outcome in cocaine-dependent patients. 
Journal of Experimental and Clinical Psychopharmacology, 
4, 1–8. 

Carroll, K. M., Nich, C., Ball, S. A., McCance, E., & Rounsaville, 
B. J. (1998). Treatment of cocaine and alcohol dependence 
with psychotherapy and disulfiram. Addiction, 
93, 713–727. 

Carroll, K. M., & Onken, L. S. (2005). Behavioral therapies 
for drug abuse. American Journal of Psychiatry, 162, 
1452–1460. 

Carroll, K. M., Rounsaville, B. J., Nich, C., Gordon, L. T., 
Wirtz, P. W., & Gawin, F. (1994). One-year follow-up of 
psychotherapy and pharmacotherapy for cocaine dependence: 
Delayed emergence of psychotherapy effects. Archives 
of General Psychiatry, 51, 989–997. 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2008). Smoking 
attributable mortality, years of potential life lost, and productivity 
losses—U.S. 2000–2004. Morbidity and Mortality 
Weekly Report, 57, 1226–1228. 

Derogatis, L. R. (1983). SCL-90-R: Administration, scoring 
and procedures manual—II. Towson, MD: Clinical Psychometric 
Research. 

Festinger, D. S., Lamb, R. J., Kirby, K. C., & Marlowe, D. B. 
(1996). The accelerated intake: A method for increasing 
initial attendance to outpatient cocaine treatment. Journal 
of Applied Behavior Analysis, 29, 387–389. 

Griffith, J. D., Rowan-Szal, G. A., Roark, R. R., & Simpson, 

D. D. (2000). Contingency management in outpatient 
methadone treatment: A meta-analysis. Drug and Alcohol 
Dependence, 58, 55–66. 
Griffiths, R. R., Bigelow, G. E., & Henningfield, J. E. (1980). 


Drug Use Disorders 

Similarities in animal and human drug taking behavior. 
In N. K. Mello (Ed.), Advances in substance abuse: behavioral 
and biological research (pp. 1–90). Greenwich, 
CT: JAI Press. 

Henggeler, S. W., Pickrel, S. G., Brondino, M. J., & Crouch, J. 

L. (1996). Eliminating (almost) treatment dropout of substance 
abusing or dependent delinquents through homebased 
multisystemic therapy. American Journal of Psychiatry, 
153, 427–428. 
Herrmann, E. S., Heil, S. H., Sigmon, S. C., Dunn, K. E., 
Washio, Y., & Higgins, S. T. (2013). Characterizing 
and improving HIV/AIDS knowledge among cocainedependent 
outpatients using modified materials. Drug and 
Alcohol Dependence, 127(1–3), 220–225. 

Higgins, S. T., Heil, S. H., & Lussier, J. P. (2004). Clinical implications 
of reinforcement as a determinant of substance 
use disorders. Annual Review of Psychology, 55, 431–461. 

Higgins, S. T., Sigmon, S. C., Wong, C. J., Heil, S. H., Badger, 

G. J., Donham, R., et al. (2003). Community reinforcement 
therapy for cocaine-dependent outpatients. Archives 
of General Psychiatry, 60, 1043–1052. 
Higgins, S. T., Silverman, K., & Heil, S. H. (2008). Contingency 
management in substance abuse use treatment. 
New York: Guilford Press. 

Higgins, S. T., Silverman, K., Sigmon, S. C., & Naito, N. A. 
(2012). Incentives and health: An introduction. Preventive 
Medicine, 55, S2–S6. 

Hjorthoj, C. R., Hjorthoj, A. R., & Nordentoft, M. (2012). 
Validity of Timeline Follow-Back for self-reported use of 
cannabis and other illicit substances—systematic review 
and meta-analysis. Addictive Behaviors, 37, 225–233. 

Irvin, J. E., Bowers, C. A., Dunn, M. E., & Wong, M. C. 
(1999). Efficacy of relapse prevention: A meta-analytic 
review. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 
67, 563–570. 

Kenford, S. L., & Fiore, M. C. (2004). Promoting tobacco 
cessation and relapse prevention. Medical Clinics of North 
America, 88, 1553–1574. 

Lewinsohn, P. M., Muñoz, R. F., Youngren, M. A., & Zeiss, 

A. M. (1986). Control your depression. New York: Simon 
& Schuster. 
Liddle, H. A., Dakof, G., Parker, K., Diamond, G. S., Barrett, 
K., & Tejeda, M. (2001). Multidimensional family therapy 
for adolescent drug abuse: Results of a randomized clinical 
trial. American Journal of Drug and Alcohol Abuse, 
27, 651–688. 

Lussier, J. P., Heil, S. H., Mongeon, J. A., Badger, G. J., & 
Higgins, S. T. (2006). A meta-analysis of voucher-based 
reinforcement therapy for substance use disorders. Addiction, 
101(2), 192–203. 

Martino, S., Carroll, K. M., & Rounsaville, B. J. (2006). A 
randomized controlled pilot study of motivational interviewing 
for patients with psychotic and drug use disorders. 
Addiction, 101, 1479–1492. 

McLellan, A. T., Cacciola, J. C., Alterman, A. I., Rikoon, S. 

H., & Carise, D. (2006). The Addiction Severity Index 
at 25: Origins, contributions, and transitions. American 
Journal on Addictions, 15, 113–124. 

Meyers, R. J., & Smith, J. E. (1995). Clinical guide to alcohol 
treatment: The community reinforcement approach. New 
York: Guilford Press. 

Miller, W. R., & Muñoz, R. F. (2005). Controlling your 
drinking: Tools to make moderation work for you. New 
York: Guilford Press. 

Miller, W. R., & Rollnick, S. (2002). Motivational interviewing: 
Preparing people for change (2nd ed.). New York: 
Guilford Press. 

Miller, W. R., & Tonigan, J. S. (1996). Assessing drinkers’ 
motivation for change: The Stages of Change Readiness 
and Treatment Eagerness Scale (SOCRATES). Psychology 
of Addictive Behaviors, 10, 81–89. 

Monti, P. M., Kadden, R. M., Rohsenow, D. J., Cooney, N. L., 
& Abrams, D. B. (2002). Treating alcohol dependence: A 
coping skills training guide (2nd ed.). New York: Guilford 
Press. 

Monti, P. M., Rohsenow, D. J., Michalec, E., Martin, R. A., 
& Abrams, D. B. (1997). Brief coping skills treatment for 
cocaine abuse: Substance use outcomes at three months. 
Addiction, 92, 1717–1728. 

Morin, C. M. (2004). Cognitive-behavioral approaches to the 
treatment of insomnia. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 65, 
33–40. 

Muñoz, R. F., & Miranda, J. (2000). Individual therapy 
manual for cognitive behavioral treatment for depression. 
Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation. 

National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA). (2009). Principles 
of addiction treatment: A research-based guide (2nd ed.; 
NIH Publication No. 09-4180). Rockville, MD: Author. 

O’Brien, C. (2011). Addiction and dependence in DSM-V. Addiction, 
106, 866–867. 

O’Farrell, T. J., & Clements, K. (2012). Review of outcome 
research on marital and family therapy in treatment for 
alcoholism. Journal of Marital and Family Therapy, 38, 
122–144. 

Rawson, R. A., Marinelli-Casey, P., Anglin, M. D., Dickow, 
A., Frazier, Y., Gallagher, C., et al. (2004). A multi-site 
comparison of psychosocial approaches for the treatment 
of methamphetamine dependence. Addiction, 99, 708–717. 

Reback, C. J., & Shoptaw, S. (in press). Development of an 
evidence-based, gay-specific cognitive behavioral therapy 
intervention for methamphetamine abusing gay and bisexual 
men. Addictive Behaviors. 

Rodebaugh, T. L., Holaway, R. M., & Heimberg, R. G. (2004). 
The treatment of social anxiety disorder. Clinical Psychology 
Review, 24, 883–908. 

Roozen, H. G., Boulogne, J. J., van Tulder, M. W., van den 
Brink, W., De Jong, C. A., & Kerkhof, A. J. (2004). A 
systematic review of the effectiveness of the community 
reinforcement approach in alcohol, cocaine and opioid addiction. 
Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 74, 1–13. 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

Schnoll, R. A., & Lerman, C. (2006). Current and emerging 
pharmacotherapies for treating tobacco dependence. Expert 
Opinion on Emerging Drugs, 11, 429–444. 

Selzer, M. L. (1971). The Michigan Alcoholism Screening 
Test. American Journal of Psychiatry, 127, 1653–1658. 

Silverman, K., Robles, E., Mudric, T., & Stitzer, M. L. (2004). 
A randomized trial of long-term reinforcement of cocaine 
abstinence in methadone-maintained patients who inject 
drugs. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 72, 
839–854. 

Smedslund, G., Berg, R. C., Hammerstrøm, K. T., Steiro, A., 
Leiknes, K. A., Dahl, H. M., et al. (2011). Motivational 
interviewing for substance abuse. Cochrane Database of 
Systematic Reviews, 5, CD008063. 

Sobell, L. C., & Sobell, M. B. (1992). Timeline Follow-Back: 
A technique for assessing self-reported alcohol consumption. 
In R. Z. Litten & J. P. Allen (Eds.), Measuring alcohol 
consumption: Psychosocial and biochemical methods 
(pp. 41–72). Totowa, NJ: Humana Press. 

Sulzer-Azaroff, B., & Meyer, G. R. (1991). Behavior analy


sis for lasting change. Fort Worth, TX: Holt, Rinehart & 
Winston. 

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (USDHHS). 
(2012). National Survey on Drug Use and Health, 2010 
(Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. 
Center for Behavioral Health Statistics and Quality). 
Ann Arbor, MI: Interuniversity Consortium for Political 
and Social Research [distributor]. 
U.S. Department of Justice. (2011). The economic impact of 
illicit drug use on American society [Product No. 2011Q0317-
002]. Washington, DC: United States Department 
of Justice, National Drug Intelligence Center. 
Vasilaki, E. I., Hosier, S. G., & Cox, W. M. (2006). The efficacy 
of motivational interviewing as a brief intervention 
for excessive drinking: A meta-analytic review. Alcohol 
and Alcoholism, 41, 328–335. 

Washton, A. M., Stone, N. S., & Hendrickson, E. C. (1988). 
Cocaine abuse. In D. M. Donovan & G. A. Marlatt (Eds.), 
Assessment of addictive behaviors (pp. 364–389). New 
York: Guilford Press. 


CHaPter 15 

evidence‑Based relationships 
and responsiveness for Depression 
and substance Abuse 

JohN c. Norcross 
larry e. Beutler 

implicit in all chapters in this book is the necessity of tailoring the treatment in a flexible 
manner to the individual patient, as well as attending to patient, therapist, and relationship 
factors. some chapters also purposefully integrate and “match” techniques from 
different approaches into the treatment protocols described to accomplish specific goals, 
such as motivational interviewing (see Payne, ellard, farchione, fairholme, & Barlow, 
Chapter 6) or attention to the social and interpersonal context of the patient. But in this 
chapter the topics are made explicit by two senior and distinguished clinical investigators 
who have made it their life work to pursue these themes in a rigorous and empirical manner. 
The unique contribution of this chapter is that transdiagnostic patient and therapist 
factors, as well as matching the style of the treatment protocol (e.g., less directive or more 
directive depending on the level of resistance or “readiness” of the patient for therapy), 
are also evidence‑based procedures and deserve description in this book. Thus, it is important 
not only to choose the most effective change procedure for a given disorder, 
such as panic disorder, but also to attend explicitly to relationship factors; to provide for 
consistent, bidirectional feedback between patient and the therapist; and to establish 
a transparent, collaborative therapeutic style. The authors demonstrate this integrative 
approach in the context of the fascinating case of “Amber,” a young woman suffering 
from polysubstance abuse and depression. Awareness of this perspective will enrich the 
reader’s appreciation of all of the chapters in this book.—D. H. B. 

Psychotherapy is a treatment method and a healing 
relationship fit to the individual patient and context. 
On this, virtually every practitioner (and patient) will 
agree. However, selection of the particular treatment 
method has received the lion’s share of attention in the 
movement toward evidence-based practice (Norcross, 
Beutler, & Levant, 2006). Matching the treatment 
method to the patient is helpful indeed, but it is also 
clinically incomplete given that the therapy relation


ship frequently accounts for much of the success (and 
failure) of psychotherapy (Norcross, 2011). Moreover, 
psychological science directs us to which relationship 
behaviors and matches contribute to treatment outcomes 
across the spectrum of psychological disorders 
(Beutler, 2009). 

As virtually every psychotherapist also knows, psychotherapy 
should be tailored to the individuality of 
the patient and the singularity of his/her context. As 

617 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

early as 1919, Freud introduced psychoanalytic psychotherapy 
as an alternative to classical analysis, based on 
the recognition that the more rarified approach lacked 
universal applicability (Wolitzky, 2011). The mandate 
for individualizing psychotherapy was embodied in 
Gordon Paul’s (1967, p. 111, original emphasis) iconic 
question: “What treatment, by whom, is most effective 
for this individual with that specific problem, and 
under which set of circumstances?” Every psychotherapist 
recognizes that what works for one person may not 
work for another; we seek “different strokes for different 
folks.” 

Only in the past two decades has sufficient research 
been conducted to operationalize these noble intentions 
into specific matching guidelines. Particularly absent 
until recently has been research matching psychotherapy 
to the entire person of the patient, beyond his/her 
disorder. As Sir William Osler (1906), father of modern 
medicine, said: “It is sometimes much more important 
to know what sort of a patient has a disease than what 
sort of disease a patient has.” 

The process of creating this optimal fit in psychotherapy 
has been accorded multiple names: treatment 
adaptation, responsiveness, attunement, matchmaking, 
customizing, prescriptionism, treatment selection, 
specificity factor, differential therapeutics, tailoring, 
and individualizing. By whatever name, the goal is to 
enhance treatment effectiveness by tailoring it to the individual 
and his/her singular situation. In other words, 
psychotherapists endeavor to create a new therapy for 
each patient. 

In this chapter, we apply our integrative psychotherapy 
to comorbid depression and substance abuse. We 
begin with an overview of the approach and its research 
evidence, particularly the evidence-based therapy relationship 
and responsiveness or fit to individual patients. 
The co-occurrence of mood disorders and substance 
abuse is outlined, and the step-by-step treatment selection 
is demonstrated. We conclude with a detailed 
case illustration of “Amber,” a woman suffering from 
chronic depression, substance abuse, and a host of other 
psychological disorders. 

overview of our aPProach 

Our approach to psychotherapy is broadly characterized 
as integrative and specifically labeled “systematic 
eclectic” or “systematic treatment selection.” Psychotherapy 
integration is characterized by dissatisfaction 

with single-school approaches and a concomitant desire 
to look across school boundaries to see how patients 
can benefit from other ways of conducting psychotherapy 
(Norcross & Goldfried, 2005). We attempt 
to customize psychological treatments and therapeutic 
relationships to the specific and varied needs of individual 
patients as defined by a multitude of diagnostic 
and particularly nondiagnostic considerations. We do 
so by drawing on effective methods across theoretical 
schools (eclecticism), by matching those methods to 
particular clients on the basis of evidence-based principles 
(treatment selection), and by adhering to an explicit 
and orderly (systematic) model. 

The clinical reality is that no single psychotherapy is 
effective for all patients and situations, no matter how 
good it is for some. Evidence-based practice has come 
to demand a flexible, if not integrative, perspective. 
Psychotherapy universally applied as one size fits all is 
proving impossible and, in some cases, even unethical. 
Of course, that would simplify treatment selection— 
give every patient the same brand of psychotherapy!— 
but it flies in the face of what we know about individual 
differences, patient preferences, and disparate cultures. 

Imposing a parallel situation onto other health care 
professions drives the point home. To take a medical 
metaphor, would you entrust your health to a physician 
who prescribed the identical treatment (say, antibiotics 
or neurosurgery) for every patient and illness encountered? 
Or, to take an educational analogy, would you 
prize instructors who employed the same pedagogical 
method (say, a lecture) for every educational opportunity? 
Or would you entrust your child to a child 
care worker who delivers the identical response (say, a 
nondirective attitude or a slap on the bottom) to every 
child and every misbehavior? “No” is probably your resounding 
answer. Psychotherapy clients deserve no less 
consideration. 

Concisely put, we believe that no theory is uniformly 
valid, and no mechanism of therapeutic action is equally 
applicable to all individuals. As a consequence, we 
select different methods and relationships according to 
the patient and the context. The result is a more efficient 
and efficacious therapy—and one that fits both the client 
and the clinician. 

On the face of it, of course, virtually every clinician 
endorses matching the therapy to the individual client. 
After all, who can seriously dispute the notion that psychological 
treatment should be tailored to the needs of 
the individual patient? Indeed, treatment manuals increasingly 
focus on ways to be flexible—but they all 


Depression and Substance Abuse 

still work within a confined set of theoretical parameters 
and technical procedures. In contrast, our integrative 
therapy goes beyond this simple acknowledgment 
of the need for flexibility in several ways: 

•• 
Our integrative therapy is derived directly from 
outcome research rather than from an idiosyncratic 
theory or seat-of-the-pants syncretism. 

•• 
Our therapy embraces the potential contributions 
of multiple systems of psychotherapy rather than 
working from within a single theoretical system. 

•• 
Our treatment selection is predicated on many diagnostic 
and nondiagnostic client characteristics, 
in contrast to relying on patient diagnosis alone. 

•• 
Our aim is to offer optimal treatment methods and 
healing relationships, whereas many therapists 
focus narrowly on selecting methods. Both interventions 
and relationships, both the instrumental 
and the interpersonal—intertwined as they are— 
are required in effective psychotherapy. 

•• 
Matching methods and relationships to the client 
occurs throughout the course of therapy, not only 
at pretreatment as a case formulation. 

•• 
As will be evident in the case illustration that follows, 
clients evolve and progress—and their initial 
complaints are not necessarily their primary 
disorders or goals at the conclusion of treatment. 
Our integrative therapy tracks their progress and 
evolves with them through termination. 

research eviDeNce 

The outcome research supporting our approach comes 
in several guises. First and most generally, the entire 
body of psychotherapy research has provided the foundation 
for the key principles on which integrative treatment 
rests. This is the basis from which we have systematized 
the process of treatment selection. A genuine 
advantage of being integrative is the vast amount of 
research attesting to the efficacy of psychotherapy and 
pointing to the differential effectiveness among different 
types of patients. Integration tries to incorporate 
state-of-the-art research findings into its open framework, 
in contrast to becoming yet another “system” of 
psychotherapy. 

We embrace the robust common factors among the 
therapies and, at the same time, capitalize on their differences. 
Integration gathers, in the words of Abraham 
Lincoln, “strange, discordant, and even, hostile elements 

from the four winds.” Diverse treatment methods are 
optimally employed with patients and in situations for 
which research has found evidence of effectiveness. We 
hasten to add that the incorporation of these treatments 
should occur within a systematic process and an integrative 
perspective, that is, be integrative, not syncretic. 

A second and more specific source of research evidence 
is our ongoing programmatic research on treatment 
selection according to client characteristics (for 
details, see Castonguay & Beutler, 2006; Norcrosss, 
2011). Below we summarize the research evidence underpinning 
evidence-based therapy relationships and 
responsive fit to transdiagnostic patient characteristics. 

Relationships That Work 

Decades of psychological science have identified many 
of the relational behaviors that contribute to and predict 
successful psychotherapy, and multiple meta-analyses 
have refined our understanding of which of these 
work to improve outcomes (Norcross, 2011). In fact, 
evidence-based therapy relationships have been highlighted 
on the National Registry of Evidence-Based 
Programs and Practices (NREPP; www.nrepp.samhsa. 
gov/norcross.aspx). Below we summarize the research 
evidence for those elements of the therapy relationship 
that are primarily provided by the psychotherapist. 

The Alliance 

The alliance is an emergent quality of partnership between 
therapist and client, built principally on a positive 
emotional bond between therapist and client, and their 
ability to agree on the goals of treatment and to reach a 
mutual consensus on the tasks. A meta-analysis of 201 
studies, involving over 14,000 adult patients, found an 
effect size (d) of 0.60 (Horvath, Del Re, Flückiger, & 
Symonds, 2011), which describes the degree to which 
the alliance is related to and predicts psychotherapy 
outcome. (In all instances of reporting effect sizes in 
this chapter, we use d, where 0 indicates no effect; 0.20 
represents a small effect; 0.50 represents a medium effect; 
and 0.80 and above, a large effect [Cohen, 1988].) 

As in the adult research, the alliance in youth treatment 
is characterized as a collaborative bond between 
client and therapist, but the psychotherapist typically 
established two alliances: one with the youth and one 
with the parent or guardian. A meta-analysis of 29 studies 
with 2,202 youth clients and 892 parents estimated 
the association between alliance and outcome in youth 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

therapy (Shirk & Karver, 2011). The effect size (d) was 
0.39, between both the therapist and the youth, and the 
therapist and the parent/guardian. 

Just as in individual therapy, the alliance in couple 
and family therapy (CFT) involves the creation of a 
strong emotional bond, as well as negotiation of goals 
and tasks with the therapist. However, family members 
often vary in the degree to which they like and agree 
with the therapist about treatment goals and tasks, thus 
creating multiple alliances that interact systemically. 
A meta-analysis of 24 studies (7 couples, 17 family 
studies; 1,461 clients) was conducted in which CFT 
alliances were used to predict treatment improvement 
midtreatment and final outcomes (Friedlander, Escudero, 
Heatherington, & Diamond, 2011). The effect size 

(d) was 0.53, indicating that the alliance accounted for 
a substantial proportion of variance in CFT retention 
and outcome. According to conventional benchmarks, 
this represents a medium effect size in the behavioral 
sciences; the success rate increases from 37 to 63% in 
low versus high alliance cases. 
Cohesion in Group Therapy 

Probably the closest parallel of the alliance in individual 
therapy is cohesion in group therapy. A metaanalysis 
of 40 studies, comprising 3,323 patients, was 
conducted on the association between cohesion and the 
success of group psychotherapy (Burlingame, McClendon, 
& Alonso, 2011). The effect size was a moderate d 
of 0.52. This indicates that, as cohesion levels increase 
in groups, client outcomes improve and psychological 
symptoms decrease. This correlation was found for 
therapy groups across different settings (inpatient and 
outpatient) and diagnostic classifications. 

Empathy 

Much of the research continues to follow Carl Rogers’s 
(1957) definition of empathy as the therapist’s sensitive 
ability to understand the client’s thoughts, feelings, and 
struggles from the client’s point of view and communicate 
that understanding to the client. A meta-analysis 
examined the association between therapist empathy 
and treatment outcome (Elliott, Bohart, Watson, & 
Greenberg, 2011). The analysis of 57 studies resulted in 
an overall d of 0.61, a medium effect, between therapist 
empathy and client success (suggesting a success rate 
of 57% compared to 43% for higher vs. lower empathy). 
Empathy predicted treatment outcome consistently 

across different theoretical orientations (e.g., cognitivebehavioral, 
psychodynamic, humanistic). 

Collecting Client Feedback 

In this relational behavior, the therapist systematically 
monitors a client’s mental health vital signs through 
the use of standardized scales and expected treatment 
response. Results of this monitoring are then fed back 
in real-time to the therapist and discussed in session 
with the client. A meta-analysis of nine studies on the 
impact of feedback methods on treatment outcomes 
showed effect sizes (d) between 0.49 and 0.70 (Lambert 
& Shimokawa, 2011). Rates of patient deterioration in 
psychotherapy were cut by two-thirds when client feedback 
was used with warning signals for at-risk patients. 
Accordingly, patients are better off when practitioners 
routinely monitor their ongoing mental health functioning. 
Such monitoring leads to increased opportunities 
to repair alliance ruptures, enhance motivation, and 
reduce premature termination. Systematic feedback is 
especially useful in helping clinicians identify the possible 
failure of ongoing treatment and collaborate with 
the client in restoring positive outcomes. 

Goal Consensus 

Agreement about the nature of the problem for which 
the client is seeking help, goals for treatment, and the 
way that the two parties work together to achieve these 
goals are the essence of goal consensus. A meta-analysis 
addressed how patient–therapist goal consensus relates 
to psychotherapy outcome (Tryon & Winograd, 2011). 
The goal consensus–outcome meta-analysis—based 
on 15 studies with a total sample of 1,302 patients— 
yielded an effect size (d) of 0.72. This substantial result 
reflects the meaningful positive outcomes that are associated 
with higher agreement between therapists and 
clients about the aims of treatment and how to accomplish 
such aims. 

Collaboration 

To help clients fulfill mutual treatment goals, professionals 
and patients should function as a team. The 
collaboration–outcome meta-analysis—based on 19 
studies involving 2,260 patients—yielded an d of 0.70 
(Tryon & Winograd, 2011). As with goal consensus, 
this result suggests that patient well-being is considerably 
enhanced with a better collaborative relationship. 


Depression and Substance Abuse 

Affirmation/Positive Regard 

To investigate the association between therapists’ positive 
regard and treatment outcome, Farber and Doolin 
(2011) performed a meta-analysis of 18 studies. The 
overall effect size among these studies was 0.57, indicating 
that positive regard has a moderate association 
with therapeutic outcomes. Thus, like many other relational 
factors, positive regard appears to be a significant 
but hardly an exhaustive part of the process–outcome 
equation. 

Researchers cannot study all of these relationship 
behaviors simultaneously, and there is considerable 
overlap in these constructs and in the amount of variance 
they account for in psychotherapy. At the same 
time, it is demonstrably true that these relationship 
behaviors are important predictors and contributors to 
psychotherapy success that can be learned and, in most 
cases, taught. 

Patient–Treatment Fits That Work 

The question of fit or responsiveness becomes which 
patient transdiagnostic dimensions can reliably guide 
us in adapting psychotherapy to different clients or with 
the same client at different points in time. More than 
200 client variables have been proposed as potential 
matchmaking markers, and at least 100 of these have 
been subjected to some research scrutiny (Clarkin & 
Levy, 2004). We commissioned a series of original 
meta-analyses on the research linking treatment outcome 
to patient characteristics, and the results of those 
analyses point to at least five potent matches: reactance 
level, stages of change, coping style, preferences, and 
culture (Norcross, 2011). Following are thumbnail descriptions 
of each, and we demonstrate their respective 
uses later in our case study. 

Reactance Level 

Research confirms what one would expect: High patient 
reactance or resistance is consistently associated 
with poorer therapy outcomes (in 82% of studies). But 
matching therapist directiveness to client reactance 
mightily improves therapy outcome. Specifically, clients 
presenting with high reactance benefited more 
from self-control methods, minimal therapist directiveness, 
and paradoxical interventions. By contrast, clients 
with low reactance benefited more from therapist directiveness 
and explicit guidance. This strong, consis


tent finding can be expressed as a large effect size (d) 
averaging 0.76 (Beutler, Harwood, Michelson, Song, & 
Holman, 2011). 

Stages of Change 

The amount of progress clients make in psychotherapy 
tends to be a direct function of their pretreatment stage 
of change—precontemplation, contemplation, preparation, 
action, and maintenance. A meta-analysis of 39 
psychotherapy studies (Norcross, Krebs, & Prochaska, 
2011) found a mean effect size (d) of 0.46, indicating 
that the stages reliably predict outcomes in psychotherapy. 
This effect has been found to be true for patients 
suffering from dozens of mental and medical disorders 
immediately following intervention, as well as 12 
months afterward. 

More importantly, research in behavioral medicine 
and psychotherapy converge in showing that different 
processes of change are differentially effective in certain 
stages of change. A meta-analysis (Rosen, 2000) 
of 47 studies examining relationships among the stages 
and the processes of change showed large effect sizes 
(d = 0.70 and 0.80). That is, adapting psychotherapy to 
the client’s stage of change significantly improves outcome 
across disorders (Prochaska & Norcross, 2013). 

These client markers provide prescriptive as well 
as proscriptive guidance to the psychotherapist. In reactance, 
the prescriptive implication is to match the 
therapist’s amount of directiveness to the patient’s reactance, 
and the proscriptive implication is to avoid 
meeting high client reactance with high therapist direction. 
In stages of change, action-oriented therapies 
are quite effective with individuals who are in 
the preparation or action stages. However, these same 
therapies tend to be less effective or even detrimental 
with individuals in the precontemplation and contemplation 
stages. 

Coping Style 

The research has been devoted primarily to the externalizing 
(impulsive, stimulation-seeking, extroverted) 
and internalizing (self-critical, inhibited, introverted) 
coping styles. Approximately 80% of the studies investigating 
this dimension have demonstrated differential 
effects of the type of treatment as a function of patient 
coping style. A meta-analysis of 12 of those studies, involving 
more than 1,000 patients, revealed a medium 
effect (d = 0.55) for matching therapist method to pa



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

tient coping style (Beutler, Harwood, Michelson, et al., 
2011). Specifically, interpersonal and insight-oriented 
therapies are more effective among internalizing patients, 
whereas symptom-focused and skill-building 
therapies are more effective among externalizing 
patients. This pattern is frequently known for child 
patients—say, a depressed internalizing girl versus a 
hyperactive externalizing boy—but less well known 
for the adult patients on whom the meta-analysis was 
conducted. 

Preferences 

Client preferences and goals are frequently direct indicators 
of the best therapeutic method and healing relationship 
for that person. Decades of empirical evidence 
attest to the benefit of seriously considering, and at least 
beginning with, the relational preferences and treatment 
goals of the client. A meta-analysis of 35 studies 
compared the treatment outcomes of clients matched 
to their preferred treatment to outcomes of clients not 
matched to their preference. The findings indicated a 
medium positive effect (d = 0.31) in favor of clients 
matched to preferences. Clients who were matched to 
their preference were one-third less likely to drop out of 
psychotherapy—a powerful effect indeed (Swift, Callahan, 
& Vollmer, 2011). 

Culture 

A meta-analysis of 65 studies, encompassing 8,620 clients, 
evaluated the effectiveness of culturally adapted 
therapies versus traditional, nonadapted therapies. The 
most frequent methods of adaptation in the studies involved 
incorporating cultural content and values, using 
the client’s preferred language, and matching therapists 
of similar ethnicity. The results revealed a positive 
effect (d = 0.46) in favor of clients receiving culturally 
adapted treatments (Smith, Rodriguez, & Bernal, 
2011). Cultural “fit” works, not only as an ethical commitment 
but also as an evidence-based practice. 

DePressioN aND suBstaNce aBuse 

Depression is the most prevalent comorbid condition 
among the behavioral health disorders, co-occurring at 
very high rates in almost all behavioral and many medical 
disorders. It is especially likely to co-occur among 
those with substance abuse; posttraumatic stress disor


der (PTSD) and other anxiety disorders; and heart disease, 
cancer, and many other physical diseases (Beutler, 
Clarkin, & Bongar, 2000; Kessler et al., 2005). As 
many as 80% of patients with chronic medical conditions 
suffer from comorbid (unipolar) depression. The 
prevalence rates of comorbid depression and substance 
abuse are so consistent that many have suggested that 
substance abuse may be a manifestation of depressive 
spectrum disorders). This may also be true for other 
disorders, such as PTSD, in which both depression and 
chemical abuse frequently seems to substitute for the 
PTSD symptoms following mass trauma (Housley & 
Beutler, 2007). 

The lifetime prevalence rates for comorbid depression 
and substance abuse are high, reaching a figure of 
nearly 10%, closely approximating the lifetime prevalence 
rates of substance use disorders alone. What is 
more, co-occurring depression and substance abuse 
tend to follow similar patterns of response to treatment. 
Virtually all structured treatments produce similar effects 
among either depressed or substance-abusing patients 
(Beutler & Malik, 2002). Likewise, the course 
of recovery and relapse from depression is extremely 
variable and generally more similar to that of the extant 
comorbid conditions than to other instances of depression. 
Reviews of the literature conclude that there is 
little evidence of either a specific course of depression 
or a specific treatment that is uniquely effective (e.g., 
Cuijpers, van Straten, Andersson, & van Oppen, 2008; 
Cuijpers et al., 2010); rather, depression functions more 
as an indexing symptom of distress and impairment 
than as a separate disorder in its own right. 

As we discuss throughout this chapter, it is also now 
relatively clear that the therapy relationship and matching 
strategies that positively impact the treatment of 
depression work in the same manner to ameliorate substance 
abuse. Beutler and colleagues (2003), for example, 
studied a group of patients with comorbid depression 
and substance dependence, comparing the relative 
and absolute influence of patient predisposing factors 
(e.g., reactance level, coping styles), treatment characteristics, 
the therapy relationship (as measured by the 
alliance), and the fit between the treatment characteristics 
and the patient factors. Cross-cutting categories of 
psychotherapy included therapist level of directiveness 
and the relative proportion of insight and symptomfocused 
interventions (Beutler et al., 2000). 

Figures 15.1 and 15.2 show that all of these factors— 
patient factors, treatment methods, therapy relationship, 
and the degree of fit between the treatment and 


Depression and Substance Abuse 

end of treatment 
follow-up 
100% 
90% 
80% 
70% 
60% 
50% 
40% 
30% 
20% 
10% 
0% 
patient treatment alliance matching 

figUre 15.1. Relative contributions of patient, treatment, relationship, and treatment fit to changes in depression 
(Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression [HRSD]) among comorbid substance-abusing and depressed patients. 

patient—contributed to the success of psychotherapy. substance abuse, maximal treatment gain was associ-
Depression symptoms were somewhat easier to change ated with a psychotherapy that fit both the treatment 
at both the end of treatment and 6-month posttreatment method and the healing relationship to the individual 
follow-up, but the pattern and relative effects of each patient and context. That repeated research finding 
class of factors were similar and collectively added to has become the leitmotif of applying our approach, to 
the effectiveness of treatment. For both depression and which we now turn. 

end of treatment 
follow-up 
100% 
90% 
80% 
70% 
60% 
50% 
40% 
30% 
20% 
10% 
0% 
patient treatment alliance matching 

figUre 15.2. Relative contributions of patient, treatment, relationship, and treatment fit to changes in substance abuse 
(Addiction Severity Index [ASI]) among comorbid substance-abusing and depressed patients. 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

aPPlicatioN of our aPProach 

Treatment selection invariably involves iterative, recursive 
decisions about setting, format, intensity, pharmacotherapy, 
therapy relationship, and treatment methods. 
Why? Because each client responds best to a different 
configuration or mix of components. We cannot and 
should not assume that the treatment will automatically 
be outpatient individual psychotherapy on a weekly 
basis. Below we consider each of these decisions, devoting 
more time to selection of treatment methods 
predicated on the patient’s diagnostic and transdiagnostic 
features. 

Treatment Settings 

The setting is where the treatment occurs—a psychotherapist’s 
office, a psychiatric unit, a halfway house, 
an outpatient clinic, a secondary school, or a medical 
ward. The choice of setting depends primarily on 
the relative need for restricting and/or supporting the 
patient given the severity of psychopathology and the 
amount of support in the patient’s environment. As 
applied to depression and substance abuse, the urgent 
question is whether hospitalization or detoxification is 
required for either. 

Each treatment decision is related to the other treatment 
decisions, as well as to certain patient characteristics. 
The optimal setting, for example, is partially 
determined by the level of functional impairment and 
partially reflects reactance level. Those clients who are 
most impaired and resistant have the greatest need for a 
restrictive environment. Outpatient treatment is always 
preferred over a restrictive setting; indeed, preference 
is nearly always for the least restrictive setting. 

Therapy Formats 

The format indicates who directly participates in the 
treatment, the interpersonal context within which the 
therapy is conducted. The typical treatment formats— 
individual, group, couples, and family—are characterized 
by a set of treatment parameters, all determined 
largely by the number and identities of participants. 

Decades of research support the effectiveness and 
especially the cost-efficiency of group, couple, and 
family therapy. Therapy conducted in these formats is 
generally as effective as individual therapy, but patients 
and therapists usually prefer the individual format. 
Even so, a multiperson format is indicated when social 

support systems are low and if one or more of the major 
problems involves a specific other person. 

Treatment Intensity 

The intensity of psychotherapy is the product of the duration 
of the treatment episode, the length of a session, 
and the frequency of contact. It may also entail the use 
of multiple formats, such as both group and individual 
therapy or both pharmacotherapy and psychotherapy. 

Intensity should be gauged as a function of problem 
complexity and level of impairment in the context of the 
patient’s resources. For example, a patient with a multiplicity 
of treatment goals, severe functional impairment, 
few social supports, and a personality disorder is likely to 
require substantially longer, more intense, and more varied 
treatment than a patient with a simpler problem. Patients 
suffering from both mood disorders and substance 
abuse almost always require intense and long-term care. 

Pharmacotherapy 

Psychotropic medications are particularly indicated for 
more severe and chronic disorders, which is the case 
with the majority of depressed substance abusers. Unlike 
some systems of psychotherapy, integrative psychotherapies 
are well suited to the integration of pharmacotherapy 
and psychotherapy. This position, of course, 
is consistent with the pluralism underlying treatment 
selection. But like most health care professionals, integrative 
therapists are especially keen to avoid treating 
substance abuse with only another substance. 

Thus, we offer a cautionary note here: Medication 
alone is not an integrative treatment. Tightening insurance 
reimbursements and restricting psychological 
services unduly favor pharmacotherapy at the expense 
of psychotherapy for virtually every disorder. This situation 
is clinically and empirically appalling to us because 
decades of research indicate that, in fact, there 
is frequently no stronger medicine than psychotherapy 
for both clinical depression and substance abuse (e.g., 
Antonuccio, 1995; Antonuccio, Danton, & DeNelsky, 
1995; DeRubeis et al., 2005; Hollon, 1990). The 
preponderance of scientific evidence shows that psychotherapy 
is generally as effective as medications 
in treating nonpsychotic disorders, especially when 
patient-rated measures, side effect profiles, and longterm 
follow-up are considered. This is not to devalue 
the salutary impact of pharmacotherapy; rather, it is to 
underscore the reliable potency of psychotherapy. 


Depression and Substance Abuse 

Therapy Relationship 

All psychotherapy occurs within the sensitive and 
curative context of the human connection. Although 
we emphasized this point and its research underpinnings 
earlier in this chapter, we hasten to dispute the 
unfortunate misperception of treatment selection as a 
disembodied, technique-oriented process. Our integrative 
approach attempts to fit not only therapy methods 
but also relationship stances to individual clients. One 
way to conceptualize the matter, paralleling the notion 
of “treatments of choice” in terms of techniques, is 
how clinicians determine “therapeutic relationships of 
choice” in terms of interpersonal stances (Norcross & 
Beutler, 1997). Conducting the best of evidence-based 
treatment all comes to naught unless the client feels 
safe, cared for, and connected. 

Early on, then, we strive to develop a working alliance 
and to demonstrate empathy for the client’s experiences 
and concerns. We proceed collaboratively in 
establishing treatment goals, in securing the patient’s 
preferences, in allaying the initially expected distrust 
and fear, and in presenting ourselves as caring and supportive. 
Of course, the therapy relationship must also 
be matched or tailored to the individual patient and his/ 
her cultures. 

This imperative to fit or match psychotherapy to the 
patient can be misconstrued as an authority figure/ 
therapist prescribing a particular form of psychotherapy 
for a passive client. The clinical reality is precisely 
the opposite. Our goal is for an empathic therapist to 
work toward an optimal relationship that enhances collaboration, 
is consistent with the client’s preferences, 
and secures the patient’s sense of safety and commitment. 
The nature of such an optimal relationship is 
determined by patient preferences, cultures, and personality. 
If a client frequently resists, for example, then 
the therapist considers whether he/she is pushing something 
that the client finds incompatible (preferences), or 
whether the client is not ready to make those changes 
(stage of change) or is uncomfortable with a directive 
style (reactance). We lead by following and respecting 
the client (Norcross, 2010). 

Treatment Methods 

When clinicians first meet clients, they are tempted to 
focus immediately and intensely on particular therapy 
methods and strategies. However, as we have noted, 
treatment selection always involves a cascading series 

of interrelated decisions. A truly integrated treatment 
requires that the therapist recursively consider these 
other decisions before jumping to therapy methods. 

The selection of methods and strategies is the most 
controversial component of integrative therapy for 
depression and substance abuse. While there may be 
occasional professional disagreement about the ideal 
treatment setting and format, proponents of disparate 
theoretical orientations frequently endorse decidedly 
different positions on which methods should be used. 
Moreover, any given method can be used in different 
ways. Thus, rather than focusing on specific techniques 
per se, we prefer prescribing change principles. Principles 
are flexible, yet specific. Each principle can be 
implemented in a number of ways and with diverse 
techniques, depending on the predilections and skills 
of the therapist. By mixing and matching methods from 
different therapy systems, we tailor the treatment to the 
particular patient (Norcross, 2013). 

Humans, including psychotherapists, cannot process 
more than a handful of matching dimensions at 
once (Halford, Baker, McCredden, & Bain, 2005). As 
discussed earlier, we principally consider five transdiagnostic 
patient characteristics (reactance level, stage 
of change, coping style, preferences, and culture) that 
have a proven empirical track record as prescriptive 
guidelines. 

What about diagnosis in treatment selection? When 
it comes to the psychological treatment of unipolar depression 
and substance abuse, the diagnosis does not 
suggest a particular treatment, other than to favor those 
with the most research support. That is, diagnosis has 
the least evidence of differential treatment effects. In 
any case, we reiterate that reliance on diagnosis alone 
to select a treatment plan is empirically questionable 
and clinically suspect. Instead, as applied to depression 
and substance abuse, we select treatment methods on 
the basis of matching the outcome research to those 
transdiagnostic patient features of reactance, stage of 
change, preferences, coping style, and culture. 

Clinical Assessment 

Our approach strongly values clinical assessment 
that guides effective treatment (Harwood, Beutler, & 
Groth-Marnat, 2011). Such assessment is conducted 
early in psychotherapy to select treatment methods and 
therapy relationships that are most likely to be effective, 
throughout therapy to monitor the patient’s response 
and to make midcourse adjustments as needed, 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

and toward the end of psychotherapy to evaluate the 
outcome of the entire enterprise. Thus, assessment is 
continuous, collaborative, and invaluable. 

Clinical assessment of the patient in integrative therapy 
is relatively traditional, with one major exception. 
The assessment interview(s) entail collecting information 
on presenting problems, relevant histories, and 
treatment expectations and goals, as well as building 
a working alliance. As psychologists, we also typically 
use formal psychological testing as a means of securing 
additional data and identifying disorders. We recommend 
both symptomatic rating forms (e.g., Beck Depression 
Inventory–II [BDI-II], Symptom Checklist 
90—Revised) and broader measures of pathology and 
personality (e.g., Minnesota Multiphasic Personality 
Inventory–II, Millon Clinical Multiaxial Inventory– 
III). 

The one way in which our assessment departs from 
the usual is that we collect, from the outset, information 
on multiple patient characteristics that will guide 
treatment selection. 

The five patient characteristics identified in the research 
(as noted earlier) guide us in identifying a beneficial 
fit between patient and treatment. Of course, we 
are not confined to these five considerations, but they 
do illustrate our process of clinical assessment and 
treatment matching. 

A free, online program has been developed (www. 
innerlife.com) to guide patients in selecting an optimal 
treatment and finding a clinician who can best implement 
that treatment. A companion program is available 
to clinicians (at the same website) for a modest cost to 
help them plan a research-informed treatment that is 
both broad and flexible in applying fundamental principles 
of change. Completing the assessment requires 
approximately 15 minutes and takes the person through 
a series of item-branching questions. At completion, 
the Innerlife STS renders a report to the patient that addresses 
treatment issues tailored to the person: 

•• 
Potential Areas of Concern 

•• 
Treatments to Consider 

•• 
Treatments to Avoid 

•• 
Compatible Therapist Styles 

•• 
Picking a Psychotherapist 

•• 
Self-Help Resources 

A similar set of treatment issues are addressed in 
more detail in the parallel report directed to the clinician, 
and available through the same website. This 

more detailed report also includes programmatic considerations 
that should be addressed in structuring the 
environment and directing the staff of treatment centers 
in what is needed for effective change. 

case stuDy: aMBer 

Initial Encounters 

Amber’s father initially contacted our private practice 
office seeking psychotherapy for his 32-year-old, 
divorced European American daughter following her 
scheduled release from prison the next month. The father 
was informed of the 3-month waiting list, referred 
to an office mate psychiatrist to begin pharmacotherapy, 
and offered names of other psychologists. Amber 
and her parents decided to wait to see one of the authors 

(J. C. N.) but she began attending Alcoholics Anonymous 
(AA) meetings 5 days a week and started an antidepressant 
(fluoxetine, to 80 mg) and an anxiolytic 
(BuSpar, 20 mg three times a day) for 2 months before 
commencing individual psychotherapy. Although the 
delay was not clinically advisable, it did fortuitously 
provide a baseline and control comparison for the subsequent 
effects of psychotherapy. That is, at our initial 
evaluation, we were able to establish the extant effects 
of the medications and AA participation apart from 
and predating the psychotherapy. The two medications 
were continued over the course of psychotherapy and 
were monitored by a psychiatrist throughout. 
At our first session, I began with standard open-ended 
questions: 

tHeraPist: Ms. Smith, what brings you here today? 
What do you hope to accomplish? 

client: Well, I am depressed and a recovering addict. 
I was released a couple of months ago from prison, 
where I was diagnosed with borderline personality 
disorder. I suppose I want to work on all of that. 

We begin with Ms. Smith’s story and with respect. I 
address the client as Ms. Smith until or if she grants me 
permission to call her Amber, which she does within 10 
minutes. We also begin with the client’s narrative story 
and concerns. The primary task in the first session is 
twofold: to cultivate an accepting, empathic relationship, 
one in which she will feel understood and prized, 
and to collect sufficient information to begin planning 
treatment together. 


Depression and Substance Abuse 

A tumultuous and complicated history pours out of 
Amber: For as long as she can remember, she has felt 
depressed, lonely, and incompetent despite having a 
loving and stable family. Three courses of psychotherapy, 
ranging from 3 months to a year each, and multiple 
antidepressants did little to relieve her misery. Approximately 
5 years ago, she began embezzling funds 
from the legal firm where she worked as a paralegal and 
assisted with the bookkeeping. The stolen money was 
used to finance an escalating and expensive addiction 
to opiates, benzodiazepines, and alcohol. “They help 
me get numb.” Her pathological gambling and shoplifting 
escalated as the drugs loosened her impulse control 
and impaired her judgment further. She descended into 
burglary to support her habit and into infidelity with 
men who supplied her with drugs. Her self-cutting, 
emotional lability, and fear of abandonment intensified. 
Amber’s embezzlement was discovered by her law 
firm, the police caught her with stolen items, and her 
husband of 3 years learned of the serial affairs. Amber 
was fired, incarcerated, and divorced in a matter of 
weeks. She then spent 2 years in county and state prisons 
until she was released early for good behavior and 
sentenced to several years of parole. 

An abbreviated mental status examination reveals 
that this well-oriented, well-nourished woman appears 
younger than her stated age. Amber is polite, 
deferential, and verbal throughout the interview. She 
is visibly distressed by her condition and acknowledges 
suicidal ideation, but no intentions or plans. 
Her mood is depressed and anxious but appropriate. 
There is no evidence or complaints of psychosis, 
mania, or aggression. Detailed assessment of her 
functioning will be undertaken between sessions and 
in subsequent visits. 

Upon learning that Amber’s three previous experiences 
with psychotherapy did not prove particularly 
successful, I began to explore what did and did not 
work in those treatments, thereby defining and aligning 
our collaborative relationship. 

tHeraPist: From those experiences, Amber, you certainly 
learned how a psychotherapist could be most 
useful to you. What would he or she ideally do? And 
what should he or she not do? 

amBer: Well, I don’t really know . . . (sounding hesitant 
and incredulous) 

tHeraPist: I did not mean to put you on the spot [attributing 
her reluctance to voice preferences to my 

unexpected question rather than her core deference 
to authorities]. In our work together, I will be asking 
you to provide feedback on our progress and on 
what we do here. That’s the honest partnership we 
hope to create. Perhaps you have had some thoughts 
about what worked and what did not in your previous 
treatment? 

amBer: Well, the one with Dr. X did not teach me anything, 
but he was very nice and supportive. I liked 
him but I did not make any progress. Dr. Y asked 
me to keep free associating and tell him my dreams. 
That was interesting, but did not leave me feeling 
any better. 

tHeraPist: Do I have it right that we should not repeat 
those mistakes: only nice without teaching you new 
skills and leaving you too . . . unstructured? 

amBer: . . . and too passive. I need some skills, directions, 
ways to deal with all of this [her problems]. 

Amber nominates additional preferences for transparency 
in the process, between-session goals (also 
known as homework), and reading materials. Amber’s 
preferences naturally segue into an exploration of our 
respective roles and her active collaboration in psychotherapy. 
She intellectually understands the importance 
of an active client but, emotionally, feels inadequate to 
undertake the task: “I’ve felt like this my entire life. I 
know what I want, but can’t get there.” 

Thus, psychotherapy begins with both an explanation 
and an experience of the way we might proceed. To 
ensure that treatment proceeds with her informed consent 
and active collaboration, we jointly develop three 
between-session activities. First, Amber grants me 
permission to speak with the psychiatrist and to secure 
her psychological records from prison, and asks me 
to respond to her probation officer, should he contact 
me. Second, at my request, Amber agrees to complete 
a life history inventory and a series of comprehensive 
computer-administered psychological tests to cover the 
essential ground. We will review her test responses next 
session. And third, Amber will prioritize her treatment 
goals. Among the desirable changes, which would she 
like to focus on at the outset? 

All of these activities are designed to jump-start the 
therapy process and to activate Amber’s collaboration, 
despite her unsuccessful therapy experiences in the 
past. We both leave the first session feeling connected, 
more optimistic, but a bit overwhelmed by the magnitude 
of her conditions. 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

History and Background 

Amber was the youngest of three children (girl, boy, 
girl), and experienced normal developmental milestones. 
According to her recollections and her mother’s 
independent report, Amber had suffered pervasive 
anxiety “since birth” and throughout adolescence. Neither 
the patient nor her parents reported any history of 
trauma; instead, all agreed that family life was stable 
and relatively benign. Both parents were professionals, 
and both appeared to care deeply about Amber and her 
future. 

The patient succeeded in academics but flailed at 
friendships. She completed high school with fine grades 
and went on to earn a college degree and another year 
of paralegal training. Starting early in school, Amber 
suffered from feelings of inadequacy, low self-esteem, 
avoidance, and school reluctance. It was the latter and a 
brief bout of being bullied that led her to the guidance 
counselor in elementary school for several sessions of 
counseling. 

Her adolescence was punctuated by quiet academic 
achievement but a series of internalizing disorders: “secret” 
shoplifting, nonsuicidal self-mutilation, and alcohol 
use before high school classes (“to lift my mood 
and soothe my nerves”). In college, she became bulimic 
for a year. She related that “no one ever knew” about 
the eating disorder or the other dysfunctions, and that 
she was “keeping it all inside of me.” 

At that point Amber entered into individual therapy 
on three occasions over a span of about 5 years, while 
simultaneously working with two different psychiatrists. 
When those treatments did not materially reduce 
her distress, Amber reported that she “gave up” and 
began the downward spiral of addiction, impulse dyscontrol, 
and embezzlement that led to her being fired, 
incarcerated, and divorced in a matter of weeks. 

Medical history was unremarkable: a bout of childhood 
asthma that she outgrew, a broken limb secondary 
to a sport accident, and seasonal allergies. With the 
exception of the psychotropic medications, Amber was 
not taking medications and was followed regularly by 
her primary care physician and gynecologist. She enjoyed 
robust physical health and was an avid exerciser. 
She had begun to smoke a few cigarettes daily since 
release from prison but had been abstinent from alcohol 
and drugs for 60 days when we first met. 

By contrast, the family history was positive for multiple 
mental disorders. Her older sister was hospitalized 
for an eating disorder and suffers from anxiety disor


ders, for which she continues in psychotherapy. Her 
brother experiences clinical levels of anxiety and depression, 
which periodically leads him to psychotherapy 
and pharmacotherapy. Amber’s mother, by multiple 
accounts, suffers from strong obsessive and agoraphobic 
tendencies, for which she has also sought professional 
care. Her father was characterized as “very anxious” 
but apparently did not receive treatment. 

Assessment and Formulation 

In addition to a mental status examination conducted 
during our second meeting and the life history inventory 
completed between meetings, Amber completed 
the Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory–2 
(MMPI-2), the BDI-II, and the Beck Anxiety Inventory 
(BAI). Scores on both the Beck instruments were in 
the severe range at intake (BDI-II = 37; BAI = 49), as 
shown in Figure 15.3. Amber’s ratings of urge intensity 
in the last week on a 11-point visual analogue scale (0 
= None to 10 = The worst) were 3 for alcohol, drugs 2, 
gambling 8, and shoplifting 9. 

Amber’s MMPI-2 profile was clinically elevated on 
multiple scales, including the D, Pt, and Sc scales, and 
suggested unusually severe psychological problems 
(Welsh code 87**21*3460”‘9+/5:F***+L-K/). Depression, 
anxiety, and social introversion were all spiking 
above the 99th percentile. So, too, were two scales 
measuring PTSD symptoms. The computer-generated 
interpretive report indicated that “a pattern of chronic 
psychological maladjustment characterizes individuals 
with this MMPI-2 clinical profile. The client is overwhelmed 
by anxiety, tension, and depression. She feels 
helpless and alone, inadequate and insecure, and she 
believes that life is hopeless and that nothing is working 
out right. She attempts to control her worries through 
intellectualization and unproductive self-analysis, but 
she has difficulty concentrating and making decisions.” 
Her coping style was markedly introverted (at the 99th 
percentile) and avoidant (above the 95th percentile); 
her interpersonal relationships tended to be ambivalent, 
“never fully trusting or loving anyone. Many individuals 
with this profile never establish lasting, intimate 
relationships.” The two negative treatment indicators 
were also quite elevated: Amber’s low motivation and 
inability to disclose were both above the 95th percentile. 


At the same time, several of Amber’s strengths were 
evident despite the dismal symptom picture. Amber 
had survived years of incarceration, she was voluntari



Depression and Substance Abuse 

50 
45 
40 
35Test Score 
30 
25 
20 
BDI-II 
BAI 
15 
10 
5 
0 
2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 16 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48 50 
Number of sessions 

FIGURE 15.3. Amber’s scores on the Beck Anxiety Inventory (BAI) and Beck Depression Inventory–II (BDI-II) across 
sessions. 

ly seeking psychotherapy following three disappointing 
efforts, and she was pushing herself to relate to me 
in an honest, forthcoming manner. She was a resilient 
survivor with a keen intellect and a supportive family. 
And she knew in her heart, as she put it, “this time, it 
(psychotherapy) must work or I end up back in prison.” 

At the same time, our treatment approach is less 
concerned about formal diagnoses and more concerned 
with understanding Amber in her uniqueness and complexity. 
But this is not to say that diagnoses are inconsequential. 
At the second session, Amber and I reviewed 
her completed life history inventory and psychological 
test results. Although not flattering, the test results 
struck Amber as “exactly me.” She appreciated the candid 
discussion of her multiple disorders, which she did 
not experience or recall occurring in her previous treatments. 
She was particularly struck by her high levels 
of anxiety, which she typically labeled depression, and 
multiple indications of PTSD stemming from her arrest 
and incarceration. 

Her mental status examination, clinical history, and 
the psychological test results converged on a series of 
diagnosable DSM-5 disorders: major depressive disorder, 
polysubstance dependence, generalized anxiety 
disorder (chronic), PTSD, pathological gambling, klep


tomania/shoplifting, borderline personality disorder, 
and prominent avoidant personality features. Her Global 
Assessment of Functioning (GAF) was 50. 

But assessment falls short for treatment purposes if 
it stops with disorders and even strengths. What about 
Amber as a person, beyond a list of diagnoses? What 
are her treatment preferences, her reactance level, 
stage of change, coping style, and cultures? In terms 
of personality traits, Amber is low in reactance, almost 
pathologically unassertive and dependent, and her 
coping style is fundamentally internalizing. Although 
kleptomania and substance abuse typically indicate an 
externalizing style, she has kept most of her problems 
hidden from others. In terms of problem-specific stages 
of change, Amber is in the preparation stage for her 
anxiety, early action stage for depression, action stage 
for gambling and shoplifting, and in the early maintenance 
stage for her substance abuse. Two fear-charged 
exceptions arise from this pattern of “wanting to tackle 
problems:” Amber is in contemplation for the borderline 
personality disorder and PTSD. She acknowledges 
that she does not understand well the borderline diagnosis 
made in prison, and what she understands is scary 
and pessimistic. Nor is she willing yet to discuss treat



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

ment methods for her prison-related PTSD. We accede 
to her preferences and respect her early contemplation 
stage for those conditions. In terms of culture, Amber 
identifies herself as a female recovering addict of European 
American persuasion and heterosexual orientation. 


Preparing the Patient 

Amber presents for the second session looking more 
comfortable and less distressed. I share this observation, 
and Amber responds, “I did feel better this past 
week.” I ask for her impressions of our first session, as 
a means of developing collaboration, collecting feedback, 
and communicating the need for goal and task 
consensus. We discuss Amber’s experiences, including 
her perception of comfort with me and her feelings of 
shame and guilt in revealing her “awful mess of a life.” 
I offer that I was impressed with her openness and honesty, 
particularly given her history of secrecy and the 
fact that it was our first meeting Within a few minutes, 
we agree that the therapist–patient fit is “good” and proceed 
to review the test results (as summarized earlier). 

Consistent with her stages of change, Amber decides 
to focus in early sessions on treating her depression and 
maintaining her drug abstinence. I concur with these 
preferences because they coincide with the usual sequencing 
of treatment goals with multidisordered patients: 
Accord first priority to decreasing suicidal (and 
return-to-prison) behaviors, then to therapy-interfering 
behaviors, and then to decreasing behaviors that interfere 
with quality of life (Linehan, 1993a). We agree to 
begin with weekly individual psychotherapy with the 
caveat that we will increase the frequency if her distress 
and impairment do not decline soon. 

Preparing the patient for psychotherapy occurs 
in two guises: one for the role demands of psychotherapy 
in general, and one for the specific treatment 
methods in particular. A good portion of the second 
session is occupied with laying the groundwork for 
psychotherapy—confidentiality, cancellations, contacting 
the therapist, handling crises, answering service, 
payment, and so on—and then Amber’s role induction 
as an active, informed patient of the process. As 
an experienced therapy patient, Amber grasps this information 
rapidly, asks a few clarifying questions, and 
readily agrees to the frame of treatment. With a less 
experienced patient, more time would (and should) be 
devoted to these matters. 

An additional element of preparation is introducing 
the view that psychotherapy is a single part of the more 
inclusive treatment plan. The research indicates that 
patients who are functionally impaired respond best 
to a comprehensive treatment. Specifically, more impaired 
or disabled patients profit from more treatment, 
lengthier treatment, psychoactive medication, multiple 
therapy formats (individual, couple, group), and explicit 
efforts to strengthen their social support networks 
(Beutler, Harwood, Alimohamed, & Malik, 2002). Patients 
suffering from both mood and substance disorders 
are cases in point; to put it simply, complex problems 
require complex treatments. 

The second guise of preparation is explaining the 
particular treatment methods, in this instance, beginning 
with cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) for the 
depression and relapse prevention for the substance 
abuse, gambling, and shoplifting. These particular 
treatments immediately suggest themselves for Amber 
on several counts: They match her stage of change (action 
and maintenance, respectively), her low reactance 
level (calling for more directive and therapist guided 
treatments), and her preferences for change tools and 
homework assignments. And, of course, both CBT and 
relapse prevention enjoy solid research evidence of 
their effectiveness in treating Amber’s disorders. 

Psychotherapy is more effective when both the method 
and relationship are tailored to the client’s stage of 
change and then evolve as the client moves along the 
stages during the course of treatment. With contemplators, 
the optimal role as therapist is akin to a Socratic 
teacher who encourages clients to achieve their own insights 
into their condition. Because Amber is into the 
action stage, the stance morphs into an experienced, 
supportive coach who has been through many crucial 
matches and can provide a fine game plan. 

Although the research clearly indicates that Amber’s 
action and maintenance stages and her low reactance 
favor the therapist’s use of directive methods, the therapist 
must also sensitively broach the topic of transferring 
more responsibility and self-direction to the client 
over time. Amber, with a lifelong history of dependency 
and low reactance, will respond best to a directive 
stance on the part of the therapist. At the same time, 
we must be careful not to reenact, in conscious and unconscious 
ways, Amber’s unassertive and subservient 
relationship with the powerful therapist. Thus, I broach 
this matter early in the third session and contract for an 
evolving relationship in terms of our respective roles. 


Depression and Substance Abuse 

tHeraPist: Last time, we agreed that I would be an 
active and directive therapist with action plans and 
homework in addressing your depression and drug 
use. (Amber nods in agreement.) The research evidence 
also supports that. My concern is that doing 
so may reinforce in here your tendency to behave dependently 
and defer to others. Does that make sense? 

amBer: Ummmm. Yes, I had not thought about that, 
but I see how that would probably happen. I would 
depend more on you. 

tHeraPist: That will be fine in the short run, while 
we are reducing your depression and keeping you 
abstinent. In the long run, your depending too much 
on me compounds your unassertive personality style. 
Might I suggest this as a way out of the paradox? In 
our early sessions, I will be more directive, in the 
lead, so that you can become less depressed and certain 
in your sobriety. Once that happens, in the later 
sessions, then we will ask and teach you to become 
more assertive, more in the lead. It will sort of be 
like AA—right now you depend a lot on your sponsor, 
but one day you will be probably sponsoring others. 
How does that sound? 

This distinction between mediating goals and ultimate 
goals is almost always enthusiastically received, 
as it was by Amber. The mediating goal is to reduce 
symptomatic distress; the ultimate goal is to restructure 
interpersonal behavior. Psychotherapy can be more directive 
in the short term to work toward more mature 
and assertive relationships in the long term. 

Ongoing assessment will, of course, refine Amber’s 
goals, and her early success will lead to further goals. 
Her immediate goals and, as she puts it, “where she 
is at” (in the stages of change) are to reduce depression 
and maintain her abstinence. Those goals reflect 
where her commitment and action lie, representing the 
best chances of reducing her suicidal ideation and her 
probability of returning to prison Her chronic anxiety, 
PTSD, and matrix of borderline personality symptoms 
are addressed more fully in later sessions. 

Monitoring Progress 

We routinely collect real-time client feedback over the 
course of psychotherapy regarding three crucial areas: 
patient functioning/symptoms; task and goal consensus; 
and satisfaction with the therapy relationship. In 

terms of symptom monitoring, Amber and I agree that 
she will complete the BDI-II and the BAI every four 
sessions (once a month) to monitor her progress. (Figure 
15.3 presents these results). We have found that 
more frequent measurement in lengthier psychotherapy 
proves unnecessary and frequently annoys patients. 
In most sessions, Amber will rate her urges to drink, 
drug, gamble, and shoplift in the last week on a 11point 
visual analogue scale, where 0 = None and 10 = 
The worst. 

In terms of treatment and relationship satisfaction, 
we typically rely on asking direct questions of clients 
following the scoring and review of the measures of 
symptom outcome. These begin with broad, open-ended 
questions, such as “How is the psychotherapy going? 
How are we (the relationship) doing?” Then we follow 
up with more focused inquiries as the patient’s responses 
and situations dictate. For Amber, these might 
be on the order of “What has been the most help so 
far? The least helpful? How are we doing on honoring 
your preferences? Do you experience me being directive 
enough and providing enough tools? How can we 
improve things?” 

Several standardized measures are available for assessing 
two or more of these crucial areas: the COM-
PASS (Lueger et al., 2001), the Clinical Outcomes in 
Routine Evaluation (CORE) system (widely used in the 
United Kingdom; Barkham et al., 2001), the Partners 
for Change Outcome Management System (PCOMS; 
Miller, Duncan, Sorrell, & Brown, 2005), and the Outcome 
Questionnaire–45 (OQ-45; Lambert et al., 2004). 
Our favorite, the Innerlife STS system (www.innerlife. 
com), provides both clinician and client versions, and 
offers both pretreatment and across-treatment information. 
The important point here is not the particular outcome 
monitoring system but that the therapist regularly 
collects the information. For novice therapists unaccustomed 
to asking these questions, particularly those 
related to treatment and relationship satisfaction, we 
strongly encourage the use of the formal measurement 
systems. 

Treatment Process 

Having now created a sufficiently empathic alliance, 
collected sufficient diagnostic and transdiagnostic information 
to create a treatment plan, and prepared the 
patient, we proceed in the fourth session to conducting 
CBT for depression and relapse prevention. 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

The CBT follows a fairly standard protocol: The patient 
is oriented to the cognitive model of depression, 
guided in identifying depressogenic thoughts, asked to 
record those thoughts between sessions, and instructed 
in challenging and disputing those thoughts, replacing 
them with healthier attributions and coping statements. 
The patient also agrees to behavioral activation: getting 
out of her home for at least 3 hours a day initially 
(graduating to 6 hours later in therapy) and volunteering 
4 hours a week (eventually progressing to 15 hours 
a week). Amber is presented with a list of psychologistrecommended 
and research-supported self-help books 
on depression (Norcross et al., 2013), and decides to 
read Feeling Good: The New Mood Therapy (Burns, 
1999). She later decides to purchase the accompanying 
workbook and often brings it to session to review the 
worksheets. 

We devote about half of the session time to the CBT 
for her depression and the other half to relapse prevention 
(RP) for her drinking, drugging, shoplifting, and 
gambling. Amber has become aware in her AA meetings 
that relapse is the most common long-term outcome 
in the treatment of addictions. More urgently, 
Amber feels the pressure of returning to prison if she is 
found taking drugs or shoplifting. 

RP is self-management training designed to avoid 
recycling and to enhance the maintenance stage (Marlatt 
& Donovan, 2007). Through in-session discussions 
and between-session readings, Amber is taught how to 
understand relapse as a process, identify high-risk situations, 
learn to cope with cravings to engage in the addictive 
behavior, and achieve a balanced lifestyle. Her 
riskiest triggers pertain to inactivity, negative mood 
states, and a particular subset of friends. Fortunately, 
the first two of these are being fruitfully addressed by 
the CBT for her depression. A lot of time in session 
is spent on actualizing the “avoid people, places, and 
things” slogan of her AA meetings to minimize time 
spent with those friends. We also practice and rehearse 
urge-surfing for those times when, in spite of avoiding 
the triggers, Amber confronts the cravings. 

As an eager computer user, Amber decides to search 
the Web for research reviews on RP and finds a metaanalysis 
(which she understandably does not fully comprehend) 
on its effectiveness in 26 studies representing 
a sample of 9,504 patients (Irvin, Bowers, Dunn, 
& Wang, 1999). The results reveal that RP is generally 
effective, certainly more so than no-treatment controls, 
and particularly effective for alcohol and polysub


stance use disorders. “Just like me,” Amber smilingly 
acknowledges in session. 

In one session, the 13th or 14th, Amber appears uncharacteristically 
reticent to participate in the therapeutic 
work. I ask about her interest, and she unconvincingly 
responds, “Oh, I’m just tired today.” The pattern 
persists into the next session: 

tHeraPist: You do not seem into it [psychotherapy] 
today. It seems different to me, like last week. Not as 
much energy and zip like we usually have. What are 
you experiencing or feeling in session of late? 

amBer: Well .. . I don’t know .. . feeling annoyed. 

tHeraPist: Thanks for telling me. I realize that’s a 
hard thing for you to do—voicing your annoyance, 
disappointment, with someone. Good for you. 

amBer: It’s hard .. . (about a 30-second pause) Last 
time [session] I think that you did not understand 
how hard I have been working to do all of these 
things. You seemed critical of me like I’m not doing 
enough. 

tHeraPist: You’re feeling that I am not appreciating 
your hard work, in psychotherapy and at home, and 
that I’m critical of your efforts .. .. 

amBer: Yeah, that’s right. But now I’m afraid that I’m 
disappointing you or making you angry .. . 

tHeraPist: Certainly not, Amber. I’m feeling the opposite: 
I’m pleased and proud that you took the risk 
of being assertive and telling me how you feel today. 
That’s a wonderful way for us to be, but not wonderful 
feelings inside you. Huh? 

Amber concurs that these are troubling feelings for 
her: Assertion triggers her fear of rejection or abandonment. 
When I inquire when she has felt this way 
before, she immediately says—literally, immediately, 
speaking before I finish the question—“my father.” 
That leads into an extended process of Amber speaking 
about how she perceives her father to be supportive 
in his remarks but critical and unaccepting of her in 
his behavior. Without prompting, she observes, “Ohh. 
That’s what I am saying now about you.. ..” 

At the end of her psychotherapy, Amber and I both 
nominated this session as a memorable turning point 
for her. She found her voice to express her displeasure 
with me—a male authority figure—and discovered that 
she was transferring or projecting feelings originally 
associated with her father to me (and probably others). 


Depression and Substance Abuse 

It is quite possible that an empathic failure or a neutral 
look on my part sparked her feeling, but the underlying 
feelings certainly belonged to her father. 

Beyond that self-awareness, this session also solidified 
our relationship in that it demonstrated in vivo a 
way for us to repair any ruptures in the alliance (Safran, 
Muran, & Eubanks-Carter, 2011). The therapist 
can respond nondefensively, attend emphatically and 
directly to the relationship, understand the mutual dynamics, 
adjust behavior (if necessary), and attend to 
the patient’s conflictual relationship pattern. In several 
studies, rupture repair positively predicts treatment outcome 
(Safran et al., 2011). At the end of session, Amber 
said that she experienced “like a breakthrough,” and I 
felt that is was one of the good moments in our work. 

In approximately 20 to 22 sessions, Amber is less depressed. 
Her BDI-II score has been cut in half (Figure 
15.3), and her suicidal ideation has disappeared. Her 
urges to use are down to 0–2, accompanied by no slips 
in drugging, drinking, gambling, or shoplifting. 

Brimming with a new-found confidence and a genuine 
trust in the process, Amber is ready to address her 
anxiety and PTSD. However, she remains conflicted 
and fearful. “Depression” is her favored term, and understanding 
“anxiety” is novel and unsettling. 

There are many therapeutic means to address ambivalence 
and resistance, of course, but I select motivational 
interviewing (MI) for Amber. MI fits our therapeutic 
relationship, matches Amber’s contemplation stage, 
and comes with impressive research support for large 
effects in a small number of sessions (Hettema, Steele, 
& Miller, 2005). MI expands on person-centered therapy 
by providing specific methods to move the patient 
toward behavior change (Miller & Rollnick, 2002). 
Following the guiding spirit of MI, I try to: 

•• 
Express empathy by using reflective listening to 

convey understanding of Amber’s ambivalence 

about tacking the anxiety problem and PTSD, and 

to communicate my respect for her need for self


preservation. 

•• 
Develop discrepancy between Amber’s convic


tion that she suffers only from depression and sub


stance abuse, and the clinical findings that she also 

experiences high anxiety. 

•• 
Roll with resistance by meeting it with reflection 

and curiosity rather than confrontation. 

•• 
Support self-efficacy by actively conveying the 

message that the client is capable of change. 

MI leverages the inherent energy that resistance 
brings to the therapeutic interaction, seeking to redirect 
it in a manner that avoids a rupture in the therapeutic 
relationship and allows the emergence of client 
change talk. Just as a canoeist would probably not 
paddle upstream against a strong current, so, too, the 
motivational interviewer does not argue with clients. 
Instead, I roll with the resistance by using the energy 
in the client to steer the interaction (Moyers & Rollnick, 
2002). 

MI is used to enhance Amber’s intrinsic motivation 
to change and to explore and resolve her ambivalence. 
After three sessions of primarily MI methods, Amber 
opts to confront her anxiety and PTSD. Just as Carl 
Rogers predicted, clients can go a long way in a short 
time when provided with facilitative conditions, an 
accepting therapist, and considerable autonomy. MI’s 
flexibility of use permits it to be integrated into other 
psychotherapies to reduce client ambivalence and to 
minimize their resistance (Miller & Moyers, 2005). 

The majority of session time now focuses on treating 
Amber’s anxiety-fueled avoidance and her prison-related 
PTSD. The cognitive restructuring for depression has 
already prepared her for the cognitive work of exposure 
therapy in her daily life. Amber decides initially to target 
her fear of speaking in AA meetings and driving on 
highways. In order to promote her choice and autonomy, I 
ask Amber to read descriptions of two leading treatments 
for PTSD: prolonged exposure with response prevention 
and eye movement desensitization and reprocessing 
(EMDR). After doing so, Amber elects to try the EMDR, 
reasoning that whereas prolonged exposure requires extensive 
daily homework, EMDR does not. 

Simultaneously, she begins to read Getting Past 
Your Past (Shapiro, 2012), a recent self-help book by 
EMDR’s developer. When Amber mentions this to me, 
I congratulate her for taking the initiative, and then 
somewhat sheepishly admit that I should have thought 
of recommending it to her when she expressed interest 
in self-help materials. In an exchange that Amber 
nominated at the end of her therapy as a pivotal moment, 
she smiles and cautions me against thinking in 
terms of “shoulds.” I laugh for a full minute, barely able 
to contain myself, congratulate her on mastering cognitive 
therapy, then observe that the “student is becoming 
the master.” Amber responds deadpan, “Yes, grasshopper”—
an allusion to an old television series (favored 
by her father!) in which the seasoned master calls the 
eager student “grasshopper.” 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

We introduce breathing exercises and practice selfsoothing 
skills before undertaking the EMDR proper. 
Amber then undergoes five elongated sessions (90 minutes) 
of EMDR to address a series of traumatic events 
during her incarceration. Amber tolerates the sessions 
well and successfully uses the breathing and selfsoothing 
between sessions for a couple of nightmares 
and daytime flashbacks. Her anxiety noticeably drops, 
as do her subjective units of distress (SUDs) ascribed 
to the traumatic events. At the conclusion of the five 
EMDR sessions, the SUDS are 1 or 2 for each event, 
which she deems ecologically valid. 

Meanwhile, the exposure to speaking in AA meetings 
and highway driving continues successfully. 
Amber participates verbally in a frequency of the “average 
person,” which is her goal. Driving on the highway 
at or above the posted speed limit becomes “no big 
deal anymore.” Quite apart from accomplishing these 
goals, Amber learns the larger lesson that avoidance 
reduces anxiety in the short run but brings far more 
misery in the long run. 

The in vivo exposure work continues but occupies 
less of our attention in session as Amber now tackles 
the amorphous borderline personality disorder. Amber 
and I begin slowly and didactically with education about 
her unassertive, approval-seeking style through bibliotherapy. 
I offer a selection of assertion and borderline 
personality self-help resources rated highly by mental 
health professionals (Norcross et al., 2013), again asking 
Amber to choose actively instead of passively accepting 
a prescription. She selects not one but three: Your Perfect 
Right (Alberti & Emmons, 1995), Sometimes I Act 
Crazy (Kreisman & Straus, 2006) for her parents, and 
Skills Training Manual for Treating Borderline Personality 
Disorder (Linehan, 1993b) for herself. 

We begin with assertion training in the behavioral 
and feminist traditions: exploring differences between 
assertion and aggression; cognitive restructuring for 
her guilt and fear of rejection when assertive; examining 
gender scripts in her family and in society about 
power; role-playing specific responses in session; taperecording 
Amber during role plays to fine-tune her 
voice and words; and jointly developing homework 
assignments with family members. Assertion is a goal 
not only outside therapy but within it as well. I remind 
Amber of our compact several months earlier when we 
agreed that she would move forward and take more 
control over the work. She agrees, and I chuckle as I 
remind her, “I am the grasshopper now.” 

Amber’s underlying identity or schema as inadequate 
is now more fully explored. It is difficult to summarize 
the constellation of intersecting therapy methods used 
for our final 20 sessions—emotional processing, cognitive 
restructuring, assertion training, transference interpretations, 
and active practice. The emotion-focused 
work follows in the experiential tradition, including a 
few two-chair dialogues between Amber’s competent 
part and her inadequate part. The exercise provide, in 
Amber’s words, “clarity—I can really see how they 
clash and result in strange behavior.” Her symptoms 
continue to fade away. 

Amber’s emerging self is now confronted with endless 
choices in her life and in therapy. Should she secure 
employment? What about her love life? Would graduate 
school make sense? What would she like to tackle in 
therapy? I participate in these discussions, of course, 
but ultimately Amber will decide, knowing that I support 
Amber and her decisions. 

By way of summary, here is how Amber courageously 
tackles these life challenges. She decides 
to continue her volunteer work (now at 20 hours per 
week) and to pursue part-time employment. Submitting 
job applications forces her to explain her legal and addiction 
travails, which prompts considerable anxiety, 
but she successfully avoids the avoidant pull and does 
so. She obtains part-time employment. Amber begins 
to date casually and decides that she is not ready yet 
for a romantic commitment; she is charmed that several 
men ask to date her and two of them seek something 
“deeper.” She will make that decision “in time—when I 
am ready.” She explores several career options with the 
assistance of a vocational interest inventory I administer 
and, like many clients engaged in psychotherapy 
and AA, decides to reorient her career trajectory to a 
human service field. Finally, the cumulative work on 
assertion deficits and borderline personality disorder 
prompts Amber to create different boundaries with her 
parents and to invite them in for a few conjoint sessions 
to renegotiate a competent adult to competent adult 
connection, in contradistinction to years of parent– 
crazy child relating. 

Fifty or so sessions into the psychotherapy, Amber 
notes, “We have not rated my urges [to drink, drug, 
gamble, shoplift] lately.” I reflect for a moment and respond, 
“There does not seem to be any need to do so, 
is there?” We mutually decide to recognize Amber’s 
progress by changing from weekly sessions to sessions 
every 2 or 3 weeks. 


Depression and Substance Abuse 

As psychotherapy winds down, and as Amber consolidates 
and internalizes her progress, my mind turns 
to her future. I gently suggest that the best protection 
against slipping back into depression, substance abuse, 
avoidance, anxiety, and patterns of inadequacy is selfnurturance. 
Amber thinks on this for a few weeks, then 
at our next session presents a self-nurturance list. This 
includes reducing her cigarette smoking, continuing 
her AA attendance and physical exercise, and a host of 
assertive and social pursuits. 

Maintenance or booster sessions are indicated when 
the problems are complex, when addictions are present, 
when the patient is highly impaired, and when a personality 
disorder is present. Those features certainly 
apply to Amber, at least the “old Amber,” and constitute 
strong indicators of the tendency to relapse. For these 
reasons, Amber and I decide on a schedule of monthly 
maintenance sessions for several months. 

Typical Problems 

For patients undergoing integrative therapy, the typical 
problem entails the burden of a lot of work within and 
between sessions. As purposefully more inclusive and 
ambitious, integrative treatment probably asks more of 
the client. We routinely collaborate on homework— 
because the research strongly supports it (Kazantzis, 
Whittington, & Dattilio, 2010), and because Amber 
explicitly requested it. In collaboration with the client, 
the therapist must properly pace or “dose” the amount 
of work and ensure that the client’s motivational distress 
remains motivating, not disabling. With Amber, 
the recurrent question was “Does this feel challenging 
but not overwhelming for you?” 

For therapists conducting integrative therapy, a common 
problem involves retreat into their standard relationship 
style and default treatment method. When the 
research advises a more directive stance, for example, 
therapists may begin in a directive way but then gradually 
slip back into their customary less-directive stance. 
Or as another example, therapists more accustomed to 
working with patients in the action stage will start in a 
more exploratory stance compatible with the patient’s 
contemplation stage, but subsequently provide actionoriented 
processes well before the patient is ready to 
plunge into the action stage. Periodic reevaluations, 
ongoing client feedback, and therapists’ self-awareness 
to fit the patient (not only themselves) tends to correct 
these lapses. 

For neophyte therapists, the core challenge in our 
approach is to avoid the extremes: overemphasizing either 
the treatment method or the healing relationship, 
adhering to either a rule-bound treatment manual or 
an intuitive seat-of-the-pants syncretism, relying exclusively 
on the empirical research or on participant 
preferences. We strive for balanced flexibility, the Aristotelian 
mean, that systematically incorporates all of 
these without succumbing to the human tendency of 
polarization. This can prove problematic for psychotherapists 
trained to think in either–or, binary ways 
about psychotherapy. It can also be daunting in a multidisorderd 
patient, like Amber, with multiple goals sequenced 
over time. “One treatment fits all” becomes an 
attractive, easier alternative to the hard work of tailoring 
psychotherapy to the unique individual and singular 
situation. 

Outcome and Prognosis 

Over the course of 50 weekly individual sessions and 
several maintenance sessions, Amber impressively reduced 
her depression and maintained her abstinence. 
Her depression consistently declined over time, as 
shown in Figure 15.3. The largest drop in her anxiety 
scores occurred between weeks 26 and 32, when the 
EMDR was conducted. Her cravings to drink, drug, 
and shoplift gravitated to 0 on the 0- to 10 scale after 3 
months of psychotherapy, but her urge to gamble would 
periodically spike to the 3- or 4-point range. She did 
not behaviorally succumb to those temptations, however. 
Symptomatically, Amber’s test scores were in the 
normal range, and she was better than ever. 

Interpersonally, the patient achieved impressive 
gains as well. She was less impulsive, more emotionally 
self-regulating, more self-soothing, and increasingly 
assertive and expressive. She certainly no longer 
met the diagnostic criteria for borderline personality 
disorder, but she was susceptible to some behavioral 
avoidance and abandonment fears in her new dating 
relationships. She mourned the years lost to drugs and 
addressed her existential guilt and shame, as much as 
most humans can. 

Her medications were gradually halved over the year 
of our psychological treatment, from 80 mg to 40 mg 
of fluoxetine and from 60 mg to 20 mg of BuSpar. She 
continues on those medications as maintenance with 
plans eventually to reduce them. And Amber continues 
to attend AA meetings twice a week and monthly 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

maintenance psychotherapy sessions, where her most 
recent BDI-II and BAI scores were both 3, well within 
normal limits. 

Despite all of these positive outcomes, as with most 
cases in psychotherapy, not all of Amber’s goals were 
realized. She continues to smoke cigarettes (a maximum 
of 3 per day), and full-time employment has proven 
elusive because her felony record leaves her ineligible 
for many positions. She does work the equivalent 
of three-quarters time between two jobs and is applying 
to graduate school in a human service profession. 
And Amber is prone to occasional bouts of anxiety and 
avoidance when confronting new situations. 

From all accounts, the prognosis is promising indeed. 
She is the “new” Amber as I phrased it, or, as she 
memorably put it, the Amber “2.0.” 

Case Commentary 

We have chosen to illustrate our treatment approach 
for depression and substance abuse with a complex, 
multidisordered woman. As is typical, she suffered for 
many years and from more than two discrete disorders. 
The chronic course of comorbid disorders increases 
the need for integrative treatment, including, in Amber’s 
case, individual psychotherapy, pharmacotherapy, 
support groups, self-help resources, and a few conjoint 
family sessions. The high rates of comorbidity of personality 
disorders and PTSD among substance abusers 
complicates psychotherapy and increases the need to 
sequence treatment methods and goals thoughtfully. 

The psychotherapist can accept some credit for the 
salubrious outcomes in this case, but Amber deserves 
the lion’s share. She worked hard to master new skills, 
prevent relapses, and intentionally expose herself to 
anxiety-provoking situations. She was a bright, motivated, 
and psychologically minded client who progressed 
from the contemplation stage to the action stage and 
ultimately to long-term maintenance. All these patient 
features predict more successful outcomes in all forms 
of psychotherapy. 

Several circumstances also proved fortuitous. Amber 
participated regularly in AA meetings, was motivated 
by the “sobering” experiences of prison, and was supported 
by her parents, who contributed to payment for 
50 sessions of psychotherapy. Fewer sessions with a 
therapist working in a public clinic would probably not 
have yielded the same benefits. Although Amber was 
not favorably impressed by her previous therapy experiences, 
it was clear the she had benefited from the so


cialization into psychotherapy and perhaps from moving 
from earlier stages of change to later stages before 
undertaking this course of treatment. 

Where our integrative approach was probably most 
effective was in fitting or tailoring the therapy relationship 
and treatment methods specifically to Amber. The 
treatment proceeded stepwise in accordance with the 
research evidence, the patient’s preferences, stage of 
change, and her other transdiagnostic characteristics. 
The therapist systematically addressed depression, 
substance abuse, and others disorders by combining 
therapy methods (those traditionally associated with 
person-centered, behavioral, cognitive, exposure, feminist, 
psychodynamic, and experiential traditions) and 
healing resources (psychotherapy, pharmacotherapy, 
self-help, and AA spirituality) in a seamless and responsive 
manner. 

Predictors of Success and Failure 

No therapy or therapist is immune to failure. It is at 
such times that experienced clinicians often wonder 
whether therapy methods from orientations other than 
their own might more usefully have been included in 
the treatment, or whether another orientation’s strength 
in dealing with the particular problems might complement 
the therapist’s own orientational weakness. Integrative 
therapies assume that each orientation has its 
particular domain of expertise and that these domains 
can be linked to maximize their effectiveness (Pinsof, 
1995). In this way, rival therapy systems are increasingly 
viewed not as adversaries but as welcome partners 
(Landsman, 1974); not as contradictory but as 
complementary. 

When integrative therapy fails, it may be a result of 
failure to follow the guiding integrative principles, a 
dearth of skill in implementing a particular treatment, 
a poor fit between the particular patient and the particular 
therapist, or inaccurate evaluation of the patient 
dimensions that indicate the optimal therapist style and 
objectives. Each of these alternatives should be considered 
when a patient is not accomplishing his/her goals 
at a rate expected among similar patients. Our approach 
embraces an initial evaluation of the transdiagnostic 
patient dimensions, as well as periodic review of treatment 
processes to ensure that the therapy methods are 
a good fit as defined by the research. Finally, formal 
feedback about progress is helpful and often initiates a 
discussion of things that slow or block progress and of 
procedures that may help move through such impasses. 


Depression and Substance Abuse 

In the past few years, we have begun sharing with the 
patient the results of serial testing (e.g., that presented 
in Figure 15.3) or the Innerlife STS progress graphs to 
illustrate points of impasse and success. 

coNclusioNs 

Psychotherapy is a treatment method and a healing relationship 
fit to the individual patient and context. In 
this chapter, we have endeavored to demonstrate how 
psychotherapists can do exactly that for patients suffering 
from depression and substance abuse, thereby 
increasing treatment effectiveness and efficiency. Such 
treatment selection must be systematic, flexible, and 
evidence-based. For these reasons, integrative psychotherapy 
seems particularly indicated for complex patients 
with comorbid disorders, such as Amber, and for 
patients whom pure form or monotherapies have failed 
or been only partially successful. 

Our chapter presentation and case illustration may 
convey the impression that integrative psychotherapy 
can be thoroughly planned from the beginning, but 
clinical reality is not so accommodating. Although 
we try to formulate the case and plan treatment at the 
outset, we expect and welcome the invariable turn of 
events. Treatment selection is nonlinear and dynamic; 
a behavior or change at one point in time impacts all 
subsequent behavior. “You never know what to expect 
the next session” is one of the fascinations of psychotherapy. 
We are continuously moving with the patient 
and evolving with the unanticipated, but we do so informed 
by clinical experience and research evidence. 

This chapter has outlined our integrative therapy 
and detailed its step-by-step process of systematic 
treatment selection in substance abuse and depression. 
This process applies research knowledge from multiple 
theoretical orientations on both diagnostic and transdiagnostic 
patient characteristics to the optimal choice of 
technical and relational methods. Such a therapy posits 
that many treatment methods and interpersonal stances 
have a valuable place in the repertoire of the contemporary 
psychotherapist. Their particular and differential 
place can be determined through outcome research, 
seasoned experience, and positioning the client at the 
center of the clinical enterprise. Integrative therapy offers 
the evidence-based relationships, treatments, and 
responsiveness to meet the multifarious needs of individual 
patients and their unique contexts well into the 
21st century. 

referenCes 

Alberti, R., & Emmons, M. (1995). Your perfect right: A 
guide to assertive living (7th ed.). San Luis Obispo, CA: 
Impact. 

American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and 
statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.). Arlington, 
VA: Author. 

Antonuccio, D. O. (1995). Psychotherapy for depression: No 
stronger medicine. American Psychologist, 50, 450–452. 

Antonuccio, D. O., Danton, W. G., & DeNelsky, G. Y. (1995). 
Psychotherapy versus medication for depression: Challenging 
the conventional wisdom with data. Professional 
Psychology: Research and Practice, 26, 574–585. 

Barkham, M., Margison, F., Leach, C., Lucock, M., Mellor-
Clark, J., Evans, C., et al. (2001). Service profiling and 
outcomes benchmarking using the CORE_OM: Toward 
practice-based evidence in the psychological therapies. 
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 69, 184– 
196. 

Beutler, L. E. (2009). Making science matter in clinical practice: 
Redefining psychotherapy. Clinical Psychology: Science 
and Practice, 16, 301–317. 

Beutler, L. E., & Clarkin, J. (1990). Systematic treatment selection: 
Toward targeted therapeutic interventions. New 
York: Brunner/Mazel. 

Beutler, L. E., Clarkin, J., & Bongar, B. (2000). Guidelines 
for the systematic treatment of the depressed patient. New 
York: Oxford University Press. 

Beutler, L. E., & Harwood, T. M. (2000). Prescriptive psychotherapy: 
A practical guide to systematic treatment selection. 
New York: Oxford University Press. 

Beutler, L. E., Harwood, T. M., Alimohamed, S., & Malik, 

M. (2002). Functional impairment and coping style. In J. 
C. Norcross (Ed.), Psychotherapy relationships that work 
(pp. 145–173). New York: Oxford University Press. 
Beutler, L. E., Harwood, T. M., Kimpara, S., Verdirame, D., 
& Blau, K. (2011). Coping style. In J. C. Norcross (Ed.), 
Psychotherapy relationships that work (2nd ed., pp. 336– 
353). New York: Oxford University Press. 

Beutler, L. E., Harwood, T. M., Michelson, A., Song, X., & 
Holman, J. (2011). Reactance/resistance. In J. C. Norcross 
(Ed.), Psychotherapy relationships that work (2nd ed., 
pp. 261–278). New York: Oxford University Press. 

Beutler, L. E., & Malik, M. L. (2002). Diagnosis and treatment 
guidelines: The example of depression. In L. E. 
Beutler & M. L. Malik (Eds.), Rethinking the DSM 
(pp. 251–278). Washington, DC: American Psychological 
Association. 

Beutler, L. E., Moleiro, C., Malik, M., Harwood, T. M., Romanelli, 
R., Gallagher-Thompson, D., et al. (2003). A 
comparison of the Dodo, EST, and ATI factors among comorbid 
stimulant-dependent, depressed patients. Clinical 
Psychology and Psychotherapy, 10, 69–85. 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

Burns, D. (1999). Feeling good: The new mood therapy (rev. 
ed.). New York: Avon. 

Burlingame, G., McClendon, D. T., Alonso, J. (2011). Group 
cohesion. In J. C. Norcross (Ed.), Psychotherapy relationships 
that work (2nd ed., pp. 110–131). New York: Oxford 
University Press. 

Castonguay, L. G., & Beutler, L. E. (Eds.). (2006). Principles 
of therapeutic change that work. New York: Oxford University 
Press. 

Clarkin, J. F., & Levy, K. N. (2004). The influence of client 
variables on psychotherapy. In M. J. Lambert (Ed.), Bergin 
and Garfield’s handbook of psychotherapy and behavior 
change (5th ed., pp. 194–226). New York: Wiley. 

Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical power analysis for the behavioral 
sciences (2nd ed.). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. 

Cuijpers, P., van Straten, A., Andersson, G., & van Oppen, P. 
(2008). Psychotherapy for depression in adults: A metaanalysis 
of comparative outcome studies. Journal of Consulting 
and Clinical Psychology, 76, 909–922. 

Cuijpers, P., van Straten, A., Schuurmans, J., van Oppen, P., 
Hollon, S. D., & Andersson, G. (2010). Psychotherapy for 
chronic major depression and dysthymia: A meta-analysis. 
Clinical Psychology Review, 30, 51–62. 

DeRubeis, R. J., Hollon, S. D., Amsterdam, J. D., Shelton, 

R. C., Young, P. R., Salomon, R. M., et al. (2005). Cognitive 
therapy vs medications in the treatment of moderate 
to severe depression. Archives of General Psychiatry, 62, 
409–416. 
Elliott, R., Bohart, A. C., Watson, J. C., & Greenberg, L. S. 
(2011). Empathy. In J. C. Norcross (Ed.), Psychotherapy 
relationships that work (2nd ed., pp. 132–152). New York: 
Oxford University Press. 

Eysenck, H. J. (1970). A mish-mash of theories. International 
Journal of Psychiatry, 9, 140–146. 
Farber, B. A., & Doolin, E. M. (2011). Positive regard. In 

J. C. Norcross (Ed.), Psychotherapy relationships that 
works (2nd ed., pp. 168–186). New York: Oxford University 
Press. 
Friedlander, M. L., Escudero, V., Heatherington, L., & Diamond, 
G. M. (2011). Alliance in couple and family therapy. 
In J. C. Norcross (Ed.), Psychotherapy relationships 
that work (2nd ed., pp. 92–109). New York: Oxford University 
Press. 

Halford, G. S., Baker, R., McCredden, J. E., & Bain, J. D. 
(2005). How many variables can humans process? Psychological 
Science, 16, 70–76. 

Harwood, T. M., Beutler, L. E., & Groth-Marnat, G. (Eds.). 
(2011). Integrated assessment of adult personality (3rd 
ed.). New York: Guilford Press. 

Hettema, J., Steele, J., & Miller, W. R. (2005). Motivational 
interviewing. Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 1, 
91–111. 

Hollon, S. D. (1990). Cognitive therapy and pharmacotherapy 
for depression. Psychiatric Annals, 20, 249–258. 

Horvath, A. O., Del Re, A., Flückiger, C., & Symonds, D. 
(2011). Alliance in individual psychotherapy. In J. C. Norcross 
(Ed.), Psychotherapy relationships that work (2nd 
ed., pp. 25–69). New York: Oxford University Press. 

Housley, J., & Beutler, L. E. (2007). Treating victims of 
mass disaster and terrorism. Cambridge, MA: Hogrefe & 
Huber. 

Irvin, J. E., Bowers, C. A., Dunn, M. E., & Wang, M. C. 
(1999). Efficacy of relapse prevention: A meta-analytic 
review. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 
67, 563–570. 

Kazantzis, N., Whittington, C., & Dattilio, F. (2010). Metaanalysis 
of homework effects in cognitive and behavioral 
therapy: A replication and extension. Clinical Psychology: 
Science and Practice, 17, 144–156. 

Kessler, R. C., Berglund, P., Demler, O., Jin, R., Merikangas, 

K. R., & Walters, E. E. (2005). Lifetime prevalence and 
age-of-onset distributions of DSM-IV disorders in the National 
Comorbidity Survey Replication. Archives of General 
Psychiatry, 62, 593–602. 
Kreisman, J. J., & Straus, H. (2006). Sometimes I act crazy: 
Living with a borderline personality disorder. Hoboken, 
NJ: Wiley. 

Lambert, M. J., Morton, J. J., Hatfield, D., Harmon, C., Hamilton, 
S., Reid, R. C., et al. (2004). Administration and 
scoring manual for the Outcome Questionnaire–45. Salt 
Lake City, UT: OQ Measures. 

Lambert, M. J., & Shimokawa, K. (2011). Collecting client 
feedback. In J. C. Norcross (Ed.), Psychotherapy relationships 
that work (2nd ed., pp. 203–223). New York: Oxford 
University Press. 

Landsman, J. T. (1974, August). Not an adversity but a welcome 
diversity. Paper presented at the annual meeting of 
the American Psychological Association, New Orleans, 
LA. 

Linehan, M. M. (1993a). Cognitive-behavioral treatment 
of borderline personality disorder. New York: Guilford 
Press. 

Linehan, M. M. (1993b). Skills training manual for treating 
borderline personality disorder. New York: Guilford 
Press. 

Lueger, R. J., Howard, K. I., Martinovich Z., Lutz, W., Anderson, 
E. E., & Grissom, G. (2001). Assessing treatment 
progress of individual clients using expected treatment 
response models. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 
69, 150–158. 

Marlatt, G. A., & Donovan, D. M. (Eds.). (2007). Relapse 
prevention: Maintenance strategies in the treatment of 
addictive behaviors (2nd ed., pp. 267–271). New York: 
Guilford Press. 

Miller, S. D., Duncan, B. L., Sorrell, R., & Brown, G. S. 
(2005). The Partners for Change Outcome System. Journal 
of Clinical Psychology: In Session, 61, 199–208. 

Miller, W. R., & Moyers, T. B. (2005). Motivational inter



Depression and Substance Abuse 

viewing. In G. P. Koocher, J. C. Norcross, & S. S. Hill 
(Eds.), Psychologists’ desk reference (2nd ed., pp. 267– 
271). New York: Oxford University Press. 

Moyers, T. B., & Rollnick, S. (2002). A motivational interviewing 
perspective on resistance. Journal of Clinical 
Psychology: In Session, 58(2), 185–193. 

Miller, W. R., & Rollnick, S. (2002). Motivational interviewing: 
Preparing people for change (2nd ed.). New York: 
Guilford Press. 

Norcross, J. C. (2010). The therapeutic relationship. In B. L. 
Duncan, S. D. Miller, B. E. Wampold, & M. A. Hubble 
(Eds.), Heart and soul of change (2nd ed., pp. 113–142). 
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. 

Norcross, J. C. (Ed.). (2011). Psychotherapy relationships 
that work (2nd ed.). New York: Oxford University Press 

Norcross, J. C. (2013). Changeology: Five steps to realizing 
your goals and resolutions. New York: Simon & 
Schuster. 

Norcross, J. C., & Beutler, L. E. (1997). Determining the 
therapeutic relationship of choice in brief therapy. In J. 

N. Butcher (Ed.), Personality assessment in managed 
care: A practitioner’s guide. New York: Oxford University 
Press. 
Norcross, J. C., Beutler, L. E., & Levant, R. F. (Eds.). (2006). 
Evidence-based practices in mental health: Debate and 
dialogue on the fundamental questions. Washington, DC: 
American Psychological Association. 

Norcross, J. C., Campbell, L. M., Grohol, J. M., Santrock, J. 
W., Selagea, F., & Sommer, R. (2013). Self-help that works 
(4th ed.). New York: Oxford University Press. 

Norcross, J. C., & Goldfried, M. R. (Eds.). (2005). Handbook 
of psychotherapy integration (2nd ed.). New York: Oxford 
University Press. 

Norcross, J. C., & Karpiak, C. P. (2012). Clinical psychologists 
in the 2010s: Fifty years of the APA Division of 
Clinical Psychology. Clinical Psychology: Science and 
Practice, 19, 1–12. 

Norcross, J. C., Krebs, P. M., & Prochaska, J. O. (2011). 
Stages of change. In J. C. Norcross (Ed.), Psychotherapy 
relationships that work (2nd ed., pp. 279–300). New York: 
Oxford University Press. 

Osler, W. (1906). Aequanimatas. New York: McGraw-Hill. 

Paul, G. L. (1967). Strategy of outcome research in psychotherapy. 
Journal of Consulting Psychology, 31, 109–118. 

Pinsof, W. M. (1995). Integrative problem-centered therapy: 
A synthesis of biological, individual, and family therapies. 
New York: Basic Books. 

Prochaska, J. O., & Norcross, J. C. (2013). Systems of psychotherapy: 
A transtheoretical analysis (8th ed.). Pacific 
Grove, CA: Brooks/Cole. 

Rogers, C. R. (1957). The necessary and sufficient conditions 
of therapeutic personality change. Journal of Consulting 
Psychology, 21, 95–103. 

Rosen, C. S. (2000). Is the sequencing of change processes by 
stage consistent across health problems?: A meta-analysis. 
Health Psychology, 19, 593–604. 

Safran, J. D., Muran, J. C., & Eubanks-Carter, C. (2011). Repairing 
alliance ruptures. In J. C. Norcross (Ed.), Psychotherapy 
relationships that work (2nd ed., pp. 224–238). 
New York: Oxford University Press. 

Shapiro, F. (2012). Getting past your past: Take control of 
your life with self-help techniques from EMDR therapy. 
New York: Rodale. 

Shirk, S. R., & Karver, M. (2011). Alliance in child and adolescent 
therapy. In J. C. Norcross (Ed.), Psychotherapy 
relationships that work (2nd ed., pp. 70–91). New York: 
Oxford University Press. 

Smith, T. B., Rodriguez, M. D., & Bernal, G. (2011). Culture. 
In J. C. Norcross (Ed.), Psychotherapy relationships that 
work (2nd ed., pp. 316–335). New York: Oxford University 
Press. 

Swift, J. K., Callahan, J. L., & Vollmer, B. M. (2011). Preferences. 
In J. C. Norcross (Ed.), Psychotherapy relationships 
that work (2nd ed., pp. 301–315). New York: Oxford 
University Press. 

Tryon, G. S., & Winograd, G. (2011). Goal consensus and 
collaboration. In J. C. Norcross (Ed.), Psychotherapy relationships 
that work (2nd ed., pp. 153–167). New York: 
Oxford University Press. 

Wolitzky, D. L. (2011). Psychoanalytic theories of psychotherapy. 
In J. C. Norcross, G. R. VandenBos, & D. K. 
Freedheim (Eds.), History of psychotherapy (2nd ed., 
pp. 65–100). Washington, DC: American Psychological 
Association. 


Chapter 16 

Treatment of Sleep Disturbance 

Katherine a. Kaplan 
allison G. harvey 

Perhaps the best-kept secret among health and mental health practitioners everywhere 
is the marked superiority of brief psychological treatments for insomnia compared to 
popular and frequently advertised medications. With approximately 6% of members of 
the adult population suffering from insomnia to the degree that they meet diagnostic 
criteria, and as many as 12% reporting that insomnia interferes significantly with their 
daytime activities, the problem is significant and most often poorly treated. Insomnia 
very frequently accompanies other psychological disorders, and recent evidence indicates 
that insomnia predates and may contribute to or even cause these comorbid disorders, 
which is all the more reason why every health and mental health practitioner should be 
aware of the cutting-edge brief interventions presented in this chapter. Indeed, the American 
Academy of Sleep Medicine recommends these protocols as a first-line treatment 
for people with all forms of insomnia, including those currently using hypnotic drugs. 
Among the leaders in this burgeoning field, Kaplan and Harvey outline a state-of-the-art 
integrated behavioral and cognitive approach with strong evidence for both efficacy and 
durability that should be in the armamentarium of every health professional.—D. H. B. 

Sleep disorders are common and associated with considerable 
morbidity and functional impairment. In this 
chapter we focus on insomnia, given its high prevalence 
and public health impact. We also briefly discuss hypersomnolence 
disorder given the rising possible role 
of psychological treatments for patients with this disorder. 
A wide range of other sleep disorders, which are 
beyond the scope of this chapter, are each prevalent 
and impairing. For example, obstructive sleep apnea/ 
hypopnea involves transient closure of the upper airway 
during sleep that results in pauses in breathing, leading 
to daytime sleepiness and cardiovascular problems. 
Restless legs syndrome involves an involuntary urge to 
move one’s legs during sleep that leads to partial or full 
awakenings, resulting in sleep fragmentation and day


time sleepiness. It is important for clinicians to have a 
working knowledge of these and other sleep disorders, 
as well as to know when to refer patients to a sleep center, 
neurologist, or other health professional (Kryger, 
Roth, & Dement, 2010). 

Insomnia is a prevalent sleep disturbance that involves 
difficulty with falling asleep, staying asleep, or 
waking too early in the morning. It is associated with 
considerable functional impairment and health-related 
costs. Insomnia is often comorbid with, and predicts 
the development of, numerous psychological and medical 
conditions. As such, insomnia represents an important 
target for intervention. This chapter begins with a 
brief overview of human sleep, along with diagnostic 
and theoretical considerations, because this knowledge 

640 


Sleep Disturbance 

provides the basis for delivering cognitive-behavioral 
therapy for insomnia (CBT-I), which is the focus of this 
chapter. 

sleeP aND iNsoMNia 

Sleep Stages 

Human sleep can be divided into (1) non–rapid eye 
movement (or NREM) sleep that can be subdivided 
into three stages (N1, N2, and N3) through which sleep 
progressively deepens, and (2) rapid eye movement (or 
REM) sleep. In adults, each NREM–REM cycle spans 
70 to 120 minutes (Kryger et al., 2010). NREM sleep 
is thought to be important for conservation of energy 
and restoration. This phase of sleep is associated with 
the most rapid cell division in some tissues, as well as 
increased protein synthesis (Kryger et al., 2010). The 
functions of REM sleep are understood to include a 
role in learning (Karni, Tanne, Rubenstien, Askenasy, 
& Sagi, 1994) and in the unlearning of irrelevant information 
(Crick & Mitchison, 1983), as well as memory 
consolidation (Walker & Stickgold, 2006), emotional 
processing, and mood/emotion regulation (Yoo, Gujar, 
Hu, Jolesz, & Walker, 2007). It is well established that 
sleep deprivation has detrimental effects in many domains 
of health (Zee & Turek, 2006), including the 
immune system, the neuroendocrine system, and the 
cardiovascular system (Banks & Dinges, 2010). Given 
these important functions, disorders of sleep have 
major public health implications. 

Two‑Process Model of Sleep 

The two-process model of sleep regulation (Borbely, 
1982) is important in that it underpins the treatment 
we describe later. In fact, many clinicians describe 
this model to clients as part of the rationale for delivering 
stimulus control and sleep restriction described 
below. The model proposes that sleep and wakefulness 
are dependent on two processes, a homeostatic process 
and a circadian process (Achermann & Borbely, 
2010). The homeostatic process influences sleep likelihood. 
Sleep pressure increases with time spent awake, 
resulting in an increased tendency to sleep when a 
person has been sleep-deprived, and a decreased tendency 
to sleep after having had a substantial amount 
of sleep or a substantial nap. The circadian rhythm is 
an internal biological clock that operates on roughly a 

24-hour basis. It is responsible for variations in melatonin, 
temperature, and other biological functions, including 
levels of alertness throughout the day (Lack 
& Bootzin, 2003). These two processes work together 
such that sleep is likely to occur when sleep pressure 
(the homeostatic process) is high and level of alertness 
(the circadian process) is relatively low. Thus, if a person 
naps in the afternoon, he/she may have difficulty 
falling asleep that evening because homeostatic sleep 
pressure is low; likewise, if a person goes to bed early 
following a poor night of sleep, even if sleep pressure 
is high, circadian arousal may prevent sleep onset 
from occurring. 

Some, but not all, studies have found impaired sleep 
homeostasis in persons with insomnia (e.g., Besset, 
Villemin, Tafti, & Billiard, 1998; Stepanski, Zorick, 
Roehrs, & Roth, 2000). There is a similar lack of consensus 
in the research about whether circadian rhythm 
abnormalities play a role in insomnia. Environmentally 
induced phase shifts, such as those occurring as a result 
of shift work or jet lag, can cause acute insomnia. There 
is also evidence that hyperarousal, a central notion in 
theories of insomnia that we discuss below, may not 
be a 24-hour issue for some but rather may fluctuate 
according to circadian influences (Perlis, Smith, & Pigeon, 
2005). 

Sleep across the Lifespan 

Sleep changes across the lifespan. This is very important 
because it impacts therapists’ expectations of sleep 
outcomes when working with clients of different ages. 
With age, slow-wave sleep decreases, while lighter 
sleep and awakenings become more common across 
the night. Moreover, both circadian and homeostatic 
processes are influenced by age. For example, the circadian 
system grows increasingly less sensitive to zeitgebers 
such as melatonin and morning light with age 
(Van Someren, 2000). Throughout adolescence, there 
is a well-documented circadian shift in favor of later 
bedtimes and rise times, with a more slowly building 
homeostatic pressure to fall asleep (Jenni, Achermann, 
& Carskadon, 2005). This pattern can result in initial 
insomnia (difficulty falling asleep at night). In middleto-
older adulthood, circadian shifts can again favor of 
early bedtimes and rise times, resulting in terminal 
insomnia (early morning awakening with difficulty 
falling back asleep; Ancoli-Israel, 2009). Along with 
circadian rhythms, the homeostatic process also shows 
age-dependent changes across the lifespan. Individuals 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

in their 60s and 70s showed reduced homeostatic pressure 
to sleep and achieve less total sleep time (TST) 
relative to members of a comparison group in their 20s 
(Klerman & Dijk, 2008). 

the iNsoMNia DiaGNosis 

The following section describes diagnostic considerations, 
reviews prevalence and comorbidity, and presents 
several models of insomnia that have been influential 
in conceptualizing CBT-I treatment targets. 

There are three main classification systems for sleep 
disorders: the second edition of the International Classification 
of Sleep Disorders (ICSD; American Academy 
of Sleep Medicine, 2005), the Research Diagnostic 
Criteria (RDC; Edinger et al., 2004), and the Diagnostic 
and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM5; 
American Psychiatric Association, 2013). Within 
DSM-5 criteria, a diagnosis of insomnia may be given 
when there is a subjective complaint of trouble falling 
or staying asleep. These difficulties must be associated 
with daytime impairment and must not be better accounted 
for by another medical or psychiatric condition. 


The insomnia diagnostic criteria described earlier 
have been clarified with quantitative criteria. The quantitative 
criteria require that self-reported sleep-onset 
latency (SOL) and/or wake after sleep onset (WASO) 
must be greater than 30 minutes for at least 3 nights 
per week over a period of at least 6 months (Lichstein, 
Durrence, Taylor, Bush, & Riedel, 2003). Note that 
self-reports of insomnia complaints are sufficient for 
the diagnosis, without objective evidence for sleep disturbance 
(see “Assessment” below). 

Insomnia Prevalence and Comorbidity 

It is estimated that about 6% of the general adult population 
meets diagnostic criteria for a formal diagnosis 
of insomnia based on DSM-IV-TR criteria. Approximately 
33% of the general population reports some significant 
symptoms of insomnia. Additionally, as many 
as 12% of individuals in the general adult population 
suffer from the daytime sequelae of sleep disturbance 
(Hohagen et al., 1993; Ohayon, 2002). More recent surveys 
suggest that health-related costs of insomnia are 
considerable, regardless of the diagnostic system used 
to define it (Roth et al., 2011). 

Because insomnia can be associated with a wide 
range of medical illnesses and psychological disorders, 

the previous DSM edition (i.e., DSM-IV-TR; American 
Psychiatric Association, 2000) made distinctions 
between “primary” and “secondary” or comorbid 
insomnia. The distinction between primary and secondary 
insomnia was blurred, however, by epidemiological 
research suggesting that insomnia may predate, 
and predict, psychological disorders (Breslau, 
Roth, Rosenthal, & Andreski, 1996; Ford & Kamerow, 
1989). Indeed, a National Institutes of Health (NIH; 
2005) state-of-the-science conference concluded that 
the term “secondary” should be replaced with “comorbid” 
on the basis of evidence that insomnia comorbid 
with another disorder likely contributes to the maintenance 
of the disorder (Harvey, 2001; Smith, Huang, & 
Manber, 2005). These conclusions were recognized in 
DSM-5, which does not distinguish between “primary” 
and “secondary” insomnia, but has only one “insomnia 
disorder.” 

For older adults, insomnia is often accompanied by 
medical illnesses, which may complicate issues of assessment 
and treatment, further compounding burden 
and cost (Morin et al., 2006). In a large epidemiological 
study, Ford and Kamerow (1989) found that there 
is approximately a 50% comorbidity rate between insomnia 
and other psychological disorders or medical 
illnesses; other studies have yielded a rate as high as 
75% (Lichstein, 2000). In cases of comorbid insomnia, 
additional empirical and clinical attention may 
be especially important because there appears to be a 
cyclical influence of sleep disturbance and medical illness 
or psychological disorders, with worsening sleep 
problems leading to a decline in general health and 
increased psychiatric symptoms that, in turn, worsen 
sleep problems. Fortunately, evidence suggests that 
insomnia responds to CBT-I treatment even if the accompanying 
disorder is not under control (Rybarczyk, 
Lopez, Schelble, & Stepanski, 2005). Smith and colleagues 
(2005) concluded that treatment effects are 
generally moderate to large for CBT-I administered in 
the context of accompanying disorders or illnesses, and 
are comparable to treatment effects in primary insomnia. 


Models of Insomnia 

This section begins with a discussion of an influential 
overarching framework, the Spielman model. We then 
move on to describe several behavioral, cognitive, and 
combination models of insomnia that help to explain 
particular facets of the disorder that should be addressed 
and treated in CBT-I. 


Sleep Disturbance 

Spielman’s Three-Factor Model 

This is a diathesis–stress model often referred to as 
the three-factor or the three-P model. According to 
Spielman, Caruso, and Glovinsky (1987), acute or 
short-term insomnia occurs as a result of predisposing 
factors (e.g., traits) and precipitating factors (e.g., 
life stressors). This acute form can then develop into a 
chronic or longer-term disorder as a result of perpetuating 
factors (e.g., poor coping strategies). Predisposing 
factors (e.g., a tendency to worry) constitute a vulnerability 
for insomnia, and this vulnerability remains 
across the life of the disorder. Precipitating factors trigger 
acute insomnia, but their influence tends to wane 
over time. In contrast, perpetuating factors take hold of 
and maintain insomnia. CBT-I targets these perpetuating 
factors, seeking to reduce the additive effects of 
predisposing, precipitating, and perpetuating factors 
below the threshold for insomnia diagnosis. 

Behavioral Models 

One of the most important behavioral models for insomnia 
is the stimulus control model (Bootzin, 1972). 
It is based on the conditioning principle that insomnia 
occurs when the bed or bedroom ceases to be paired 
specifically with sleep, but has become paired with 
many possible responses (e.g., being awake and anxious 
about not sleeping). As will become evident later 
in this chapter, this theory has led to the development of 
“stimulus control,” an intervention with strong efficacy 
(Morin et al., 2006). 

Cognitive Models 

Some of the earliest research on cognitive processes in 
insomnia noted that individuals with insomnia tended 
to overestimate wakefulness and underestimate TST 
(Bixler, Kales, Leo, & Slye, 1973; Carskadon et al., 
1976), and researchers began to explore the role of cognitive 
arousal in insomnia (Borkovec, 1982; Lichstein 
& Rosenthal, 1980). Seminal work in the 1990s highlighted 
the importance of unhelpful beliefs about sleep 
(Morin, 1993) and delineated the content of presleep 
intrusive thoughts (Watts, Coyle, & East, 1994; Wicklow 
& Espie, 2000). The last decade has ushered in an 
increase in empirical attention to other cognitive mechanisms 
in insomnia, including attention to threat and 
the use of safety behaviors to allay perceived threats 
(Espie, 2002; Harvey, 2005; Harvey, Tang, & Browning, 
2005). 

One cognitive model of insomnia aims to specify 
the cognitive processes that serve to perpetuate insomnia 
(Harvey, 2002a) and represents an important 
component of CBT-I as outlined here. According to this 
conceptualization, contributors to the maintenance of 
insomnia include the following cascade of cognitive 
processes that operate at night and during the day: (1) 
worry and rumination, (2) selective attention and monitoring, 
(3) misperception of sleep and daytime deficits, 

(4) dysfunctional beliefs about sleep (based on Morin, 
1993), and (5) counterproductive safety behaviors that 
serve to maintain beliefs. Many of the specific predictions 
generated by this model have been empirically 
tested, leading to refinement of the model (Harvey, 
2005) and a new cognitive therapy treatment approach 
that has preliminary support in an open trial (Harvey, 
Sharpley, Ree, Stinson, & Clark, 2007). 
Combination Models 

Morin’s (1993) cognitive-behavioral model of insomnia 
incorporates cognitive, temporal, and environmental 
variables as both precipitating and perpetuating factors, 
with hyperarousal as the key precipitating factor 
of insomnia. Conditioning can then exacerbate this 
arousal. For example, a person may associate temporal 
(e.g., bedtime routines) and environmental (e.g., bedroom) 
stimuli with fear of being unable to sleep. Worry 
and rumination may then result. Additional perpetuating 
factors may ensue, including, as in the cognitive 
model, daytime fatigue, worry, and emotional distress 
about sleep loss and maladaptive habits (e.g., excessive 
time in bed). 

In summary, adequate treatment of insomnia targets 
both cognitive and behavioral processes to address 
their mutually maintaining effects. Each of the models 
reviewed earlier has been influential in conceptualizing 
the insomnia diagnosis and identifying treatment 
targets. In the next section, we review evidence for the 
effectiveness of CBT-I as a multicomponent treatment 
for insomnia. 

eviDeNce for cBt‑i treatMeNt 

CBT-I has been established as an effective treatment in 
multiple meta-analyses (e.g., Irwin, Cole, & Nicassio, 
2006; Montgomery & Dennis, 2003; Morin, Culbert, 
& Schwartz, 1994; Murtagh & Greenwood, 1995) and 
in a review by the Standards of Practice Committee of 
the American Academy of Sleep Medicine (Chesson et 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

al., 1999; Morin et al., 1999), which has been updated 
(Morin et al., 2006). 

A number of randomized controlled trials (RCTs) 
have compared one or more components of CBT-I to 
each other and/or to placebo. A recent review found 
CBT-I to be highly effective and to have sustainable 
gains over long-term follow-up, up to 24 months in 
adult and older adult samples (Morin et al., 2006). 
This review used the American Psychological Association’s 
Society of Clinical Psychology criteria for wellsupported, 
empirically based treatments (Chambless & 
Hollon, 1998) and concluded that these criteria are met 
by stimulus control, paradoxical intention, relaxation, 
sleep restriction approaches, and the administration of 
multiple components in the form of CBT-I. The sleep 
hygiene intervention alone has not been found to be effective 
as a treatment for insomnia. Cognitive therapy 
for insomnia is a promising new approach, but randomized 
trials are still needed for it to meet criteria for an 
empirically supported treatment. 

There are multiple classes of medications, both prescribed 
and over the counter, that can be used to treat 
insomnia (Kryger et al., 2010), including benzodiazepines, 
nonbenzodiazepine hypnotics (e.g., zolpidem, 
zaleplon, and eszopiclone), antidepressants (e.g., trazodone 
and doxepin), and over-the-counter antihistamines 
(e.g., diphenhydramine and doxylamine). 
However, there is evidence that nonpharmacological interventions 
for insomnia are more acceptable to clients 
(Morin, Gaulier, Barry, & Kowatch, 1992) and produce 
more durable effects (Morin et al., 2009; Sivertsen et 
al., 2006) than do hypnotic medications alone. In the 
case of comorbid insomnia, the optimal intervention 
would alleviate insomnia without causing adverse interactions 
with other prescribed medication; therefore, 
a nonpharmacological intervention may be the best 
choice for these cases of insomnia (Harvey, 2008). 

In summary, CBT-I appears to be an efficacious and 
promising intervention to address sleep disturbance, 
particularly in treating comorbid insomnia. In the next 
section, we discuss treatment objectives, setting, and 
client–therapist variables that are considered when administering 
CBT-I. 

the coNtext of theraPy 

Treatment Objectives and Structure 

CBT-I aims to target and reverse the behavioral and cognitive 
processes that maintain insomnia. This is done in 

a time-limited format. Treatment usually comprises six 
to eight sessions, each 50 minutes in length. Because 
there are multiple targets to address in a limited period 
of time, it is essential that treatment be agenda-driven, 
goal-oriented, and center around an individualized case 
formulation derived for each client. 

The overall treatment structure is illustrated in Figure 
16.1. The first session of treatment focuses on explaining 
treatment rationale and objectives, deriving a 
case formulation, and providing psychoeducation on 
sleep and insomnia. This is generally followed by two 
to three sessions with a behavioral emphasis, and two to 
three sessions with a cognitive emphasis. However, the 
therapist will decide whether to pursue behavioral targets 
or cognitive targets, or some combination of both 
in tandem, based on the individualized case formulation. 
For example, a client who presents with excessive 
worry, rumination, unhelpful beliefs about sleep, 
and myriad safety behaviors is likely to benefit from 
treatment that begins with cognitive targets. A client 
whose sleep disturbance is characterized by schedule 
irregularity, daytime napping, and excessive time in 
bed is likely to benefit from treatment that begins with 
behavioral targets. The final session summarizes tools 
learned, and anticipates and plans for sleep setbacks. 

Setting 

The CBT-I overview presented here is an outpatientbased 
treatment, delivered in an individual rather than 
group setting. Sessions are typically held weekly. The 
therapist will find it helpful to have a table on which 
to spread out materials (diaries, handouts, thought records), 
along with a calculator to derive weekly sleep 
averages and sleep efficiency scores. The client is encouraged 
to keep all treatment-related materials in a 
binder or folder and reinforced for bringing this weekly 
to session. 

Though treatment is conducted on an individual 
basis, the social and familial context of the sleep environment 
should not be ignored. Clients will have 
bedmates, children, or pets that may disrupt sleep, and 
often the therapist will have to improvise to adapt treatment 
guidelines to the lives of individual clients. Social 
contexts, when used strategically, can also facilitate 
treatment adherence and behavior change. Encouraging 
the use of friends, family, and technology to aid in 
adherence to sleep principles—for example, in regularizing 
sleep–wake times, sleep restriction, and stimulus 
control, each of which is described below—can be helpful. 
Many clients use cell phone alarms as reminders 


Sleep Disturbance 

Session 1: Introduction 
• Treatment overview 
• Case formulation 
• Goal setting 
• Motivational Interviewing 
• 
Sleep and circadian education 

• Sleep restriction 
• Stimulus control 
• Sleep hygiene 
• Wind-down routine 
• Wake-up routine 
3 Sessions: Behavioral Targets 
• Worry 
•Attention and monitoring 
•Unhelpful beliefs about sleep 
• Safety behaviors 
• Daytime energy 
3 Sessions: Cognitive Targets 
Session 8: Relapse Prevention 
• Treatment review 
• Anticipate obstacles 
• 
Lapse vs. relapse 
• 
Review goal attainment 

figUre 16.1. Treatment flow diagram. Note the practitioner’s discretion in beginning with behavioral or cognitive 
targets as indicated by case conceptualization. 

to begin a wind-down period or to wake up at the same 
time each morning. Likewise, recruiting the support of 
family and friends to call or visit in the morning so as to 
prevent oversleeping, or to respect a “no-calls” period in 
the hour before bed to promote a relaxing wind down, 
can be crucial to the success of the strategies. 

Client Variables 

The treatment described here is for individuals who 
experience “insomnia,” defined as difficulty falling or 
staying asleep at least three nights per week. This treatment 
is equally suitable for men and women. Though 
we present a treatment here that is suitable for adults, 
adaptations can be readily made for teenagers (Clarke 
& Harvey, 2012; Harvey, 2009). This treatment is ef


fective in clients who present with a variety of comorbid 
diagnoses, including anxiety, depression, and other 
psychological conditions, along with a variety of medical 
comorbidities. Special considerations are needed 
for clients with concurrent alcohol and substance use 
disorders given their myriad effects on sleep. 

Many clients who present for treatment are taking 
concurrently a sleep medication, either prescribed or 
over the counter, and many of these medications are 
taken nightly. Clients may wish to reduce or cease 
their use of these medications. There is an evidence 
base for how to approach discontinuation of prescribed 
medication, and readers are referred to several protocols 
for more information (Belleville, Guay, Guay, & 
Morin, 2007; Lichstein et al., 1999). Any change to a 
prescribed medication regimen is made in collabora



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

tion with the prescribing provider. Over-the-counter 
sleeping agents do not appear to have substantial discontinuation 
effects (Morin, Koetter, Bastien, Ware, & 
Wooten, 2005) and may be stopped without physician 
collaboration. 

Therapist Variables 

It is essential to establish a collaborative working relationship 
between clinician and client. Along with 
genuine empathy and support, a strong therapist–client 
alliance is necessary because much of the treatment 
depends on the client’s compliance with implementing 
different clinical recommendations. In this context, the 
therapist’s role is one of facilitator and problem-solver. 
He/she provides specific guidelines, instructions, 
and corrective feedback. Therapy is directive, taskoriented, 
and teaches clients problem-solving skills to 
improve sleep and to cope with residual insomnia after 
completing treatment. In turn, the client is also actively 
engaged in the therapeutic process and is responsible 
for implementing clinical procedures. 

The treatment is highly structured and requires time, 
effort, and diligent adherence with homework assignments. 
This cannot be overemphasized. Although some 
procedures may initially appear simplistic and straightforward, 
the client is cautioned that regular and consistent 
adherence to the entire program, including homework, 
is the key to successful outcome. 

It is often necessary to contrast the CBT-I approach 
with medication treatment for insomnia. It is essential 
to point out that, with CBT-I, there is no “quick fix” 
for chronic insomnia. To avoid premature termination, 
the client is cautioned that no immediate results should 
be expected after one or two office visits. A time commitment 
of 6–8 weeks is required. This time-limited 
format is emphasized to maximize compliance. Considering 
that most clients will have suffered with insomnia 
for years, this represents a very short investment 
of time. 

It is also important to convey a sense of hope and 
model a positive yet realistic attitude regarding outcome. 
An occasional poor night of sleep, particularly 
associated with a stressor, is normal and should be 
anticipated. Also, it is important to emphasize that a 
goal of treatment is to equip the client with tools and 
methods to continue making sleep gains once therapy 
is over. 

Finally, therapists work with clients to encourage a 
system of regular rewards and positive reinforcement 

to facilitate behavior change. Clients can be motivated 
to comply with treatment recommendations with use of 
small daily rewards, such as a morning trip to the coffee 
shop or taking an enjoyable bath. Likewise, therapists 
are encouraged to highlight successes in sessions 
rather than failures. For example, if a client’s weekly 
sleep diary reveals that naps were taken on 4 of 7 days, 
praise the client for the 3 days naps were not taken, 
and perhaps do a functional analysis of how naps were 
avoided. Point out positive nighttime sleep parameters 
(e.g., reduced time to fall asleep or nighttime wakefulness) 
on days that naps were not taken. 

assessMeNt 

Subjective Estimates 

As is evident from the DSM-5 criteria, insomnia is defined 
subjectively. As such, three levels of self-reported 
sleep data are collected from clients during an assessment 
for insomnia (see Buysse, Ancoli-Israel, Edinger, 
Lichstein, & Morin, 2006, for further information on 
insomnia assessment). First, a clinical sleep history is 
taken to assess for diagnostic criteria and the presence 
of comorbid problems. Information gathered includes 
the duration, frequency, and severity of nighttime sleep 
disturbance, including estimates of the key sleep parameters: 
SOL, number of awakenings after sleep 
onset, total amount of time awake after sleep onset, 
TST, and an estimate of sleep quality (SQ). Information 
about the onset and duration of the insomnia and type 
of symptoms (i.e., sleep onset, sleep maintenance, early 
morning waking problem, or combinations of these) is 
collected. A description of the daytime correlates and 
consequences of insomnia is key. In addition, obtaining 
information about medications (prescription and over 
the counter) and screening for the presence of comorbid 
psychological disorders and medical problems (including 
other sleep disorders) are also important. 

Second, one or more validated measures can be used 
to index the presence and severity of sleep disturbance 
(e.g., Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index; Buysse, Reynolds, 
Monk, Berman, & Kupfer, 1989), insomnia (e.g., 
Insomnia Severity Index; Bastien, Vallieres, & Morin, 
2001), and daytime sleepiness (e.g., Stanford Sleepiness 
Scale; Hoddes, Zarcone, Smythe, Phillips, & Dement, 
1973). The Duke Structured Interview for Sleep 
Disorders (Edinger et al., 2009), a semistructured interview 
that assesses research diagnostic criteria for 


Sleep Disturbance 

sleep disorders, may also be used to establish sleep disturbance 
diagnoses. 

Third, asking the client to complete a sleep diary 
(Carney et al., 2012) each morning as soon as possible 
after waking for 2 weeks can provide prospective estimates 
of sleep. A sleep diary provides a wealth of information, 
including night-to-night variability in sleeping 
difficulty and sleep–wake patterns, and can be used to 
determine the presence of circadian rhythm problems, 
such as a delayed sleep phase or an advanced sleep 
phase. Also, sleep diaries reduce several problems associated 
with the methods just discussed that rely on 
retrospective report, such as answering on the basis 
of saliency (i.e., the worst night) or recency (i.e., last 
night) (Smith, Nowakowski, Soeffing, Orff, & Perlis, 
2003). Interestingly, the “enhanced awareness” of sleep 
patterns facilitated by diary keeping can reduce anxiety 
over sleep loss and thus contribute to better sleep 
(Morin, 1993, p. 71). A sample sleep diary is illustrated 
in Figure 16.2. 

Objective Estimates 

Polysomnography (PSG) is used to classify sleep into 
various stages. It involves placing surface electrodes on 
the scalp and face to measure electrical brain activity, 
eye movement, and muscle tone. The data obtained are 
used to classify each epoch by sleep stage and in terms 
of sleep cycles (NREM and REM). Disadvantages associated 
with PSG include its expense, discomfort for 
participants, and labor-intensive nature. Although PSG 
is not needed for the routine assessment of insomnia 
(Reite, Buysse, Reynolds, & Mendelson, 1995), it is 
important if the client is suspected of having a comorbid 
sleep disorder, such as sleep apnea or periodic limb 
movement disorder. 

Actigraphy is an alternative means of providing an 
objective estimate of sleep. An actigraph is a small, 
wrist-worn device that contains a sensor, a processor, 
and memory storage. The sensor samples physical motion 
and can be downloaded and analyzed to generate 
various estimates of sleep parameters, though it cannot 
differentiate stages of sleep. Correlation between 
actigraphy- and polysomnography-defined estimates of 
TST is quite strong, ranging from .88 to .97 in adult 
nonpatients (Jean-Louis et al., 1997). It is worth noting, 
however, that actigraphy validation for insomnia 
patients has been met with variable success. Actigraphy 
appears to be less accurate in populations with fragmented 
sleep (Paquet, Kawinska, & Carrier, 2007) and 

in periods of quiet wakefulness, such as the sleep-onset 
period (Lichstein et al., 2006). Numerous studies have 
documented that actigraphy has a tendency to overestimate 
TST and underestimate wake time during sleep 
in insomnia (Lichstein et al., 2006; Vallieres & Morin, 
2003). Thus, although actigraphy is not required for the 
assessment of insomnia and may be subject to overestimation 
of TST, it nonetheless provides an overview of 
the sleep–wake cycle in a way that is minimally intrusive 
(Morgenthaler et al., 2007). 

iNtroDuciNG treatMeNt 

Following an assessment of insomnia history, severity, 
and collection of 7–14 days of diary data, a first treatment 
session with the client should be scheduled. This 
first session has several critical treatment components: 
to provide a treatment overview and rationale, to derive 
an individualized case formulation, and to educate 
the client about basic sleep processes. After this initial 
session, behavioral and cognitive processes are selectively 
targeted. The treatment concludes with a review 
of tools and a focus on relapse prevention. 

Treatment Overview 

As a first introduction to treatment, the therapist presents 
an overview of the therapy in the first session. This 
can take the following format: 

“The treatment that you will receive is called 
cognitive-behavioral therapy for sleep (CBT for 
short). CBT is a psychological intervention that is 
designed to help you change some behaviors (sleep 
habits, sleep schedules) and thoughts and beliefs 
(worries about sleeplessness and its consequences) 
that contribute to and perpetuate your sleep problem. 
These are selected as the target because research 
shows this is an effective strategy. The main characteristics 
of CBT for insomnia are that it is sleepfocused, 
relatively brief compared to other types of 
psychotherapy, and you take a very active role in 
your own treatment. Your treatment will involve six 
to eight weekly, 50-minute individual therapy sessions. 
The main agenda of each of these sessions 
will include reviewing your sleep diary from the 
previous week, providing practical recommendations 
and home projects to facilitate changes sleep 
habits, schedules, beliefs, thoughts, and so forth, and 


In the morning, fi ll out the night information 
for the prior night . . . mo/day 
Tuesday3/25 / / / / / / / 
1. Yesterday, I napped from to 
(Note the times of all naps.) 
1:30 to 
2:30 P.M. 
2. Yesterday, I took mg of medication 
and/or oz. of alcohol as sleep aid. 
Ambien5 mg 
3. Last night, I went to bed and turned the 
lights off at _ o’clock (A.M. or P.M.). 
10:45 P.M. 
11:15 P.M. 
4. After turning the lights off, I fell asleep 
in minutes. 
40 min. 
5. My sleep was interrupted times. 
(Specify number of nighttime 
awakenings.) 
3 
6. My sleep was interrupted for 
minutes. (Specify duration of each 
awakening.) 
1045 
7. Last night, I left my bed times. 3 
8. This morning, I actually awoke at 
o’clock. (Note time of last awakening.) 
6:15 A.M. 
9. This morning I had planned to wake 
up at o’clock A.M. or P.M. (or leaveblank if you did not plan a specifi c time).
10. This morning, I actually got out of bed at 
o’clock (specify the time). 
6:40 A.M. 
11. When I got up this morning I felt . 
(Answer on a 1- to 5-point scale: 1 = 
Exhausted, 5 = Refreshed.) 
2 
12. Overall, my sleep last night was .
(Answer on a 1- to 5-point scale: 1 = 
Restless, 5 = Very sound.) 
3 

figUre 16.2. Sample sleep diary. 

648 


Sleep Disturbance 

to help you solve problems that may interfere with 
your progress and homework assignments. The main 
objective is to help you improve your sleep and your 
daytime functioning. To achieve these goals, you 
will be provided with direct guidance, but you will 
be responsible for implementing the recommendations 
at home.” 

After presenting this overview, the therapist provides 
additional information about how this intervention was 
developed and about its clinical effectiveness. This 
information is useful to enhance treatment credibility 
and to induce a sense of hope in clients who have longstanding 
insomnia, and at the same time cautions others 
against expecting rapid changes in sleep. 

”This treatment has been developed by psychologists 
as an alternative to medication therapies. It is 
based on clinical research and has been tested extensively 
throughout the world. This treatment has 
been shown effective with hundreds of individuals 
suffering from insomnia problems similar to yours. 
This treatment will help improve your sleep and, 
most importantly, develop self-management skills 
to regain control of sleep and cope more adaptively 
with occasional sleep difficulties you may encounter 
even after completing this program. Although it 
may take more time to improve your sleep with this 
approach than with medication, research has shown 
that CBT produces sleep improvements that are well 
maintained long after completing treatment.” 

Therapists are encouraged to emphasize the collaborative 
nature of the treatment and the importance of 
homework as core foundations in treatment. The cornerstone 
of this approach, which is common to most 
CBTs, is that the client assumes an active role in his/ 
her treatment. As such, he/she is encouraged to develop 
new skills to achieve better control of his/her sleep. 

Maintaining a daily sleep diary is an essential requirement 
of treatment, and this is made very clear during 
first therapy session. Therapists explain that a daily 
diary is important to (1) document the nature and severity 
of the initial sleep problem; (2) assess night-to-night 
variations in sleep patterns and identify factors that 
contribute to improved or worsened sleep; (3) monitor 
treatment progress; and (4) evaluate compliance with 
treatment procedures. The treatment can become difficult 
if a client fails to monitor his/her sleep or forgets 
to bring in his/her diary. As noncompliance with self


monitoring is likely related to noncompliance with treatment 
procedures, therapists are encouraged to address 
this issue up front if it becomes a problem. There is no 
need for the client to monitor the clock in order to provide 
accurate times. Only one’s “felt sense” of the timing 
of sleep is needed. If self-monitoring is overlooked on a 
particular day, clients should be discouraged from going 
back and estimating sleep parameters retrospectively. 
Compliance with the diary daily is often enhanced when 
completion time and place is identified. For example, the 
client and therapist can discuss a time (breakfast) and 
location (kitchen) for filling in the diary. 

Functional Analysis and Case Formulation 

To derive a case formulation, the therapist and client 
discuss frequency, intensity, and duration of insomnia 
and its antecedents. Sleep-related behaviors and consequences 
are assessed: before bed (e.g., bedtime routine), 
during the night (e.g., cell phone left on), on waking 
(e.g., sleepiness, lethargy) and during the day (e.g., 
caffeine use, napping). The relationship between sleepspecific 
thoughts, emotions, and behaviors is charted 
across the night and day. Figure 16.3 is an example of 
a case conceptualization form for the nighttime period. 

The case formulation is designed to elicit the client’s 
curiosity about his/her sleep and to start forming a picture 
of what is going on. The therapist can introduce the 
exercise as follows: 

“It will be helpful in planning our sessions together 
to get a very detailed picture of what the experience 
of insomnia is like for you, almost like putting 
your sleep under a microscope. The way we do this 
is by identifying together a recent typical night and 
then after that a recent typical day. I’ll ask you lots 
of questions about each, so that I can get a sense of 
the kind of things that are going on. It’s like a fingerprint, 
everyone is a bit different so the treatment 
needs to be a bit different. Would that be all right?” 

The first step is to help the client to choose a very 
specific recent example of an “insomnia episode” during 
the night. Make sure you work on deriving only 
one model (i.e., either the day or the night) at a time. 
A very specific episode is a situation that happened on 
one particular day and at a particular time. Be sure to 
check in regularly to ensure that the night was typical. 
Sometimes a selected night or day is not typical or it 
was not very distressing. The therapist should stop that 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

Antecedents 

Typical Thursday, nothing unusual 


Situation 

Woke up at 2:00 am 


Thoughts 

Oh my God, it’s 2:00 am. I won’t be 
able to cope tomorrow, and I’ve 


got such a big day ahead, with 
so much to do! 


Feelings and Arousal 

Anxious 
Frustrated 
Scared 


Monitoring Safety Behaviors/Responses 

Look at clock Stayed in bed 
Notice tension in neck Turned on TV 
Notice eyelids not heavy 


Outcome: All of this made it hard to get back to sleep! 

figUre 16.3. Case conceptualization form completed for the night. 


Sleep Disturbance 

model as soon as this becomes apparent and start again 
with a typical, distressing night. Examples of some 
very specific recent episodes may include “Last Tuesday 
night I worked until 1:00 A.M. and then I couldn’t 
get to sleep” or “On Friday at work I had a terrible day, I 
felt sick, looked terrible and performed badly.” Spend a 
few minutes asking information-gathering questions to 
explore the content of the nighttime or daytime model. 
The aim of this initial discussion is to obtain a very detailed 
description of exactly what happened, along with 
the consequences of it. The following is an example of 
a client who awoke at 2:00 A.M. (Figure 16.3): 

tHeraPist: What woke you up? 

client: Don’t know. 

tHeraPist: How did you know what time it was? 

client: I looked at my clock and saw it was 2:00 A.M. 

tHeraPist: When you looked at the clock and noticed 
it was 2:00 A.M. what ran through your mind? 

client: I thought, “Oh my God.” 

tHeraPist: OK, so you looked at the clock and noticed 
it was 2:00 A.M. and you thought “Oh my God.” 
Could you tell me more? What do you mean by “Oh 
my God?” 

client: Oh my, I won’t cope tomorrow, I’ve got such a 
big day ahead with so much to do. 

tHeraPist: So when you thought, “Oh my, I’ve got 
such a big day ahead with so much to do,” how did 
you feel? 

client: Really anxious. 

Drawing on classic treatment development work 
by David M. Clark’s team (Clark et al., 1999, 2006), 
the following are useful questions to ask when deriving 
the model. The following illustrates questions for 
nighttime models, with analogous daytime questions in 
brackets [ ]: 

For identifying negative thoughts: 

•• 
“What went through your mind/what were you 
thinking before getting into bed [on waking], as 
you got into bed [as you got ready for the day], and 
as you noticed you weren’t getting to sleep [weren’t 
performing well]?” 

•• 
“What did you think would happen as a result?” 
•• 
“What would that mean? What would be so bad 
about that?” 

For identifying safety behaviors: 
•• 
“When you thought X might happen, did you do 
anything to try to prevent it from happening?” 
•• 
“Is there anything you do to ensure you get to sleep 
[perform well during the day]?” 

For identifying feelings: 
•• 
“When you are afraid that X will happen, what do 
you notice happening in your body?” 
•• 
“What kind of emotions do you have as you think 
X?” 
•• 
“How about your energy level?” 

For identifying monitoring: 
•• 
“How did you know that X would happen?” 
•• 
“How did you determine or measure how close to 
falling asleep you were or what the time was [that 
you were feeling so tired]?” 
•• 
“How do you monitor/measure when the insomnia 
is back?” 
•• 
“How do you know that you hadn’t fallen asleep 
[were still tired]?” 

It is important for the therapist to ask questions to 
illustrate the cyclical relationship among thoughts, feelings, 
and behaviors that is often evident in insomnia. 
These questions focus on the arrows. It is often important 
to connect “monitoring” and “safety behaviors” 
back to thoughts. Here are some questions that will 
help: 

For connecting thoughts, feelings and behaviors: 

•• 
“When you are concentrating on (give examples 
of monitoring, like looking at the clock), what 
thoughts occur to you? Anything run through you 
mind?” 

•• 
“When you are concentrating on (give examples 
of safety behaviors, like remaining in bed for long 
periods of time), what is its impact on your getting 
back to sleep?” 

•• 
“When you monitor these things (when you cope 
by doing X), does that help you worry less or does 
it trigger more worries?” 

Drawing out the consequences: 

•• 
“Does watching out for fatigue and tension have 
any consequences [for your day]?” 
•• 
“Were there any consequences of these thoughts, 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

emotions or behaviors for getting back to sleep 
[how the rest of your day went]?” 

Once the model has been derived, the therapist 
shares the personalized version with the client, asking 
for feedback and reactions. The therapist might say the 
following: 

“This has been very helpful. Let me show you what 
I have been scribbling here, and I’d like for you to 
give me feedback about which parts I understand 
and which parts I have got wrong. This is so similar 
to what we very often find. These kinds of thoughts 
[name some] seem to lead to these kinds of feelings 
[name them]. Both put together make it difficult to 
sleep. On top of that, the thoughts and feelings can 
put us into a state of vigilance. Then we start monitoring 
the environment and our bodies [name some 
examples of the kinds of monitoring in which client 
engages], which often triggers more thoughts, which 
triggers more feelings. Then, very understandably, 
we try to cope by doing things like [name some of 
the safety behaviors]. Now some of these really are 
likely to be helpful in getting us back to sleep, but 
sometimes during the treatment we will test out the 
extent to which they are helpful by doing an experiment, 
to double check. That’s why we call them safety 
behaviors. Safety behaviors are things that people 
do in order to try and fix the problem they have but 
which, inadvertently, sometimes contribute to the 
problem. We may test out whether these behaviors 
are helpful or unhelpful. How does this model fit for 
you?” 

Once the model has been completed, it is important 
to ask clients if they can think of ways to intervene. 
If an area is identified, draw a double line across the 
maintaining arrows to visually represent cutting into 
the cycle. Most often clients are not able to come up 
with ways to intervene, so the therapist can help them 
by saying something like the following: 

“I suggest that one of our targets be these thoughts .. . 
if we can change them we will change your feelings. 
This alone will be very helpful for helping you get 
back to sleep. In addition, we’ll also target the monitoring. 
When we change the monitoring people typically 
feel much more relaxed and sleep much better. 
Then, as I have already said, if you are interested, 
we’ll test with experiments the things you are doing 

to cope right now, just in case some are feeding into 
the cycle.” 

Summarize by pointing out that a change in one or more 
parts of the perpetuating cycle will shift the system. 

Goal Setting 

Once the case conceptualization/insomnia models are 
derived, specific goals are collaboratively identified 
and written down in session. Goals are clearly stated 
(e.g., “falling asleep within 30 minutes each night” 
instead of “falling asleep more quickly at night”) and 
feasible (e.g., “sleeping through the night with only several 
brief awakenings” instead of “sleeping through the 
night without waking,” as the latter is not biologically 
feasible). Practitioners and clients can establish goals 
for both the nighttime (falling asleep, staying asleep, 
advancing bedtime) and the daytime (increasing energy, 
reducing caffeine consumption). Goals are revisited 
briefly midway through treatment and at the conclusion 
of treatment. 

Therapy goals are set in Session 1 but may need to be 
reevaluated and readjusted periodically as the intervention 
unfolds. It is important to set realistic, operational, 
and well-defined goals. Goal setting is useful to keep 
the therapy focused. By setting well-defined goals, the 
therapeutic alliance remains oriented to the client’s 
needs and desires and minimizes diversion to irrelevant 
materials. It also provides useful information about the 
client’s sleep expectations, which sometimes need to be 
adjusted during the goal setting process. 

Motivational Interviewing 

Motivational interviewing (MI) is a communication 
method that emphasizes accepting the client as an individual, 
avoiding argumentation/lectures, and focusing 
on the process of eliciting and shaping language in 
favor of change (i.e., change talk; Miller & Rollnick, 
2002). MI also includes regular, straightforward reviews 
of perceived pros and cons of change because 
many sleep-incompatible/interfering behaviors are rewarding. 


A straightforward review of perceived pros and cons 
of the change is conducted. For example, clients often 
struggle with waking up at around the same time on 
both weekdays and weekends. Allowing the client to 
generate advantages and disadvantages with therapist 
guidance facilitates behavior change. MI is revisited 


Sleep Disturbance 

in future sessions as additional strategies are introduced. 


Sleep and Circadian Education 

Education on the circadian system and homeostatic 
sleep drive (see the earlier “Sleep and Insomnia” section) 
is presented to the client. This underscores the 
following two points: (1) Going to bed and waking up 
at the same time each day helps the circadian system 
adapt to the 24-hour sleep–wake cycle; and (2) daytime 
napping disrupts the natural buildup of homeostatic 
sleep pressure. Individuals across the age range 
may also benefit from education about specific changes 
in sleep across the lifespan. In adolescence and young 
adulthood, understanding the biological shift toward 
later bedtimes and rise times with puberty is helpful for 
later intervention. Likewise, explaining to adults that 
sleep grows lighter and more fragmented with age, and 
that sleep needs change with age, such that 7 hours of 
sleep per night may be sufficient, can go a long way to 
normalize and lay the foundation for intervention. 

Behavioral coMPoNeNts 

Sleep Restriction 

Sleep restriction, as developed by Spielman and colleagues 
(1987), rests on the general premise that time 
in bed should be limited to maximize the sleep drive, 
and so that the association between the bed and sleeping 
is strengthened. This behavioral treatment begins 
with a reduction of time spent in bed, so that time in 
bed is equivalent to the time the client estimates he/ 
she spends sleeping. Thus, for instance, if an individual 
gets approximately 6 hours of sleep per night (an average 
across the week based on sleep diaries), but usually 
spends about an additional 2 hours trying to get to 
sleep, the sleep restriction therapy would begin by limiting 
his/her time spent in bed to 6 hours. This initial 
reduction in time spent in bed is intended to heighten 
a person’s homeostatic sleep drive (Perlis & Lichstein, 
2003) and reduce the association between the bed and 
wakefulness. Following this restriction, sleep gradually 
becomes more efficient, at which point time spent in 
bed is gradually increased. 

Practitioners begin sleep restriction by calculating 
TST, time in bed, and sleep efficiency based on the 
prior week’s sleep diary. “Sleep efficiency” is defined 

as TST divided by time in bed, multiplied by 100 to 
form a percentage. So, in the previous example, if a client 
sleeps an average of 6 hours per night over the week 
and spends an average of 8 hours in bed, sleep efficiency 
for the week will be (6 ÷ 8) × 100, or 75%. The goal 
is to increase sleep efficiency to more than 85–90%. 
The therapist would set a “sleep window” equal to the 
prior week’s TST (6 hours), choosing a bedtime and 
rise time with the client (e.g., 12:00 A.M. to 6:00 A.M.). 
Once sleep efficiency reaches 85%, client and therapist 
can gradually expand the window (e.g., by 30 minutes 
per week) toward an optimal sleep time. 

Clients are often hesitant about implementing sleep 
restriction. Many individuals with insomnia believe 
that they need to spend a great deal of time in bed in 
order to “catch” a minimum amount of sleep. Still others 
worry about the short-term sleep deprivation that 
sleep restriction is likely to impart—after all, clients 
are presenting with the desire to get more sleep, and 
sleep restriction is a strategy that, in the short term, is 
likely to give them less. Explain to the client that his/ 
her brain and body have developed habits that lead 
to time awake in bed and poor sleep efficiency. Sleep 
restriction is the most effective way to improve sleep 
efficiency by consolidating sleep time. Tell the client 
that, although initially he/she may not get more sleep, 
his/her sleep quality and sleep efficiency will likely 
improve. These are the first steps to remedying sleep 
problems. Reassure the client that, as his/her sleep efficiency 
improves, you will be expanding the “sleep 
window” to allow for more time in bed. 

Stimulus Control 

The rationale for stimulus control therapy lies in the 
notion that insomnia is a result of conditioning that 
occurs when the bed becomes associated with inability 
to sleep. The bed, bedtime, and bedroom have lost 
their properties previously associated with sleep, and 
the main therapeutic goal is to reestablish or strengthen 
the associations between sleep and the stimulus conditions 
under which it typically occurs. As described by 
Bootzin, Epstein, and Wood (1991), stimulus control 
requires clients to comply with a series of specific behavioral 
recommendations. These recommendations, 
along with suggestions for introducing them, are outlined 
below. 

•• 
Only go to bed when sleepy. To reestablish the 
association between the bed and sleep, clients are 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

instructed to go to bed and to stay in bed only when 
sleepy and when sleep is imminent. Therapists explain 
that “sleepy” is different from “tired,” and that 
although an individual may feel tired in the evening, 
he/she must wait until he/she feels sleepy before getting 
into bed. Note that, if a sleep window has been set as 
part of sleep restriction (described earlier), the client is 
instructed to remain awake until the start of the sleep 
window, even if he/she feels sleepy. 

•• 
Get out of bed if unable to fall asleep. Because 
time spent awake in bed can often be associated with 
worry, rumination, and arousal, clients are instructed 
to leave the bed if they do not fall asleep within 15–20 
minutes, returning to bed only when they feel sleepy. 
This may be introduced in session as follows: 

“If you are unable to fall asleep or return to sleep 
within 15–20 minutes, get out of bed, go into another 
room, and engage in a quiet activity that you find relaxing. 
You can read, listen to music, do a crossword 
puzzle, or find something else that is nonarousing. 
Return to bed only when sleepy, and repeat this step 
as often as necessary throughout the night—so that 
anytime you wake up and are awake for more than 
20 minutes, you will be getting out of bed and going 
to another room. This regimen will help reassociate 
your bed/bedroom with falling asleep quickly.” 

•• 
Therapists can brainstorm relaxing activities with 
clients and write them down in session, listening carefully 
for and discouraging potentially stimulating activities 
(Web browsing, watching certain TV programs, 
cleaning the house). Emphasize to clients that it will be 
difficult to comply with this recommendation. Encourage 
clients to put warm clothing by the bed to increase 
the desire to get out of bed. Brainstorm with clients 
who live in studios or single rooms to find an alternate 
place (a chair or pillow on the floor) to go to when getting 
out of bed. 

•• 
Keep the bedroom for sleep and sex. Eliminate all 
sleep-incompatible activities (upsetting conversations, 
studying, watching TV) from the bed and bedroom. 
Many individuals get into bed early and read or watch 
TV in order to facilitate sleep onset. Remind clients 
that this time in bed spent awake, however, dilutes the 
association between the bed and sleep. 

•• 
Discourage napping. Explain to clients that napping 
can offset homeostatic sleep pressure, making 

it more difficult to fall asleep or stay asleep at night. 
Often it can be helpful to point to specific examples 
in the sleep diaries where a daytime nap led to greater 
difficulty falling asleep, or more wakefulness throughout 
the night, to illustrate this point. If clients regularly 
nap at a certain time, brainstorm activities that can be 
scheduled as an alternative. Tell clients that although 
naps may feel helpful in the short term, they can disrupt 
sleep–wake rhythms and perpetuate insomnia in 
the long term. 

Sleep Hygiene 

Information about sleep and sleep incompatible behaviors, 
and the daytime consequences of sleep disturbance, 
is often given to inform clients of the basic steps 
that they can take to improve their sleep. Interventions 
targeting sleep hygiene are behavioral in nature and 
target sleep-incompatible routines. Sleep hygiene interventions 
typically include the following components 
(Morin & Espie, 2003). First, education on the sleepdisrupting 
effects of alcohol, tobacco, and caffeine use 
are introduced to the client, who is encouraged to avoid 
caffeine in the evening and alcohol/tobacco at bedtime. 
Clients are encouraged to have a small snack before 
bedtime but to avoid heavy meals. Likewise, exercise is 
known to enhance sleep continuity and quality, and is 
recommended to client; exercising within several hours 
of bedtime, however, can delay sleep onset. Finally, the 
client is encouraged to keep the bedroom environment 
quiet, dark, and cool. Although sleep hygiene education 
is typically included as one component of CBT-I, its 
use as the sole intervention in treating insomnia has not 
been empirically supported (Morin et al., 2006). 

Wind Down, Wake Up, and Regularity 

Wind-Down Routine 

Clients need assistance to devise a “wind down” of 
30–60 minutes in which relaxing, sleep-enhancing 
activities are introduced in dim lighting conditions. A 
regular wind-down routine is beneficial across multiple 
domains: It promotes relaxation, increases positive 
associations with the bed/bedtime, and, when done 
in dim lighting conditions, helps the circadian phase 
advance in clients who are evening-types, maintaining 
entrainment (Wyatt, Stepanski, & Kirkby, 2006). Activities 
that are encouraged in the wind-down routine 
include reading, grooming/hygiene, bathing, complet



Sleep Disturbance 

ing a light crossword, listening to soft music, and other 
relaxing activities of the client’s choosing. A central 
issue is the use of interactive electronic media (Internet 
browsing, cell phone use, social networking). Though 
clients may acknowledge that these activities are stimulating, 
they may be reluctant to surrender them in the 
period before sleep. MI can often be helpful given 
that many clients are socially isolated and rely on prebedtime, 
Internet-based social interaction. A behavioral 
experiment stretching across the week (e.g., three 
nights of bedtime “as usual” followed by three nights 
with a “wind-down routine,” with daily ratings of prebedtime 
relaxation and SOL) can be helpful to illustrate 
the sleep-promoting effects of a good wind-down 
routine (Harvey & Talbot, 2012a). Many clients voluntarily 
choose an electronics curfew and time at which 
the wind down will commence, opting to set an alarm 
on a cell phone as a reminder. 

Wake-Up Routine 

As mentioned earlier, clients benefit from education 
about sleep inertia upon waking, and about behaviors 
that can increase or decrease sleep inertia. Helpful 
behaviors to curb sleep inertia include not hitting 
“snooze,” exposure to sunlight upon waking (e.g., 
opening the curtains to let sunlight in, eating breakfast 
outside), encouraging morning physical activity, 
showering, listening to upbeat music, and encouraging 
social contact. Behavioral recommendations may be 
introduced to combat the desire to sleep in, including 
placing an alarm away from the bed so that it is necessary 
to rise to turn it off, and making the bed, so the 
incentive to get back in bed is reduced. Encouragement 
from family and friends can also help a person to comply 
with morning rise times. 

Regularizing and Shifting Sleep and Wake Times 

Regularizing sleep and wake times across the week can 
be a helpful intervention, particularly if schedule variability 
appears to be a prominent feature of the sleep 
disturbance. Building motivation for the client to wake 
at the same time, including on weekends (Crowley & 
Carskadon, 2010) is a key focus. This promotes consistent 
sleepiness in the evening, particularly when naps 
are avoided. 

Often it is helpful to frame schedule variability 
around the phenomenon of “jet lag” as follows: 

tHeraPist: Have you ever experienced jet lag? 

client: Yes, I have. 

tHeraPist: When was the last time? 

client: Oh, I guess the last time was flying out east to 
visit relatives. 

tHeraPist: What did you notice? 

client: Let’s see . . . I felt kind of out of it, like I 
couldn’t focus. It was difficult to fall asleep, even 
more than it usually is for me! 

tHeraPist: And flying out east . . . that’s a 3-hour time 
difference from here, correct? 

client: Yes. 

tHeraPist: Let’s take a look at your sleep diary from 
last week. What do you notice from weekday to 
weekend? 

client: Well . . . I went to bed at 2:00 A.M. on Friday 
and Saturday because I went out both nights. And I 
guess I slept in as a result. 

tHeraPist: And what time did you go to bed on Sunday 
and Monday? 

client: Looks like I tried to sleep at 11:00 P.M. because 
I have to get up for work. 

tHeraPist: So you just went from 2:00 A.M. on the 
weekend to 11:00 P.M. on the weekday. You just flew 
across the country! 

client: Huh. I guess I never thought of it that way. 

tHeraPist: No wonder you had difficulty falling 
asleep on Sunday and Monday. Your body was jet 
lagged, and with the “time change” it was hard to 
fall asleep. 

client: No wonder I have so much trouble on Sunday 
nights! 

For clients who wish to advance their sleep schedules, 
we work to achieve behavioral adjustments to 
adapt to earlier bedtimes. We do this in small, systematic 
shifts (e.g., by advancing bedtime by 20–30 minutes 
each week) to ensure mastery. We encourage exposure 
to light upon waking, which will help the circadian 
system advance, and work with clients to minimize 
variability around wake times. We reassure clients that 
any sleep pressure (i.e., sleep loss) accumulated initially 
with bedtime advancement will actually help the 
sleep schedule align by increasing likelihood of earlier 
sleep onset on subsequent nights. 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

coGNitive coMPoNeNts 

Worry 

It is well established that individuals with chronic insomnia 
worry while in bed about a range of topics, including 
the failure to fall asleep (Harvey, 2002b; Wicklow 
& Espie, 2000). Cognitive models implicating 
worry (e.g., Harvey, 2002a) posit that worry activates 
the sympathetic nervous system and corresponding 
physiological arousal, which hinders sleep onset (Espie, 
2002). Therefore, an intervention targeting worry is an 
important clinical area in the treatment of insomnia. 

Following well-established cognitive therapy approaches 
(Beck, 1995; Young, Rygh, Weinberger, & 
Beck, Chapter 7, this volume), the first step in addressing 
worry involves education on negative automatic 
thoughts (NATs) and mistakes in thinking. NATs can 
be introduced to clients as follows: 

tHeraPist: Imagine there are two people outside of 
a movie theater, each waiting for a friend to arrive. 
The friend is late, and these two people have been 
waiting. Person 1 is thinking, “Gosh, I wonder why 
she is late. I hope everything is all right with her! Did 
she get into an accident on her way over?” Person 2 
is thinking, “Gosh, I can’t believe she is late. She 
always does this. She has no respect for my time. She 
is not a good friend.” What kinds of emotions do you 
think Person 1 is feeling? 

client: Probably some fear and concern. 

tHeraPist: Right. And what about Person 2? 

client: (chuckling) Anger, and maybe resentment. 

tHeraPist: Exactly! So two people in the same situation 
can have very different emotional responses to 
an event based on what they were thinking. In other 
words, our thoughts can directly influence our emotions. 
Often we have dozens of thoughts, in rapid 
succession, and we don’t even realize it. We accept 
them at face value without stopping to look at them. 
We’re going to look for, and respond to, some sleeprelated 
automatic thoughts over the next few weeks. 

The therapist then provides further education on automatic 
thoughts: (1) They are often a train of thought 
that runs parallel with spoken thought; (2) we are often 
not fully aware of them; (3) automatic thoughts are extremely 
rapid, and sometimes only a few words rather 
than sentences; (4) they do not arise as a result of delib


eration but just happen like a reflex; (5) they are often 
difficult to turn off; (6) we often accept their validity 
without stopping to question them; and (7) they often 
precede a powerful emotion. The therapist should underscore 
the point that we have hundreds and hundreds 
of NATs each day, and it is often helpful to look for 
NATs by paying attention to changes in emotion. 

The therapist next works with a client to identify a 
recent powerful emotion from the previous 2 days, and 
use the emotion as the starting place to uncover related 
NATs. These are written down on a simple threecolumn 
form (Situation–Thoughts–Emotions). The 
client is asked to practice identifying additional NATs 
over the week by paying attention to changes in emotion 
and writing them down on the three-column form, 
emphasizing insomnia-related NATs (“I’m exhausted” 
or “I won’t be able to cope today”). The therapist also 
provides psychoeducation on common cognitive distortions 
(black-and-white thinking, catastrophizing, personalizing, 
mistaking feelings for facts, etc.) and asks 
clients to categorize some of the NATs they spot over 
the week. 

At the following session, the practitioner reviews the 
client’s three-column NAT form and has a brief discussion/
review of NATs and NAT themes. The practitioner 
then introduces an extended thought record that guides 
the client in evaluating the validity of the thought with 
a series of questions, including evidence for–against the 
thought; alternative ways of interpreting the thought; 
considering the worst that could happen and whether 
the client would be able to live through it; the helpfulness 
of the thought and the effect of thinking in this 
manner; how others might see the situation; how important 
the thought will be when the client is 80; and 
whether the thought falls into one of the “mistakes in 
thinking.” Client and therapist pick a NAT together and 
work through the form together in session. 

Once the client has fully grasped this procedure, the 
therapist assigns as homework completing one extended 
record daily or, at the very least, several examples 
each week. This is continued for several weeks. The 
therapist provides the following rationale for continuing 
to fill out the extended record on a daily basis: (1) 
By observing, reporting and evaluating NATs, it is 
easier to see them objectively and to get some distance 
from them; (2) observing, reporting, and evaluating 
NATs presents an opportunity to test their reality/logic 
and recognize that thoughts can be unreliable; and most 
importantly, (3) because it takes a long time to change 
thinking habits that have been around for many years, 


Sleep Disturbance 

reversing the old habits will take practice. Completing 
one form daily over a period of weeks will make the 
new style of thinking habitual. 

Helpful and Unhelpful Worry Strategies 

A menu of other worry interventions is offered, so that 
the client gets to create a personalized list of helpful and 
unhelpful strategies to manage worry. Unhelpful strategies 
might include suppression (Harvey, 2003a), positive 
beliefs about worry (Harvey, 2003b), and “why” 
questions (Watkins & Baracaia, 2001). For suppression, 
introduce the adverse consequences of thought 
suppression whenever it becomes relevant, sometimes 
as early as Session 1. For example, as soon as the client 
mentions something along the lines of “I try to suppress 
my thoughts” or “I clear my mind,” the therapist can do 
an in-session “white bear experiment” (“For the next 
minute, let’s close our eyes and think about whatever 
we’d like, anything except a big white fluffy bear”) to 
illustrate paradoxical effects of thought suppression. 
This helps the client become aware that suppression 
often leads to “thought rebound” or monitoring for 
the suppressed thought, which makes it more likely to 
occur. A helpful assessment for suppression and other 
thought control strategies is available (Ree, Harvey, 
Blake, Tang, & Shawe-Taylor, 2005). Therapists should 
also be on the lookout for clients who hold positive beliefs 
about the utility of presleep worry. Therapists can 
use Socratic questioning to discuss the pros and cons 
of presleep worry, or consider doing behavioral experiments 
to collect data on whether positive beliefs about 
worrying in bed are helpful or not. Finally, “why” 
questions are often implicated in the presentation of insomnia. 
Many clients ask questions such as “Why am I 
awake?” or “Why don’t I sleep as well as my partner?” 
Give your client the rationale that experimental studies 
suggest that “why” questions block processing and 
promote rumination. 

After reviewing what not to do to manage worry, 
consider alternative, more helpful thought management 
strategies with the client. First, suggest the idea of not 
controlling or suppressing thoughts. Do the opposite— 
let them come. Let them drift in and out. Letting the 
thoughts come and go may give the thoughts less 
strength and power, and may even move them into the 
category of being boring. Another helpful alternative 
involves catching the thoughts and evaluating them 
with the extended thought record described earlier. 
Introducing the importance of a wind-down or buffer 

zone to process and disengage from the day can be a 
helpful response to worry. Finally, practice “savoring” 
to focus on the positives in the client’s life. Savoring 
involves attending to, appreciating, and enhancing 
positive experiences the client has had during the day. 
It can be a small/everyday event like looking out the 
window and noticing the lovely trees and flowers, reminiscing 
over a favorite vacation, or anticipating a family 
reunion or a date with one’s spouse/partner. Encourage 
the client to focus on the positive experience, and when 
negative thoughts arise, return to the positive experience 
and savor it. The rationale is to associate bedtime 
with positive thoughts. Work with your client in the session 
to identify times in the present, past, and future 
that he/she can savor. Practice savoring together in the 
session and allow the client to reflect on the experience. 

Set one or more of these alternative strategies as 
homework, introducing it as a behavioral experiment. 
Behavioral experiments, explained in Table 16.1, are 
powerful methods used across all of the cognitive components 
of CBT-I. (For further reading on behavioral 
experiments, see Perlis, Aloia, & Kuhn, 2012; Ree & 
Harvey, 2004a.) The goal is to give the client some experience 
and practice with each. Feel free to follow-up 
with additional experiments in subsequent sessions if 
needed. 

Attention and Monitoring 

As noted earlier, a number of studies have documented 
that individuals with insomnia underestimate their 
sleep time and overestimate time spent awake at night 
(e.g., Harvey & Tang, 2012). Individuals may become 
more anxious about their perceived sleep problem, and 
with increased vigilance towards the sleep state, may 
draw inaccurate conclusions about their prior sleep. 
Likewise, individuals may monitor for signs of daytime 
fatigue. A helpful measure of sleep-related monitoring 
is available (Neitzert Semler & Harvey, 2004). Behavioral 
experiments, both in and out of session, can be introduced 
to illustrate the effects of attentional bias and 
monitoring (Harvey & Talbot, 2012b; Ree & Harvey, 
2004a). 

To introduce the concept of monitoring, the therapist 
may wish to do the following: 

tHeraPist: Close your eyes and focus on your knee 
joints and the sensations that are there. I’ll do it, too. 
Let’s both take 2 minutes to do this. (after 2 minutes) 
What did you notice? 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

table 16.1. steps involved in Creating, testing, and Processing behavioral experiments 

Steps and description Example 
•• 
Step 1. Identify the thought, belief, behavior, or process Victor is unsure as to whether looking at the clock as he falls asleep 
the experiment will target. The rationale for completing the is helpful. He believes that knowing the time, and calculating how 
experiment, along with the target or aim, should be clear. much time he has left to sleep, may increase his anxiety at night; 
Targets can include challenging an unhelpful belief/behavhowever, 
he also feels that not knowing the time could increase 
ior or testing a new belief/behavior. The target is written worry and anxiety throughout the night. Victor and his therapist set 
down in session. out to test the following: “Is looking at the clock at night helpful or 
harmful to my sleep?” 
•• 
Step 2. Collaborate to brainstorm ideas for an experi-Victor and his therapist agree to set up an experiment to test the 
ment. Encourage clients to be specific, defining a place and impact of clock watching on sleep. They agree to spend 3 nights 
time for the experiment. Get creative and arouse clients’ watching the clock as usual, followed by 3 nights without looking 
curiosity. Be open and flexible to ideas the clients have, as at the clock. Victor states that he will be tempted to turn the clock 
this may increase motivation to complete the experiment. around on the “no-clock” nights, so he and his therapist collabora-
Clients sometimes enjoy giving their experiments creative tively brainstorm to move the clock across the room to reduce this 
titles. temptation. 
•• 
Step 3. Write down predictions about the outcome and Victor has the following prediction: “Not looking at the clock at 
devise a method to record the outcome as soon as possible night will increase my anxiety and keep me up longer because I’ll 
after the experiment is completed. This is very important: be wondering what time it is all night.” He and his therapist decide 
A delay in recording the outcome could lead to vague and to record “last night’s anxiety” on a scale of 1–10 immediately upon 
inaccurate memory of the experiment itself. waking and use the sleep diary to look at time it takes to fall asleep. 
•• 
Step 4. Anticipate problems and brainstorm solutions. Ask Victor and his therapist discuss obstacles to completing the experiyour 
client what might prevent him/her from completing ment. Victor has a party to attend on one of the nights, which will 
this experiment. Identify obstacles and collaborate on how delay his bedtime slightly; he and his therapist decide to skip the 
to overcome them. If the experiment centers around a new clock-watching experiment on this “nontypical” night and complete 
skill, practice the skill together in session before making it it the other six nights of the week. 
a part of the experiment. 
•• 
Step 5. Conduct the experiment. Victor spends 3 nights looking at the clock and 3 nights not looking 
at the clock, recording anxiety and standard sleep variables on his 
sleep diary. 
•• 
Step 6. Review the experiment. Ask your client to summa-Clock nights: 
rize main points he/she has learned from the experiment. Anxiety ratings (on a scale of 1–10): 8, 6, 7 
Assist him/her in filling in gaps, and write out conclusions Time to fall asleep (in minutes): 120, 45, 60 
together. Remind your client of the conclusions drawn 
from each experiment in future sessions. If the outcome is 
other than anticipated, ask follow-up questions to review 
any factors (mood, behavior, cognitions) that may have 
No-clock nights: 
Anxiety ratings (on a scale of 1–10): 10, 6, 4 
Time to fall asleep (in minutes): 140, 50, 15 
influenced the outcome in a manner other than expected. 
Typically, via careful questioning, learning can be derived 
from an experiment regardless of the outcome. 
At first glance, the numbers above do not appear to “solve” the 
experiment one way or the other. However, with careful questioning, 
a subsequent testable hypothesis is generated. Victor reports that his 
anxiety levels and length of time to fall asleep were consistent on the 
clock-watching nights. On the no-clock nights, Victor reports that 
his anxiety was initially very high as he wondered what time it was; 
by the third day, however, he acknowledged hardly thinking about 
the time. Victor and his therapist discuss the possibility that he was 
experiencing initial anxiety with the new behavioral change, and 
speculate that he may need more time in the no-clock condition to 
“get used to” the shift. 
•• 
Step 7. Identify follow-up experiments if needed. If the Victor and therapist decide to extend the “no-clock” condition for 
experiment was not completed in full, or if the outcome another week, still rating anxiety and time to fall asleep immediwas 
ambiguous and/or raised another question, return to ately upon waking. 
Step 1 and devise a further experiment. 


Sleep Disturbance 

client: Hmm .. . some tingling, and pins and needles. 
Mild pain maybe. 

tHeraPist: Imagine for a moment there was a lot of 
research to indicate that the things you mention are 
soft signs of a serious immune system disease. If you 
believed this were true, how would this impact your 
attention for the rest of the day? 

client: I’d be paying attention to my knee all day! 
tHeraPist: And how would you feel about those sensations? 
client: Well, concerned, I guess. Wondering if they 
had gotten worse. 
tHeraPist: What if your sleep is like that knee? And 
the more you look out for symptoms of tiredness or 
fatigue, the more they appear? 

The therapist can use this dialogue to brainstorm 
with the client about the monitoring in which he/she 
may engage during the day and night. Then, the therapist 
can introduce one or more of the following behavioral 
experiments to assess monitoring. 

Monitoring for Fatigue 

Go for a brief walk together in session. Instruct the client 
to spend 5 minutes focusing internally to monitor 
how his/her body feels, paying particular attention to 
signs of tiredness and fatigue. Ask your client to rate 
how tired he/she feels. Then spend 5 minutes focusing 
externally on the trees, flowers, and sky. Ask your client 
to again rate how tired he/she feels. Go back to your 
office to debrief. 

Monitoring for Sounds 

To instruct the client about monitoring at night it is often 
helpful to use the metaphor of a “radar.” One client who 
monitored for the garbage truck had her “radar” on all 
night for the sound of the garbage truck. She would 
wake up to many sounds during the night and think, 
“Oh no, it is the garbage truck, it must already be 5:00 

A.M. I’m never going to get enough sleep.” This thought 
led to anxiety that made it difficult for her to get back 
to sleep. We used multiple strategies to address this 
monitoring: (1) evaluating whether hearing the garbage 
truck was really an indication of wakefulness or whether 
the truck could have caused the client to wake from 
a light sleep; (2) discussing the pros and cons of having 
a “radar” on during the night; and (3) asking the client 
to listen to sounds in the room, and further away, in the 
adjacent room, and still further away, to sounds on the 
road, and to sounds further away yet again, encouraging 
habituation to the full range of sounds. 

Monitoring Physical Appearance 

One client with whom we worked used to complain 
about her physical appearance on the days following 
poor nights of sleep. She would wake up and immediately 
look in the mirror, noticing bags under her eyes. 
When asked how bad the bags were on days when she 
had not slept poorly, the client admitted she never really 
looked for them. We devised a behavioral experiment 
whereby she was to look at the bags under her eyes 
upon waking every day of the week, regardless of how 
she had slept, and rate the appearance of baggy eyes. 
The client found that her bags did not really change 
from morning to morning, and that she had really just 
ignored them on days when her sleep was not poor. 

Monitoring the Clock 

Paying attention to the clock throughout the night can 
increase anxiety and vigilance, interfering with sleep. 
Client and therapist can create an experiment whereby 
the clock is displayed in full view 3 nights of the week, 
then hidden from view (i.e., turned to face the wall or 
placed under the bed) for 3 nights. Ask the client to 
rate overall anxiety about the prior night’s sleep in the 
morning and record it on the sleep diary. The sleep 
diary can then be reviewed in the following session to 
compare anxiety and wakefulness on clock-watching 
nights versus clock-hidden nights. 

Unhelpful Beliefs about Sleep 

In seminal research on insomnia from the 1990s, 
Morin (e.g., 1993) highlighted the role of unhelpful 
beliefs about sleep. It has been suggested that these unhelpful 
beliefs may exacerbate intrusive and worrisome 
thoughts throughout the day and night, contributing to 
the development and maintenance of sleep disturbance 
(Harvey, 2002a). An unhelpful belief about insomnia 
might take the form of an individual believing that he/ 
she needs to sleep through the night with no awakenings 
to feel refreshed. Such a belief is unhelpful in that 
awakenings are a natural part of nocturnal sleep (e.g., 
Akerstedt et al., 2002); worry related to this belief 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

might take the form of an individual who, once awakened 
at night, believes that this fragmented sleep will 
result in impaired work performance the following day. 
One large-scale correlational study (Jansson & Linton, 
2007) surveyed unhelpful beliefs about sleep, depression, 
anxiety, and arousal at two time points spaced 1 
year apart. The researchers found that unhelpful beliefs 
about sleep—in particular, beliefs about the longterm 
negative consequences of insomnia—predicted a 
chronic pattern of poor sleep over and above arousal, 
depression, anxiety, and beliefs about short-term consequences. 
Such research suggests that targeting unhelpful 
beliefs about sleep is important for reversing 
chronic insomnia. 

In addition to thought records, unhelpful beliefs 
about sleep can commonly be addressed in two ways: 

(1) gentle Socratic questioning to explore an unhelpful 
belief, and (2) creation of a survey to collect data 
related to the belief (Harvey & Eidelman, 2012). The 
following vignette illustrates how the therapist can use 
Socratic questioning to guide the client to explore and 
correct some unrealistic expectations about sleep needs 
and morning energy: 
tHeraPist: Some of your responses suggest that you 
believe quite strongly about the need for 8 hours of 
sleep every night. 

client: Well, I’ve always thought that we need 8 hours 
of sleep to stay healthy. 

tHeraPist: Do all people you know have the same 
height? 

client: Of course not! 

tHeraPist: What is the normal height for an adult? 

client: Well, there is no norm that applies to everyone. 
It varies.. .. 

tHeraPist: It is similar for sleep. There are individual 
differences in the amount of sleep we need to feel 
rested and function well during the day. Although 
most people report about 7 or 8 hours of sleep, some 
can get by with less than that and still feel rested in 
the morning. It is possible that 6.5 hours of uninterrupted 
sleep be more satisfying and refreshing than 8 
hours of broken sleep. So, it will be important to experiment 
with various sleep durations to determine 
what the optimal duration is for you. What do you 
think happens if you assume that you need 8 hours 
of sleep but you really only need 7? 

client: I guess I’m awake an hour .. . and I spend that 
hour worrying about why I’m not sleeping! 

tHeraPist: Exactly. Pursuing unrealistic goals is 
counterproductive and may actually make you anxious 
and, as a consequence, perpetuate the underlying 
sleep difficulties. I also noted that you are very 
concerned when you are not fully rested in the morning. 


client: Well, this concerns me because I assume that 
if I am not well rested in the morning, it must mean 
that I have not slept well the night before. 

tHeraPist: This may be a valid assumption. However, 
even the best sleepers do not always arise in the 
morning feeling well rested and full of energy. 

client: So you’re telling me that when I wake up in the 
morning feeling tired, it is not necessarily an indication 
of poor sleep. 

tHeraPist: What I am suggesting is that you need 
to be careful with your expectations and interpretations. 
Even with good-quality sleep, you simply 
cannot expect to always feel refreshed and energetic 
during the day. There are day-to-day variations in 
how we feel and how energetic we are. 

client: I guess I have noted that for myself. 

tHeraPist: So, what alternative thoughts should you 
have the next time you catch yourself setting standards 
that may be unrealistic? 

client: That 8 hours of sleep is not necessarily a “gold 
standard” that applies to everyone, and that even if 
on some days I am not fully rested, I may simply 
need to accept that and not jump to the conclusion 
that I slept poorly the night before and won’t be able 
to function the next day. 

tHeraPist: Very good! This should reduce your anxiety 
about sleep as well. 

As the above vignette illustrates, many clients have 
unrealistic expectations about their sleep requirements 
and their daytime energy level. An important goal is 
to help these clients realize that diminished sleep and 
daytime energy are not always pathological, and that 
even good sleepers do not always get 8 hours of sleep 
or feel completely refreshed every morning. With 
gentle Socratic questioning, clients may benefit from 
reappraising their expectations regarding both sleep 
requirements and daytime energy. 


Sleep Disturbance 

Surveys can also be designed to evaluate unrealistic 
beliefs about sleep. Before the session, the therapist 
should have an idea of unrealistic beliefs to target (e.g., 
“Good sleepers get 8 hours of sleep,” “Only people with 
insomnia feel tired in the daytime,” or “I am not normal 
for waking up four times a night”). The Dysfunctional 
Beliefs and Attitude Scale (Morin & Espie, 2003) is a 
terrific measure to assess and document change in unhelpful 
beliefs about sleep. The therapist can introduce 
the survey by saying: 

“One of the components of this treatment that we have 
found to be very effective is for us to collaborate together 
to create and administer a survey. There are a 
number of things we get from this: advice from good 
sleepers about why they sleep so well; a reminder 
as to how well good sleepers really sleep; and data 
on our beliefs about sleep. Most of us have developed 
our ideas about sleep from magazine articles, 
from a parent, or on the basis of our own experience. 
What or who has most influenced your ideas about 
sleep? [Allow the client to respond.] In order to start 
to become more data driven we are going to devise 
a survey together and administer it to people in your 
age group. This is always an interesting exercise 
and an opportunity to learn from others about how 
they manage their sleep. We focus on people around 
your age given that sleep changes so much across the 
lifespan. Here are some questions we have found to 
be helpful in the past.” 

At this point, the therapist asks questions that pertain 
specifically to the client’s unhelpful beliefs about sleep. 
Survey questions may include the following: 

•• 
“Are you a good sleeper or someone with insomnia?” 
This question can be particularly useful to 
illustrate that individuals who regard themselves 
as “good sleepers” often feel tired in the morning, 
wake up at night, and feel sleepy in the afternoon. 


•• 
“How many hours of sleep per night do you get?” 
•• 
“How long does it take to fall asleep at night?” 
•• 
“How many times do you wake up at night?” 
•• 
“How alert do you feel upon waking, on a 1- to 

10-point scale? What have you found helpful to increase 
alertness?” 
•• 
“How often do you nap? Does it affect your subsequent 
sleep?” 

•• 
“Do you have a bedtime routine? A morning routine?” 


•• 
“Do you feel tired in the daytime? When? What 
do you do to increase energy when you feel tired?” 
This question often generates many strategies suggested 
by others, and only a small proportion of 
the strategies involve resting or sleeping. Common 
alternatives include changing the environment, 
getting fresh air, going for a walk, drinking cold 
water, or having a snack. Clients often realize that 
energy can be increased by things other than rest 
and sleep, and that boredom is a big trigger for 
feeling tired. 

Be sure to add questions of the client’s choosing as well, 
so that the survey is truly collaborative and generates 
enthusiasm and interest. Clients are often curious about 
dreams, nightmares, or sleep patterns that can be added 
as questions to the survey. Also, questions about mood 
(“How often do you feel sad?” or “Have you noticed a 
relationship between your daytime mood and nighttime 
sleep?”) can provide normalizing evidence that sleep 
and mood are interrelated, even in good sleepers. 

Safety Behaviors 

Closely related to unhelpful beliefs are so-called “safety 
behaviors,” which are actions taken to avoid feared 
outcomes that are maladaptive in two ways: (1) They 
prevent disconfirmation of the unhelpful beliefs, and 

(2) they increase the likelihood that the feared outcomes 
will occur. Individuals with insomnia, in an attempt 
to cope with anxiety related to unhelpful beliefs 
about sleep, often employ safety behaviors (Salkovskis, 
1991). In the previous section, we described an individual 
who endorsed the unhelpful belief that only 
solid, uninterrupted sleep would allow unimpaired 
work performance the next day. To prevent nocturnal 
awakenings, this individual might develop a routine 
of safety behaviors that include never going out in the 
evening, wearing earplugs, and using a sound machine 
as she sleeps. Engaging in these behaviors, while understandable 
in a general way, will clearly prevent her 
from learning that she can get adequate sleep even if 
the routine is broken. Paradoxically, these behaviors 
may make the feared outcome more likely to occur. Not 
going out in the evening increases the chance that she 
will become preoccupied with her sleep, and may contribute 
to rumination/worry and sad mood. Earplugs 

CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

can be effective in certain circumstances, but they can 
also contribute to sleep problems if they are uncomfortable, 
or if they cause her to strain to try and hear things 
in the environment. A sound machine can facilitate 
awakenings in the night. 

To work with safety behaviors, a helpful assessment 
tool is available (Ree & Harvey, 2004b). Behavioral 
experiments are designed in which the safety behavior 
is selectively adopted and then dropped, providing an 
often stunning demonstration of their adverse impact. 
For example, if a client avoids going out in the evenings 
because of feared impact on sleep, practitioner 
and client can set up a behavioral experiment in which 
two of the evenings in the week are spent at home (the 
“control” condition), and two evenings in the week are 
spent outside the home (socializing with others, going 
to a movie, etc.; the “experimental” condition). The 
practitioner instructs the client to rate not only standard 
sleep variables on the weekly diary (SOL, TST, 
etc.) but also to add a simple scale to measure evening 
satisfaction or mood each night. Often it is helpful 
to point out that mood and satisfaction increased on 
nights the client left the home, as well as to emphasize 
minimal (or inconsistent) changes in sleep as a result 
of leaving the home. 

Daytime Energy 

Individuals with disturbed sleep often monitor themselves 
for signs of fatigue upon waking or throughout 
the day. Normalizing feelings of grogginess upon waking 
(so-called “sleep inertia”), and introducing behavioral 
experiments and attention strategies for daytime 
monitoring can reduce anxiety and preoccupation 
with sleep. Often clients believe the only way they can 
feel less tired in the daytime is to sleep more. Hence, 
a behavioral experiment is devised to allow the client 
to experience the energy-generating effects of activity 
(Ree & Harvey, 2004a). This is also an opportunity to 
develop a list of energy-generating and energy-sapping 
activities that can be used to manage daytime tiredness 
and inevitable bouts of occasional sleep deprivation. 

Many clients believe that energy progressively drains 
away throughout the day, and that the only way to generate 
energy is to sleep or rest. Accordingly, many clients 
work particularly hard at conserving energy after 
a poor night’s sleep. As such, a behavioral experiment 
targets the following cognitions: “Energy is increased 
only by rest or sleep” and “I don’t have much energy, 
so I need to take care to conserve it.” We hope to use 

the experiment to illustrate that factors other than sleep 
influence energy levels. 

To set up this behavioral experiment, client and 
therapist begin by using the sleep diary as a basis for 
discussing sleep and energy during the day. They note 
examples where nighttime sleep was good but energy 
levels in the day were poor, or where nighttime sleep 
was poor but energy levels during the day were good. 
The therapist may wish to say something like: “That is 
really interesting. So if sleep isn’t the full account of 
how you feel during the day, then there must be other 
things that can account for it.” Set up a 2-day experiment 
to test energy as follows: On the first day, spend 
one 3-hour block conserving energy, then a 3-hour 
block using energy. After each 3-hour block, the client 
rates his/her energy and mood. The following day, 
the client does this in the reverse order. Be careful to 
define what conserving energy means for your client. 
Examples include avoidance of socializing with colleagues, 
setting work tasks at a slow pace, attempting 
only mundane tasks, not going out for lunch with work 
friends, and not returning phone calls. Also, spend time 
in the session brainstorming strategies for using energy. 
These might include going for a 10-minute walk, returning 
all phone calls, arranging to have a coffee with 
a colleague, getting on top of the paperwork, going to 
the water cooler to get a drink, or walking to a local 
shop to buy a magazine or snack. Ask the client to rate 
his/her mood and fatigue on a form developed collaboratively 
in the session. The client typically finds that his/ 
her mood and energy were improved by “using” energy, 
and using energy then becomes synonymous with generating 
energy. The therapist may comment that energy 
levels are like elastic that can be stretched quite easily. 

treatMeNt suMMary 
aND relaPse PreveNtioN 

The final treatment session is oriented around consolidating 
skills and preparing for setbacks. Relapse prevention 
is designed to build skills to minimize or prevent 
the reoccurrence of sleep disturbance in the long 
term. At the end of treatment, the therapist guides the 
participant in identifying potential high-risk situations 
for insomnia in the future and discusses skills to prevent 
or cope with these high-risk situations. Client and 
therapist together discuss potential obstacles to maintaining 
gains, and they problem-solve around areas of 
future sleep disturbance. An individualized summary 

###CUT###
Sleep Disturbance 

of learning and achievements guides relapse prevention 
work. Areas needing further intervention are addressed 
by setting specific goals and creating plans for achieving 
each goal. 

In the final session, therapist and client distinguish 
between a lapse (an occasional night of insomnia), 
which is normal even for good sleepers, and relapse 
(return of frequent and chronic insomnia). Discuss 
with the client the inevitability of having an occasional 
poor night’s sleep and caution against interpreting this 
as evidence that chronic insomnia has returned. Identifying 
situations that have been problematic in the past, 
and reviewing a “new” response to temporary setbacks, 
can be critical in maintaining gains. 

The therapist can guide the client in imagining a 
typical scenario in which insomnia is present for two 
or three nights, then follow up by exploring strategies 
the client might use to handle this situation in the future. 
This is a good opportunity to check, once again, 
whether the client has integrated the necessary skills 
to cope with such insomnia nights. Discuss how he/she 
can avoid falling back in the old patterns of poor sleep. 

Clients are strongly urged to review their materials 
from treatment and do their own assessment of the 
problem and identify the best course of action. Therapists 
also encourage clients to continue using tools 
after treatment has concluded. They work with clients 
to review tools, along with how the tools can be used to 
prevent insomnia reemergence. For example, the therapist 
can give the client multiple copies of the extended 
thought record or materials that the client found particularly 
helpful in session. 

coMMoN ProBleMs iN treatMeNt 

There are at least three common problems practitioners 
may encounter in delivering CBT-I for treatment of insomnia: 
difficulty regularizing the sleep–wake schedule, 
opposition to sleep restriction, and beliefs about 
the cause of insomnia that can hinder treatment compliance. 
We briefly discuss solutions to each problem 
below. 

Clients are often reluctant to go to bed and wake up 
at the same time every day, including on weekends. 
This can be particularly problematic for teenagers or 
young adults who often socialize and/or schedule pleasurable 
activities in the weekend evening hours. As described 
earlier, MI that honestly reviews the pros and 
cons of regularizing a sleep schedule can be one way 

to clarify ambivalence and prepare clients for change. 
Therapists may also find it helpful to guide clients in 
some general behavioral activity scheduling (e.g., encouraging 
clients to schedule a brunch, hike, or social 
visit on weekend mornings instead of weekend evenings, 
to enhance motivation). Finally, family members 
and friends can be instrumental to encouraging change. 
One client found it helpful to have a parent come in and 
turn on the overhead bedroom lights every morning, including 
weekends; another agreed to have a friend call 
at the same time every morning, and to keep her phone 
by the bed so that she knew to answer it. 

In addition to regularizing sleep schedules, clients 
are often resistant to implementing sleep restriction. It 
is helpful to allow clients to voice their concerns with 
this component of treatment (e.g., fear of reduced sleep), 
then follow up with basic education and problem solving 
to address specific areas noted. Often it is helpful to 
characterize the mild sleep deprivation engendered by 
sleep restriction as a “tool” that will allows sleep pressure 
to build and the system to get back on track, or as a 
short-term side effect on the road to long-term, lasting 
gains. Encourage clients to experiment with their sleep. 

Finally, clients may have a variety of beliefs about 
the cause of their insomnia that may shape treatment 
expectations and compliance. Some clients see their 
insomnia as purely biological; others recognize psychological 
components; and still others attribute emergence 
of their insomnia to environmental causes (e.g., 
the birth of a child, or experiencing a trauma). Each 
of these may influence motivation to implement components 
of CBT-I. The therapist can acknowledge the 
client’s beliefs about his/her insomnia while explaining 
the Spielman model (see the earlier “Models of Insomnia” 
section), highlighting the fact that regardless 
of the predisposing/precipitating factors that initiated 
insomnia, perpetuating factors (excessive time in bed, 
worry, napping) are currently maintaining the insomnia. 
These perpetuating factors will be the focus of 
CBT-I treatment. 

coNclusioN aND future DirectioNs 

CBT-I is emerging as an effective treatment option for 
insomnia. Administered as a brief, structured outpatient 
treatment, CBT-I targets behavioral, cognitive, 
and attentional processes that mutually maintain insomnia. 
Though it is structured, we wish to underscore 
the idea that CBT-I can be adapted flexibly according to 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

the individualized conceptualizations of clients. Clinicians 
can use assessment data, sleep diaries, and clinical 
intuition to formulate a plan that emphasizes and 
addresses particular areas of concern (e.g., erratic sleep 
schedules, worry and rumination, or reliance on safety 
behaviors). Finally, CBT-I can be adapted for clients 
with comorbid conditions and even be used as a platform 
for addressing sleep problems such as hypersomnolence 
disorder. In this concluding section, we consider 
client–therapist variables that predict success or 
failure in treatment, issues specific to treating insomnia 
in mood disorders, and use of CBT-I principles to treat 
hypersomnolence. 

Predictors of Clinical Outcome 

There is limited research on factors that predict success 
or failure with CBT-I, though this represents an exciting 
area of future research. Evidence suggests that client 
factors predicting dropout from treatment include short 
sleep duration and elevated levels of baseline depressive 
symptomotolgy (Ong, Kuo, & Manber, 2008), though, 
in those who complete treatment, more severe insomnia 
and functional impairment at baseline actually predict 
clinical improvement (Van Houdenhove, Buyse, Gabriëls, 
& Van den Bergh, 2011). Clinical improvement 
is also predicted by changes in unhelpful beliefs about 
sleep (Edinger, Wohlgemuth, Radtke, Marsh, & Quillian, 
2001; Morin, Blais, & Savard, 2002). Therapist 
qualities that appear to predict success in group CBT-I 
include client perceptions of therapist affiliation and 
warmth, while therapists perceived as confrontational 
have more client dropout (Constantino et al., 2007). In 
our own clinical experience, we have found that fostering 
a sense of curiosity and experimentation, and 
providing a clear rationale for homework completion, 
makes a big difference in client motivation and treatment 
outcome. 

Treating Insomnia in Mood Disorders 

Sleep disturbance is commonly comorbid with other 
mood disorders (Armitage, 2007), and CBT-I may be 
a particularly useful intervention to stabilize sleep and 
circadian rhythms. For example, individuals with bipolar 
disorder display night-to-night variability in TST 
(Gruber et al., 2009), along with reduced sleep efficiency 
and increased nighttime wakefulness (Eidelman, 
Talbot, Gruber, Hairston, & Harvey, 2010; Harvey, 
Schmidt, Scarna, Semler, & Goodwin, 2005) that may 

respond particularly well to sleep restriction and stimulus 
control. Preliminary studies suggest that CBT-I 
improves unipolar depression when administered in 
combination with antidepressants (Manber et al., 2008) 
or as a stand-alone treatment (Taylor, Lichstein, Weinstock, 
Sanford, & Temple, 2007). 

For practitioners who wish to address sleep problems 
in the context of depression or bipolar disorder, we 
offer the following recommendations. First, routinely 
monitor depression, anxiety, and/or mania symptoms, 
as applicable, at the start of each session. Negotiate a 
safety plan with the client prior to the start of therapy 
should his/her mood grow unstable during treatment. 
If symptoms of depression or mania emerge, evaluate 
changes in TST that may be contributing to decline and 
consider modifying or temporarily suspending sleep 
restriction or stimulus control if necessary. Finally, we 
encourage practitioners to monitor sleepiness regularly, 
using an instrument such as the Epworth Sleepiness 
Scale (Johns, 1991). When Epworth levels reach clinical 
significance (a score of 10), discourage clients from 
driving or engaging in other potentially unsafe behaviors 
during periods of drowsiness. 

Adapting CBT‑I to Treat Hypersomnolence 

As with insomnia, several authors have raised the possibility 
that psychological mechanisms may contribute 
to the maintenance of hypersomnolence, or too much 
sleep (Billiard, Dolenc, Aldaz, Ondze, & Besset, 1994; 
Jacobson, Martell, & Dimidjian, 2001; Nofzinger et al., 
1991). If these hypotheses are supported empirically, 
there may be utility in developing a psychological intervention 
for hypersomnolence. We have been developing 
a four- to eight-session multicomponent psychological 
intervention, briefly described below, though we emphasize 
that this approach awaits empirical evaluation. 
A number of the components used to treat hypersomnolence 
are adaptations or extensions of the interventions 
for insomnia reviewed earlier. 

As in insomnia treatment, hypersomnolence treatment 
begins with a functional analysis and case formulation. 
Clinicians probe for the frequency, intensity, 
and duration of the hypersomnolence, as well as 
its antecedents, behaviors, and consequences. Clients 
complete a daily sleep diary, supplementing standard 
sleep diary questions with additional probes for energy, 
activity levels, and other contextual/psychological data 
of note. The first session also involves MI, including 
a straightforward review of pros and cons of working 


Sleep Disturbance 

toward managing the hypersomnolence (Miller & Rollnick, 
2002). The practitioner and client then set goals 
for treatment. The first and most obvious goal we set 
is for sleep (typically reducing sleep to approximately 
8 hours per night), though we find it is equally critical 
to set goals for life. The latter is based on our clinical 
experience that “having nothing to get up for” is a key 
contributor to hypersomnolence in clients with mood 
disorders. Often the combination of the mood disorder 
and the sleep disorder has led to unemployment and 
disrupted social networks. Without work to get up for 
and family/friends to see, some individuals’ motivation 
to reduce sleep seems to waver. After setting the 
“sleep” and “life” goals for the treatment, the client 
is asked to identify one small step toward these goals 
for the coming week. We engage in problem solving to 
limit the impact of these obstacles on reaching the goal, 
and a method is developed for monitoring the extent to 
which the goal is achieved (e.g., activity scheduling). 

Clients with hypersomnolence also benefit from education 
about a range of issues relating to sleep. Two 
domains have been particularly important. The first 
involves education about the operation of the circadian 
system, the stimulating environmental influences 
acting on it (e.g., light), and the tendency, if left unchecked, 
to move toward a delayed phase. The second 
involves education about sleep inertia described earlier. 
Finally, we work with clients to establish a wind-down 
period, a “wake-up protocol” (e.g., not hitting “snooze” 
on the alarm; making the bed, so that the incentive to 
get back in is reduced; heading for the shower; taking 
a quick brisk walk; getting sunlight), and to minimize 
fluctuation in the sleep–wake schedule across the 
nights of the week. 

Finally, many of the same behavioral experiments 
and surveys described in this chapter appear to effectively 
treat the decreased energy and fatigue that we 
see in hypersomnolence. For example, clients benefit 
from completing an “energy experiment” to experience 
how spending energy can be a useful way to generate 
energy. Other times, we structure an experiment in 
which clients are asked to rate their mood and energy 
before and after engaging in a social activity or leaving 
the house, to illustrate contextual variables that can 
improve mood and sleepiness. Creating a survey that 
emphasizes collecting data on what others do to generate 
energy, to get out of bed, or to fill their time when 
bored can offer helpful strategies. Finally, education 
and experiments on monitoring fatigue versus external 
stimuli can help to break attentional biases in hyper


somnolence. As always, we conclude with a session on 
relapse prevention in which progress is reviewed, gains 
are consolidated, and possible setbacks are discussed. 
In this manner, many of the treatment principles useful 
for insomnia may also be used to treat hypersomnolence. 


referenCes 

Achermann, P., & Borbely, A. A. (2010). Sleep homeostasis 
and models of sleep regulation. In M. H. Kryger, T. Roth, 
& W. C. Dement (Eds.), Principles and practice of sleep 
medicine (5th ed., pp. 431–444). Philadelphia: Elsevier. 

Akerstedt, T., Billiard, M., Bonnet, M., Ficca, G., Garma, L., 
Mariotti, M., et al. (2002). Awakening from sleep. Sleep 
Medicine Reviews, 6, 267–286. 

American Academy of Sleep Medicine. (2005). International 
classification of sleep disorders (ICSD): Diagnostic and 
coding manual (2nd ed.). Westchester, IL: Author. 

American Psychiatric Association. (2000). Diagnostic and 
statistical manual of mental disorders (4th ed., text rev.). 
Washington, DC: Author. 

American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and 
statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.). Arlington, 
VA: Author. 

Ancoli-Israel, S. (2009). Sleep and its disorders in aging populations. 
Sleep Medicine, 10(Suppl. 1), S7–S11. 

Armitage, R. (2007). Sleep and circadian rhythms in mood 
disorders. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 433(Suppl.), 
104–115. 

Banks, S., & Dinges, D. F. (2010). Chronic sleep deprivation. 
In M. H. Kryger, T. Roth, & W. C. Dement (Eds.), Principles 
and practice of sleep medicine (5th ed., pp. 67–75). 
Philadelphia: Elsevier/Saunders. 

Bastien, C. H., Vallieres, A., & Morin, C. M. (2001). Validation 
of the Insomnia Severity Index as an outcome measure 
for insomnia research. Sleep Medicine, 2, 297–307. 

Beck, J. S. (1995). Cognitive therapy: Basics and beyond. 
New York: Guilford Press. 

Belleville, G., Guay, C., Guay, B., & Morin, C. M. (2007). 
Hypnotic taper with or without self-help treatment of insomnia: 
a randomized clinical trial. Journal of Consulting 
Clinical Psychology, 75, 325–335. 

Besset, A., Villemin, E., Tafti, M., & Billiard, M. (1998). 
Homeostatic process and sleep spindles in patients with 
sleep-maintenance insomnia: Effect of partial (21 h) sleep 
deprivation. Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology, 
107(2), 122–132. 

Billiard, M., Dolenc, L., Aldaz, C., Ondze, B., & Besset, A. 
(1994). Hypersomnia associated with mood disorders: A 
new perspective. Journal of Psychosomatic Research, 
38(Suppl. 1), 41–47. 

Bixler, E. O., Kales, A., Leo, L. A., & Slye, T. A. (1973). 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

A comparison of subjective estimates and objective sleep 
laboratory findings in insomnia patients. Sleep Research, 
2, 143. 

Bootzin, R. R. (1972). Stimulus control treatment for insomnia. 
Proceedings of the American Psychological Association, 
7, 395–396. 

Bootzin, R. R., Epstein, D., & Wood, J. M. (1991). Stimulus 
control instructions. In P. J. Hauri (Ed.), Case studies in 
insomnia (pp. 19–28). New York: Plenum Press. 

Borbely, A. A. (1982). A two process model of sleep regulation. 
Human Neurobiology, 1, 195–204. 

Borkovec, T. D. (1982). Insomnia. Journal of Consulting and 
Clinical Psychology, 50, 880–895. 

Breslau, N., Roth, T., Rosenthal, L., & Andreski, P. (1996). 
Sleep disturbance and psychiatric disorders: A longitudinal 
epidemiological study of young adults. Biological Psychiatry, 
39(6), 411–418. 

Buysse, D., Ancoli-Israel, S., Edinger, J. D., Lichstein, K. L., 
& Morin, C. M. (2006). Recommendations for a standard 
research assessment of insomnia. Sleep, 29, 1155–1173. 

Buysse, D. J., Reynolds, C. F., Monk, T. H., Berman, S. R., & 
Kupfer, D. J. (1989). The Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index: 
A new instrument for psychiatric practice and research. 
Psychiatry Research, 28, 193–213. 

Carney, C. E., Buysse, D. J., Ancoli-Israel, S., Edinger, J. D., 
Krystal, A. D., Lichstein, K. L., et al. (2012). The consensus 
sleep diary: Standardizing prospective sleep selfmonitoring. 
Sleep, 35(2), 287–302. 

Carskadon, M. A., Dement, W. C., Mitler, M. M., Guilleminault, 
C., Zarcone, V. P., & Spiegel, R. (1976). Selfreports 
versus sleep laboratory findings in 122 drug-free 
subjects with complaints of chronic insomnia. American 
Journal of Psychiatry, 133(12), 1382–1388. 

Chambless, D. L., & Hollon, S. D. (1998). Defining empirically 
supported theories. Journal of Consulting and Clinical 
Psychology, 1, 7–18. 

Chesson, A. L., Jr., Anderson, W. M., Littner, M., Davila, D., 
Hartse, K., Johnson, S., et al. (1999). Practice parameters 
for the nonpharmacologic treatment of chronic insomnia 
(An American Academy of Sleep Medicine report, Standards 
of Practice Committee of the American Academy of 
Sleep Medicine). Sleep, 22, 1128–1133. 

Clark, D. M., Ehlers, A., Hackmann, A., McManus, F., Fennell, 
M., Grey, N., et al. (2006). Cognitive therapy versus 
exposure and applied relaxation in social phobia: A randomized 
controlled trial. Journal of Consulting and Clinical 
Psychology, 74, 568–578. 

Clark, D. M., Salkovskis, P. M., Hackmann, A., Wells, A., 
Ludgate, J., & Gelder, M. (1999). Brief cognitive therapy 
for panic disorder: A randomized controlled trial. Journal 
of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 67, 583–589. 

Clarke, G., & Harvey, A. G. (2012). The complex role of sleep 
in adolescent depression. Child and Adolescent Psychiatric 
Clinics of North America, 21(2), 385–400. 

Constantino, M. J., Manber, R., Ong, J., Kuo, T. F., Huang, J., 

& Arnow, B. A. (2007). Patient expectations and therapeutic 
alliance as predictors of outcome in group cognitivebehavioral 
therapy for insomnia. Behavioral Sleep Medicine, 
5(3), 210–228. 

Crick, F., & Mitchison, G. (1983). The function of dream 
sleep. Nature, 304, 111–114. 

Crowley, S. J., & Carskadon, M. A. (2010). Modifications 
to weekend recovery sleep delay circadian phase in older 
adolescents. Chronobiology International, 27, 1469–1492. 

Edinger, J. D., Bonnet, M. H., Bootzin, R. R., Doghramji, 
K., Dorsey, C. M., Espie, C. A., et al. (2004). Derivation 
of research diagnostic criteria for insomnia: Report of 
an American Academy of Sleep Medicine Work Group. 
Sleep, 27, 1567–1596. 

Edinger, J. D., Wohlgemuth, W. K., Radtke, R. A., Marsh, G. 
R., & Quillian, R. E. (2001). Does cognitive-behavioral 
insomnia therapy alter dysfunctional beliefs about sleep? 
Sleep, 24, 591–599. 

Edinger, J. D., Wyatt, J. K., Olsen, M. K., Stechuchak, K. M., 
Carney, C. E., Chiang, A., et al. (2009). Reliability and 
validity of the Duke Structured Interview for Sleep Disorders 
for insomnia screening. Sleep, 32, A265. 

Eidelman, P., Talbot, L. S., Gruber, J., Hairston, I., & Harvey, 

A. G. (2010). Sleep architecture as correlate and predictor 
of symptoms and impairment in inter-episode bipolar 
disorder: Taking on the challenge of medication effects. 
Journal of Sleep Research, 19(4), 516–524. 
Espie, C. A. (2002). Insomnia: Conceptual issues in the development, 
persistence, and treatment of sleep disorder in 
adults. Annual Review of Psychology, 53, 215–243. 

Ford, D. E., & Kamerow, D. B. (1989). Epidemiologic study 
of sleep disturbances and psychiatric disorders. An opportunity 
for prevention? Journal of the American Medical 
Association, 262, 1479–1484. 

Gruber, J., Harvey, A. G., Wang, P. W., Brooks, J. O., III, 
Thase, M. E., Sachs, G. S., et al. (2009). Sleep functioning 
in relation to mood, function, and quality of life at entry to 
the Systematic Treatment Enhancement Program for Bipolar 
Disorder (STEP-BD). Journal of Affective Disorders, 
114(1–3), 41–49. 

Harvey, A. G. (2001). Insomnia: Symptom or diagnosis? 
Clinical Psychology Review, 21, 1037–1059. 

Harvey, A. G. (2002a). A cognitive model of insomnia. Behaviour 
Research and Therapy, 40, 869–894. 

Harvey, A. G. (2002b). Trouble in bed: The role of pre-sleep 
worry and intrusions in the maintenance of insomnia 
[Special issue]. Journal of Cognitive Psychotherapy, 16, 
161–177. 

Harvey, A. G. (2003a). The attempted suppression of presleep 
cognitive activity in insomnia. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 
27, 593–602. 

Harvey, A. G. (2003b). Beliefs about the utility of presleep 
worry: An investigation of individuals with insomnia 
and good sleepers. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 27, 
403–414. 


Sleep Disturbance 

Harvey, A. G. (2005). A cognitive theory of and therapy for 
chronic insomnia. Journal of Cognitive Psychotherapy: 
An International Quarterly, 19, 41–60. 

Harvey, A. G. (2008). Sleep and circadian rhythms in bipolar 
disorder: Seeking synchrony, harmony, and regulation. 
American Journal of Psychiatry, 165, 820–829. 

Harvey, A. G. (2009). The adverse consequences of sleep 
disturbance in pediatric bipolar disorder: Implications for 
intervention. Child and Adolescent Psychiatry Clinics of 
North America, 18(2), 321–338. 

Harvey, A. G., & Eidelman, P. (2012). Intervention to reduce 
unhelpful beliefs about sleep. In M. Perlis, M. Aloia, & B. 
Kuhn (Eds.), Behavioral sleep medicine treatment protocols 
(pp. 79–90). New York: Academic Press. 

Harvey, A. G., Schmidt, D. A., Scarna, A., Semler, C. N., 
& Goodwin, G. M. (2005). Sleep-related functioning in 
euthymic patients with bipolar disorder, patients with insomnia, 
and subjects without sleep problems. American 
Journal of Psychiatry, 162, 50–57. 

Harvey, A. G., Sharpley, A. L., Ree, M. J., Stinson, K., & 
Clark, D. M. (2007). An open trial of cognitive therapy 
for chronic insomnia. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 
45, 2491–2501. 

Harvey, A. G., & Talbot, L. (2012a). Behavioral experiments. 
In M. Perlis, M. Aloia, & B. Kuhn (Eds.), Behavioral sleep 
medicine treatment protocols (pp. 71–78). New York: Academic 
Press. 

Harvey, A. G., & Talbot, L. S. (2012b). Intervention to reduce 
misperception. In M. Perlis, M. Aloia, & B. Kuhn (Eds.), 
Behavioral sleep medicine treatment protocols (pp. 91– 
96). New York: Academic Press. 

Harvey, A. G., & Tang, N. K. (2012). (Mis)perception of 
sleep in insomnia: A puzzle and a resolution. Psychological 
Bulletin, 138(1), 77–101. 

Harvey, A. G., Tang, N. K. Y., & Browning, L. (2005). Cognitive 
approaches to insomnia. Clinical Psychology Review, 
25, 593–611. 

Hoddes, E., Zarcone, V., Smythe, H., Phillips, R., & Dement, 

W. C. (1973). Quantification of sleepiness: A new approach. 
Psychophysiology, 10, 431–436. 
Hohagen, F., Rink, K., Kappler, C., Schramm, E., Riemann, 
D., Weyerer, S., et al. (1993). Prevalence and treatment of 
insomnia in general practice: A longitudinal study. European 
Archives of Psychiatry and Clinical Neuroscience, 
242, 329–336. 

Irwin, M. R., Cole, J. C., & Nicassio, P. M. (2006). Comparative 
meta-analysis of behavioral interventions for insomnia 
and their efficacy in middle-aged adults and in older 
adults 55+ years of age. Health Psychology, 25, 3–14. 

Jacobson, N., Martell, C., & Dimidjian, S. (2001). Behavioral 
activation treatment for depression: Returning to contextual 
roots. Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 8, 
255–270. 

Jansson, M., & Linton, S. J. (2007). Psychological mechanisms 
in the maintenance of insomnia: Arousal, distress, 

and sleep-related beliefs. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 
45(3), 511–521. 

Jean-Louis, G., von Gizycki, H., Zizi, F., Spielman, A., 
Hauri, P., & Taub, H. (1997). The actigraph data analysis 
software: II. A novel approach to scoring and interpreting 
sleep-wake activity. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 85, 
219–226. 

Jenni, O. G., Achermann, P., & Carskadon, M. A. (2005). 
Homeostatic sleep regulation in adolescents. Sleep, 28, 
1446–1454. 

Johns, M. W. (1991). A new method for measuring daytime 
sleepiness: The Epworth sleepiness scale. Sleep, 14, 540– 
545. 

Karni, A., Tanne, D., Rubenstien, B. S., Askenasy, J. J. M., & 
Sagi, D. (1994). Dependence on REM sleep of overnight 
improvement of a perceptual skill. Science, 265, 679–682. 

Klerman, E. B., & Dijk, D. J. (2008). Age-related reduction in 
the maximal capacity for sleep—implications for insomnia. 
Current Biology, 18(15), 1118–1123. 

Kryger, M. H., Roth, T., & Dement, W. C. (2010). Principles 
and practice of sleep medicine (5th ed.). Philadelphia: 
Saunders. 

Lack, L. C., & Bootzin, R. R. (2003). Circadian rhythm factors 
in insomnia and their treatment. In M. Perlis & K. 
Lichstein (Eds.), Treatment of sleep disorders: Principles 
and practice of behavioral sleep medicine (pp. 305–343). 
New York: Wiley. 

Lichstein, K. (2000). Secondary insomnia. In K. Lichstein & 

C. Morin (Eds.), Treatment of late-life insomnia (pp. 297– 
319). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
Lichstein, K. L., Durrence, H. H., Taylor, D. J., Bush, A. J., 
& Riedel, B. W. (2003). Quantitative criteria for insomnia. 
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 41, 427–445. 

Lichstein, K. L., Peterson, B. A., Riedel, B. W., Means, M. 
K., Epperson, M. T., & Aguillard, R. N. (1999). Relaxation 
to assist sleep medication withdrawal. Behavior Modification, 
23(3), 379–402. 

Lichstein, K. L., & Rosenthal, T. L. (1980). Insomniacs’ 
perceptions of cognitive versus somatic determinants of 
sleep disturbance. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 89, 
105–107. 

Lichstein, K. L., Stone, K. C., Donaldson, J., Nau, S. D., 
Soeffing, J. P., Murray, D., et al. (2006). Actigraphy validation 
with insomnia. Sleep, 29, 232–239. 

Manber, R., Edinger, J. D., Gress, J. L., San Pedro-Salcedo, 

M. G., Kuo, T. F., & Kalista, T. (2008). Cognitive behavioral 
therapy for insomnia enhances depression outcome 
in patients with comorbid major depressive disorder and 
insomnia. Sleep, 31(4), 489–495. 
Miller, W. R., & Rollnick, S. (2002). Motivational interviewing: 
Preparing people for change (2nd ed.). New York: 
Guilford Press. 

Montgomery, P., & Dennis, J. (2003). Cognitive behavioural 
interventions for sleep problems in adults aged 60+. Cochrane 
Database of Systematic Reviews, 1, CD003161. 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

Morgenthaler, T., Alessi, C., Friedman, L., Owens, J., Kapur, 
V., Boehlecke, B., et al. (2007). Practice parameters for 
the use of actigraphy in the assessment of sleep and sleep 
disorders: An update for 2007. Sleep, 30(4), 519–529. 

Morin, C. M. (1993). Insomnia: Psychological assessment 
and management. New York: Guilford Press. 

Morin, C. M., Blais, F., & Savard, J. (2002). Are changes in 
beliefs and attitudes about sleep related to sleep improvements 
in the treatment of insomnia? Behaviour Research 
and Therapy, 40, 741–752. 

Morin, C. M., Bootzin, R. R., Buysse, D. J., Edinger, J., D., 
Espie, C. A., & Lichstein, K. L. (2006). Psychological and 
behavioral treatment of insomnia: An update of recent evidence 
(1998–2004). Sleep, 29, 1396–1406. 

Morin, C. M., Culbert, J. P., & Schwartz, S. M. (1994). Nonpharmacological 
interventions for insomnia: A metaanalysis 
of treatment efficacy. American Journal of Psychiatry, 
151, 1172–1180. 

Morin, C. M., & Espie, C. A. (2003). Insomnia: A clinical 
guide to assessment and treatment. New York: Kluwer 
Academic/Plenum Press. 

Morin, C. M., Gaulier, B., Barry, T., & Kowatch, R. A. (1992). 
Patients’ acceptance of psychological and pharmacological 
therapies for insomnia. Sleep, 15, 302–305. 

Morin, C. M., Hauri, P. J., Espie, C. A., Spielman, A. J., 
Buysse, D. J., & Bootzin, R. R. (1999). Nonpharmacologic 
treatment of chronic insomnia: An American Academy of 
Sleep Medicine review. Sleep, 22, 1134–1156. 

Morin, C. M., Koetter, U., Bastien, C., Ware, J. C., & Wooten, 
V. (2005). Valerian–hops combination and diphenhydramine 
for treating insomnia: A randomized placebocontrolled 
clinical trial. Sleep, 28(11), 1465–1471. 

Morin, C. M., Vallieres, A., Guay, B., Ivers, H., Savard, J., 
Merette, C., et al. (2009). Cognitive behavioral therapy, 
singly and combined with medication, for persistent insomnia: 
A randomized controlled trial. Journal of the 
American Medical Association, 301(19), 2005–2015. 

Murtagh, D. R., & Greenwood, K. M. (1995). Identifying 
effective psychological treatments for insomnia: A metaanalysis. 
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 
63, 79–89. 

Neitzert Semler, C., & Harvey, A. G. (2004). Monitoring for 
sleep-related threat: A pilot study of the sleep associated 
monitoring index (SAMI). Psychosomatic Medicine, 66, 
242–250. 

National Institutes of Health. (2005). National Institutes of 
Health State of the Science Conference Statement: Manifestations 
and management of chronic insomnia in adults, 
Sleep, 28, 1049–1057. 

Nofzinger, E. A., Thase, M. E., Reynolds, C. F., III, Himmelhoch, 
J. M., Mallinger, A., Houck, P., et al. (1991). 
Hypersomnia in bipolar depression: A comparison with 
narcolepsy using the multiple sleep latency test. American 
Journal of Psychiatry, 148(9), 1177–1181. 

Ohayon, M. M. (2002). Epidemiology of insomnia: What we 
know and what we still need to learn. Sleep Medicine Reviews, 
6, 97–111. 

Ong, J. C., Kuo, T. F., & Manber, R. (2008). Who is at risk 
for dropout from group cognitive-behavioral theapy for 
insomnia? Journal of Psychosomatic Research, 64(4), 
419–425. 

Paquet, J., Kawinska, A., & Carrier, J. (2007). Wake detection 
capacity of actigraphy during sleep. Sleep, 30(10), 
1362–1369. 

Perlis, M., Aloia, M., & Kuhn, B. (Eds.). (2012). Behavioral 
sleep medicine treatment protocols. New York: Academic 
Press. 

Perlis, M., & Lichstein, K. (Eds.). (2003). Treating sleep disorders: 
Principles and practice of behavioral sleep medicine. 
New York: Wiley. 

Perlis, M. L., Smith, M. T., & Pigeon, W. R. (2005). Etiology 
and pathophysiology of insomnia. In M. H. Kryger, T. 
Roth, & W. C. Dement (Eds.), Principles and practice of 
sleep medicine (4th ed., pp. 714–725). Philadelphia: Elsevier/
Saunders. 

Ree, M., & Harvey, A. G. (2004a). Insomnia. In J. Bennett-
Levy, G. Butler, M. Fennell, A. Hackman, M. Mueller, & 

D. Westbrook (Eds.), Oxford guide to behavioural experiments 
in cognitive therapy (pp. 287–305). Oxford, UK: 
Oxford University Press. 
Ree, M., & Harvey, A. G. (2004b). Investigating safety behaviours 
in insomnia: The development of the Sleep-
Related Behaviours Questionnaire (SRBQ). Behaviour 
Change, 21, 26–36. 

Ree, M. J., Harvey, A. G., Blake, R., Tang, N. K., & 
Shawe-Taylor, M. (2005). Attempts to control unwanted 
thoughts in the night: Development of the thought control 
questionnaire-insomnia revised (TCQI-R). Behaviour Research 
and Therapy, 43, 985–998. 

Reite, M., Buysse, D., Reynolds, C., & Mendelson, W. (1995). 
The use of polysomnography in the evaluation of insomnia. 
Sleep, 18, 58–70. 

Roth, T., Coulouvrat, C., Hajak, G., Lakoma, M. D., Sampson, 
N. A., Shahly, V., et al. (2011). Prevalence and 
perceived health associated with insomnia based on 
DSM-IV-TR; International Statistical Classification of 
Diseases and related health problems, Tenth Revision; and 
Research Diagnostic Criteria/International Classification 
of Sleep Disorders, Second Edition criteria: Results from 
the America Insomnia Survey. Biological Psychiatry, 69, 
592–600. 

Rybarczyk, B., Lopez, M., Schelble, K., & Stepanski, E. 
(2005). Home-based video CBT for comorbid geriatric 
insomnia: A pilot study using secondary data analyses. 
Behavioral Sleep Medicine, 3, 158–175. 

Salkovskis, P. M. (1991). The importance of behaviour in the 
maintenance of anxiety and panic: A cognitive account. 
Behavioural Psychotherapy, 19, 6–19. 


Sleep Disturbance 

Sivertsen, B., Omvik, S., Pallesen, S., Bjorvatn, B., Havik, O. 
E., Kvale, G., et al. (2006). Cognitive behavioral therapy 
vs zopiclone for treatment of chronic primary insomnia in 
older adults: A randomized controlled trial. Journal of the 
American Medical Association, 295, 2851–2858. 

Smith, L. J., Nowakowski, S., Soeffing, J. P., Orff, H. J., & 
Perlis, M. L. (2003). The measurement of sleep. In M. L. 
Perlis & K. L. Lichstein (Eds.), Treating sleep disorders: 
Principles and practice of behavioral sleep medicine 
(pp. 29–73). New York: Wiley. 

Smith, M. T., Huang, M. I., & Manber, R. (2005). Cognitive 
behavior therapy for chronic insomnia occurring within 
the context of medical and psychiatric disorders. Clinical 
Psychology Review, 25, 559–592. 

Spielman, A. J., Caruso, L. S., & Glovinsky, P. B. (1987). A 
behavioral perspective on insomnia treatment. Psychiatric 
Clinics of North America, 10, 541–553. 

Spielman, A. J., Saskin, P., & Thorpy, M. J. (1987). Treatment 
of chronic insomnia by restriction of time in bed. Sleep, 
10, 45–56. 

Stepanski, E. J., Zorick, F., Roehrs, T., & Roth, T. (2000). Effects 
of sleep deprivation on daytime sleepiness in primary 
insomnia. Sleep, 23, 215–219. 

Taylor, D. J., Lichstein, K. L., Weinstock, J., Sanford, S., & 
Temple, J. R. (2007). A pilot study of cognitive-behavioral 
therapy of insomnia in people with mild depression. Behavior 
Therapy, 38(1), 49–57. 

Vallieres, A., & Morin, C. M. (2003). Actigraphy in the assessment 
of insomnia. Sleep, 26, 902–906. 

Van Houdenhove, L., Buyse, B., Gabriëls, L. & Van den 

Bergh, O. (2011). Treating primary insomnia: Clinical 
effectiveness and predictors of outcomes on sleep, daytime 
function and health-related quality of life. Journal 
of Clinical Psychology in Medical Settings, 18(3), 312– 
321. 

Van Someren, E. J. (2000). Circadian rhythms and sleep in 
human aging. Chronobiology International, 17, 233–243. 

Walker, M. P., & Stickgold, R. (2006). Sleep, memory, and 
plasticity. Annual Review of Psychology, 57, 139–166. 

Watkins, E., & Baracaia, S. (2001). Why do people ruminate 
in dysphoric moods? Personality and Individual Differences, 
30, 723–734. 

Watts, F. N., Coyle, K., & East, M. P. (1994). The contribution 
of worry to insomnia. British Journal of Clinical Psychology, 
33, 211–220. 

Wicklow, A., & Espie, C. A. (2000). Intrusive thoughts and 
their relationship to actigraphic measurement of sleep: Towards 
a cognitive model of insomnia. Behaviour Research 
and Therapy, 38(7), 679–693. 

Wyatt, J. K., Stepanski, E. J., & Kirkby, J. (2006). Circadian 
phase in delayed sleep phase syndrome: Predictors and 
temporal stability across multiple assessments. Sleep, 29, 
1075–1080. 

Yoo, S. S., Gujar, N., Hu, P., Jolesz, F. A., & Walker, M. P. 
(2007). The human emotional brain without sleep—a prefrontal 
amygdala disconnect. Current Biology, 17, R877– 
R878. 

Zee, P. C., & Turek, F. W. (2006). Sleep and health: Everywhere 
and in both directions. Archives of Internal Medicine, 
166, 1686–1688. 


CHaPter 17 

eating Disorders 

A Transdiagnostic Protocol 

christoPher G. fairBurN 
zafra cooPer 

The fifth edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DsM‑5) clearly 
defines and separates anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa, and recognizes for the 
first time binge‑eating disorder as a specific diagnosis. But many people with serious 
eating disorders do not quite fit these diagnostic criteria and would be lumped into an 
“other specified feeding or eating disorder” category. it is also the case that individuals 
with eating disorders change from one category to another over time. The authors of this 
chapter, involved over the years in the creation of the DsM eating disorder categories, are 
also among the originators of the most successful treatment yet devised for these disorders. 
Thus, it is significant that fairburn and colleagues have moved ahead of the curve 
and created a “transdiagnostic” unified theory and treatment protocol applicable to all 
eating disorders, including those falling into the “other specified” category. (for a similar 
approach to emotional disorders, see Payne, ellard, farchione, fairholme, & Barlow, 
Chapter 6, this volume.) in this chapter fairburn and Cooper describe this state‑of‑theart 
treatment. in what to some readers may be a surprising departure, the authors’ note 
that the central problem requiring intervention is not necessarily dieting, bingeing, low 
weight, or purging, but rather the culturally reinforced abnormal attitudes and beliefs 
regarding shape and weight. The recommendation for applying various treatment components 
in a “modular” fashion speaks to the art of administering this treatment. The 
detailed explication of cognitive‑behavioral therapy as applied to eating disorders should 
be extraordinarily useful to clinicians working with these difficult problems.—D. H. B. 

Clinical eating disorders such as anorexia nervosa, 
bulimia nervosa, and binge-eating disorder are a cause 
of substantial physical and psychosocial morbidity 
among adolescent girls and young adult women. They 
are much less common among men. They typically 
begin in adolescence and may run a chronic course. 
Their effect is pervasive, since they interfere with 

psychological, physical, and social functioning. Once 
established, they are difficult to treat and impose a significant 
burden on health services. In this chapter we 
describe the psychopathology of the eating disorders 
and the mechanisms that cause them to persist. We then 
describe a transdiagnostic cognitive-behavioral treatment 
designed to disrupt these mechanisms. 

670 


Eating Disorders 

classificatioN aND DiaGNosis 

The DSM‑5 Scheme 

The DSM-5 scheme for classifying and diagnosing 
eating disorders recognizes three specific disorders: 
anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa, and binge-eating 
disorder. In addition, there are two residual categories 
termed “other specified feeding or eating disorder” and 
“unspecified feeding or eating disorder,” respectively 
(American Psychiatric Association, 2013). 

In essence, three features needed to be present to 
make a diagnosis of anorexia nervosa: 

1. The overevaluation of shape and weight; that is, 
judging self-worth largely, or even exclusively, in 
terms of shape and weight. 
2. This is often expressed as a strong desire to be 
thin, combined with an intense fear of gaining 
weight and becoming fat. 
3. The active maintenance of an unduly low body 
weight (e.g., maintaining a body weight less than 
85% of that expected or a body mass index ≤ 
17.51). 
Amenorrhea (in postpubertal females), another requirement 
for the diagnosis of anorexia nervosa in the 
previous DSM edition, has been removed due to its 
questionable validity; that is, the majority of female 
patients who meet the other diagnostic criteria are also 
amenorrheic, and those who are not closely resemble 
those who are. 

Three features also need to be present to make a diagnosis 
of bulimia nervosa: 

1. The overevaluation of shape and weight, as in anorexia 
nervosa. 
2. Recurrent binge eating. A “binge” is an episode 
of eating during which an objectively large 
amount of food is eaten, and there is a sense of 
loss of control at the time. 
3. Extreme weight-control behavior, such as strict 
dietary restriction, recurrent self-induced vomiting, 
or marked laxative misuse. 
In addition, to diagnose bulimia nervosa, there is an exclusionary 
criterion, namely, that the diagnostic criteria 
for anorexia nervosa not be met. This criterion ensures 
that it is not possible for patients receiving both diagnoses 
at one time. 

Binge-eating disorder, which was a provisional diagnosis 
in DSM-IV, is now recognized as a full disorder 
in DSM-5. It is designed to denote an eating problem 
characterized by recurrent binge eating in the absence 
of the extreme weight control behavior seen in bulimia 
nervosa and anorexia nervosa. 

No diagnostic criteria are specified for the two residual 
eating disorder diagnoses. 

cliNical features 

Anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa, and most cases 
of other specified eating disorders, share a distinctive 
“core psychopathology” that is essentially the same in 
females and males, adults and adolescents. This is the 
overevaluation of shape and weight. Whereas most people 
evaluate themselves on the basis of their perceived 
performance in a variety of life domains (e.g., the quality 
of their relationships; their work performance; their 
sporting prowess), people with eating disorders judge 
their self-worth largely, or even exclusively, in terms 
of their shape and weight, and their ability to control 
them. This psychopathology is peculiar to the eating 
disorders (and to body dysmorphic disorder) and 
is rarely seen in the general population. It should be 
distinguished from “body shape dissatisfaction,” which 
refers to dislike of aspects of one’s appearance. Some 
degree of body shape dissatisfaction is widespread and 
its presence is sometimes referred to as “normative discontent.” 


The overevaluation of shape and weight results in the 
pursuit of weight loss—note that it is usually weight 
loss that is sought, not a specific weight—and an intense 
fear of weight gain and fatness. Most other features 
of these disorders are secondary to this core psychopathology 
and its consequences (e.g., undereating; 
becoming severely underweight). Thus, in anorexia 
nervosa there is a sustained and successful pursuit of 
weight loss that results in patients becoming severely 
underweight. This pursuit is not seen as a problem: 
Rather, it is valued and, as a consequence, patients 
have little desire to change. For this reason it is often 
other people who are responsible for these patients’ 
entry into treatment. In bulimia nervosa, equivalent attempts 
to restrict food intake are disrupted by repeated 
episodes of loss of control over eating (binges). Generally 
these binges are aversive and a source of distress, 
and they lead patients to seek help. Consequently those 
with bulimia nervosa are easier to engage in treatment, 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

although because of the accompanying shame and secrecy, 
there is typically a delay of many years before 
they divulge their eating problem and enter treatment. 

The core psychopathology of anorexia nervosa and 
bulimia nervosa has other expressions, too. Many patients 
mislabel adverse physical and emotional states as 
“feeling fat” and equate this with actually being fat. In 
addition, many repeatedly scrutinize their bodies, focusing 
on parts that they dislike. This may contribute 
to patients’ overestimation of their size. Others actively 
avoid seeing their bodies, assuming that they look fat 
and disgusting. Equivalent behavior is seen with respect 
to weighing (weight checking), with many patients 
weighing themselves frequently. As a result these 
patients become preoccupied with trivial, day-to-day 
fluctuations, whereas others actively avoid knowing 
their weight but nevertheless remain highly concerned 
about it. 

Anorexia Nervosa 

In anorexia nervosa, the pursuit of weight loss leads patients 
to engage in a severe and selective restriction of 
food intake, avoiding foods viewed as fattening. Generally 
there is no true “anorexia” (loss of appetite) as 
such. The undereating may also be an expression of 
other motives, including asceticism, competitiveness, 
and a desire to attract the attention of others. In the 
early stages of the disorder, undereating may be a goal 
in its own right, with the patient valuing the sense of 
self-control that it confers. Some patients also engage 
in a driven type of exercising that contributes to their 
weight loss. This is characterized by a strong drive to 
exercise, a tendency to overexercise, and giving exercise 
precedence over other aspects of life. Self-induced 
vomiting and other extreme forms of weight control 
(e.g., the misuse of laxatives or diuretics) are practiced 
by a subgroup of these patients, and patients in an overlapping 
group have episodes of loss of control over 
eating, although the amount eaten may not be objectively 
large (“subjective binge eating”). Depressive and 
anxiety features, irritability, lability of mood, impaired 
concentration, loss of sexual appetite, and obsessional 
features are also frequently present. Typically these 
features get worse as weight is lost and improve with 
weight regain. Interest in the outside world also wanes 
as patients become underweight, with the result that 
most become socially withdrawn and isolated. This, 
too, tends to reverse with weight regain. 

Bulimia Nervosa 

The eating habits of those with bulimia nervosa resemble 
those seen in anorexia nervosa. The main distinguishing 
feature is that the attempts to restrict food intake 
are disrupted by repeated episodes of binge eating. 
The frequency of these episodes ranges from once a 
week (the DSM-5 diagnostic threshold) to several times 
a day, and the amount eaten per episode varies but is 
typically between 1,000 and 2,000 kilocalories (kcal). 
In most cases, each binge is followed by compensatory, 
self-induced vomiting or laxative misuse but there is a 
subgroup of patients who do not “purge.” The weight 
of most patients with bulimia nervosa is in the healthy 
range (BMI between 18.5 and 25.0) due to the effects 
of undereating and overeating balancing each other. As 
a result, these patients do not experience the secondary 
psychosocial and physical effects of maintaining a 
very low weight. Depressive and anxiety features are 
prominent in bulimia nervosa—indeed, more than in 
anorexia nervosa—and there is a subgroup of patients 
who engage in substance misuse or self-injury, or both. 
This subgroup, which is also present in some anorexia 
nervosa patients who binge-eat, tends to attract the diagnosis 
of borderline personality disorder. 

Binge‑Eating Disorder 

Patients with binge-eating disorder report recurrent 
binge eating, much as in bulimia nervosa, but their 
eating habits outside the binges are quite different. As 
noted earlier, in bulimia nervosa there is a high level of 
dietary restraint, with most patients attempting to adhere 
to a highly restricted diet when not binge eating. 
In contrast, in binge-eating disorder there is a tendency 
to overeat outside the binges. Indeed, the eating habits 
of patients with binge-eating disorder resemble those of 
people with obesity, albeit with binges superimposed. 
Thus, self-induced vomiting and laxative misuse are 
not present, nor is there any tendency to overexercise. 
Most people who seek treatment for binge-eating disorder 
are overweight or meet criteria for obesity (BMI 
≥ 30.0). 

Other Specified and Unspecified 
Eating Disorders 

The psychopathology of the “other specified” and “unspecified” 
eating disorders in DSM-5, referred to as 


Eating Disorders 

eating disorder NOS in DSM-IV, closely resembles 
that seen in anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa, and 
binge-eating disorder. It is also of comparable duration 
and severity (Fairburn et al., 2007). Conceptually, it is 
helpful to distinguish two subgroups within these categories, 
although there is no sharp boundary between 
them. The first comprises cases that closely resemble 
anorexia nervosa or bulimia nervosa but just fail to 
meet their diagnostic criteria; for example, body weight 
may be marginally above the threshold for anorexia 
nervosa or the frequency of binge eating may be just 
too low for a diagnosis of bulimia nervosa. These cases 
belong to the “other specified feeding or eating disorder” 
category. The second and larger subgroup comprises 
cases in which the clinical features of anorexia 
nervosa and bulimia nervosa are combined in a manner 
that is different than that seen in the two prototypical 
disorders. Such states may be described as “mixed” in 
character and they belong to the “unspecified feeding 
and eating disorder” category. Cases of this type are 
common (Fairburn & Cooper, 2011). 

Readers may come across references to so-called 
“purging disorder,” a term that refers to a state characterized 
by recurrent purging in the absence of binge 
eating. In DSM-5 these cases are placed in the “other 
specified feeding or eating disorder” category. In our 
experience, the great majority of people who meet these 
criteria experience subjective binges and are therefore 
best viewed as having a variant of bulimia nervosa. 

Last, patients who describe overeating that is confined 
to the late evening or night are referred to as 
having “night eating syndrome,” a relatively neglected 
state, and one that is outside the scope of this chapter. 
For information on night eating syndrome and its treatment 
readers are referred to the book by Lundgren, Allison, 
and Stunkard (2012). 

DeveloPMeNt aND suBsequeNt course 

Anorexia nervosa typically starts in adolescence with 
the onset of dietary restriction that becomes progressively 
more extreme and inflexible. In its early stages the 
disorder may be self-limiting and treatment-responsive, 
but if it persists, it tends to become entrenched and requires 
more intensive treatment. In 10–20% of cases, 
it proves intractable and unremitting. Even in patients 
who recover, residual features are common, particularly 
some degree of overconcern about shape, weight, 

and eating. A frequent occurrence is the development 
of binge eating and, in about half the cases, progression 
on to full bulimia nervosa. Most prominent among the 
favorable prognostic factors are early age of onset and 
short history, whereas unfavorable prognostic factors 
include a long history, severe weight loss, binge eating, 
and vomiting. Anorexia nervosa is the one eating 
disorder to be associated with a raised mortality rate, 
with the standardized mortality ratio over the first 10 
years from presentation being about 10. The majority 
of deaths are either a direct result of medical complications 
or due to suicide. 

Bulimia nervosa has a slightly later age of onset, 
typically in late adolescence or early adulthood. It 
usually starts in much the same way as anorexia 
nervosa—indeed, in about one-fourth of cases the 
diagnostic criteria for anorexia nervosa are met for 
a time. Eventually, however, episodes of binge eating 
interrupt the dietary restriction and, as a result, 
body weight rises to normal or near normal levels. The 
disorder is extremely self-perpetuating. Thus, patients 
often present with an unremitting history of 8 years 
or more of disturbed eating. No consistent predictors 
of outcome have been identified, although there is 
evidence that childhood obesity, low self-esteem, and 
signs of personality disturbance are associated with a 
worse prognosis. 

Binge-eating disorder has a rather different age of 
presentation and course. Most of these patients are 
middle-aged and one-third or more are male. This is 
quite unlike patients with anorexia nervosa, bulimia 
nervosa, and the two groups of residual eating disorders, 
who are generally female (about 10% are male) 
and are adolescents or young adults. Clinical experience 
suggests that binge-eating disorder also differs in 
its course, in that it tends to be phasic rather than persistent, 
with most patients describing sustained periods 
lasting many months free from binge eating. Throughout, 
these patients have a general tendency to overeat 
and gain weight. Few report a history of either anorexia 
nervosa or bulimia nervosa. 

Little is known about the development and course 
of the residual eating disorders. Most patients present 
in their adolescence or 20s, as in bulimia nervosa, and 
with a comparable length of history (Fairburn et al., 
2007). Because between one-fourth and one-third of 
patients have had anorexia nervosa or bulimia nervosa 
in the past, their present state is simply the latest expression 
of an evolving eating disorder. 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

the “traNsDiaGNostic” PersPective 

The DSM-5 scheme for classifying eating disorders encourages 
the view that anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa, 
and binge-eating disorder are distinct clinical states, 
each requiring its own form of treatment. It should be 
clear from consideration of their clinical features and 
course over time that the evidence does not support this 
(Fairburn & Harrison, 2003). With the possible exception 
of binge-eating disorder, the eating disorders have 
many features in common, most of which are not seen 
in other psychiatric disorders. Studies of their course 
indicate that patients migrate between these diagnoses 
over time: Indeed, temporal migration is the norm 
rather than the exception. This temporal movement, together 
with the fact that the disorders share the same 
distinctive psychopathology, suggests that common 
“transdiagnostic” mechanisms are involved in the persistence 
of eating disorder psychopathology (Fairburn, 
Cooper, & Shafran, 2003). If correct, this implies that 
treatments capable of successfully addressing these 
maintaining mechanisms should be effective with all 
forms of eating disorder rather than just one. 

the coGNitive‑Behavioral theory 

Bulimia Nervosa 

In common with most evidence-based cognitivebehavioral 
treatments, the theory that underpins the 
cognitive-behavioral treatment for bulimia nervosa 
(CBT-BN) is primarily concerned with the processes 
that maintain the disorder rather than those responsible 
for its development. According to the theory, these patients’ 
dysfunctional scheme for self-evaluation is central 
to the maintenance of the disorder. As noted earlier, 
whereas most people evaluate themselves on the basis 
of their perceived performance in a variety of life domains, 
people with eating disorders judge themselves 
largely, or even exclusively, in terms of their shape and 
weight, and their ability to control them. As a result, 
their lives become focused on shape, weight, and eating, 
with dietary control, thinness, and weight loss 
being actively pursued, while overeating, “fatness,” and 
weight gain are assiduously avoided. Most of the other 
features of bulimia nervosa can be understood as stemming 
directly from this “core psychopathology,” including 
the weight control behavior, the various forms 
of body checking and avoidance, and the preoccupation 

with thoughts about shape, weight, and eating. Figure 

17.1 provides a schematic representation (or “formulation”) 
of the main processes involved. 
The only feature of bulimia nervosa that is obviously 
not a direct expression of the core psychopathology 
is these patients’ binge eating. The cognitivebehavioral 
theory proposes that the binge eating is 
largely a product of the particular way that these patients 
attempt to restrict their eating (i.e., their form 
of dietary restraint), irrespective of whether they actually 
undereat. Rather than adopting general guidelines 
about how they should eat, these patients try to adhere 
to multiple extreme, and highly specific, dietary rules. 
An accompanying tendency—one that involves reacting 
in an extreme and negative fashion to the frequent 
and almost inevitable breaking of these rules—leads 
to interpreting even minor dietary slips as evidence 
of lack of self-control. The result is that patients respond 
by temporarily abandoning their attempts to restrict 
their eating and instead give in to the urge to eat. 
This produces a highly distinctive pattern of eating in 
which attempts to restrict eating are repeatedly interrupted 
by episodes of binge eating. The binge eating 
maintains the core psychopathology by intensifying 
patients’ concerns about their ability to control their 
eating, shape, and weight, and it encourages yet greater 

Binge eating 
Compensatory 
vomiting/laxative 
misuse 
Events and 
associated 
mood change 
Overevaluation of shape and 
weight and their control 
Strict dieting; 
noncompensatory 
weight-control behavior 
figUre 17.1. The cognitive-behavioral theory of the 
maintenance of bulimia nervosa. From Fairburn (2008, 

p. 19). Copyright 2008 by The Guilford Press. Reprinted 
by permission. This figure may be downloaded from www. 
credo-oxford.com. 

Eating Disorders 

dietary restraint, thereby increasing the risk of further 
episodes of binge eating. 

It should be noted that these patients’ dietary slips 
and binges do not come out of the blue; rather, they are 
particularly likely to occur in response to life difficulties 
and any associated mood change, in part because 
binge eating temporarily ameliorates negative mood 
states, and in part because it distracts patients from 
thinking about their difficulties. 

A further process maintains binge eating in those 
patients who practice compensatory “purging” (i.e., 
those who induce vomiting or take laxatives in response 
to specific episodes of binge eating). Patients’ 
mistaken belief in the effectiveness of purging in preventing 
calorie (i.e., energy) absorption undermines a 
major deterrent against binge eating. They do not realize 
that vomiting only retrieves part of what has been 
eaten, and laxatives have little or no effect on energy 
absorption (Fairburn, 2013). 

This well-established cognitive-behavioral account 
of the maintenance of bulimia nervosa has clear implications 
for treatment. It suggests that if treatment is 
to have a lasting impact on binge eating and purging, 
then it also needs to address these patients’ extreme attempts 
to restrict their eating, their overevaluation of 
shape and weight, and their tendency to eat in response 
to adverse events and negative moods. 

Anorexia Nervosa and Other Specified 
Eating Disorders 

The cognitive-behavioral account of the maintenance 
of bulimia nervosa can be extended to all eating disorders. 
As noted earlier, the “transdiagnostic” theory 
highlights the fact that anorexia nervosa and bulimia 
nervosa have much in common (Fairburn et al., 2003). 
They share essentially the same core psychopathology 
with both groups of patients who overevaluate 
shape and weight, and their control, and express this 
psychopathology in similar attitudes and behavior.2 
Thus, patients with anorexia nervosa restrict their 
food intake in the same rigid and extreme way as patients 
with bulimia nervosa, and they, too, may vomit, 
misuse laxatives or diuretics, and overexercise. Binge 
eating does not distinguish the two disorders because 
there is a subgroup of patients with anorexia nervosa 
who binge-eat (with or without compensatory purging). 
The major difference between the two disorders lies in 
the relative balance of the undereating and overeating, 
and its effect on body weight. In bulimia nervosa, body 

weight is usually unremarkable, whereas in anorexia 
nervosa, undereating predominates, resulting in body 
weight that is extremely low and features of starvation 
contributing to the clinical picture and its maintenance. 
Particularly important in this regard is the pronounced 
social withdrawal seen in starvation, since this encourages 
self-absorption while isolating patients from external 
influences that might diminish their overconcern 
with eating, shape and weight. Figure 17.2 shows the 
cognitive-behavioral formulation of the classic “restricting” 
form of anorexia nervosa. 

The processes that maintain bulimia nervosa and 
anorexia nervosa also appear to maintain the clinical 
presentations seen in other specified eating disorders. 
Figure 17.3 shows a composite transdiagnostic formulation. 
It is essentially a combination of the bulimia nervosa 
and restricting anorexia nervosa formulations. In 
our experience, this composite formulation represents 
the core processes that maintain any eating disorder, 
whatever its exact form. The specific processes operating 
in any individual patient depend on the nature of 
the eating disorder psychopathology present. In some 
cases, only a limited number of these processes are ac-

Overevaluation of shape and 
weight and their control 


Strict dieting; 
noncompensatory 
weight-control behavior 


Significantly low weight 

• 
preoccupation with eating 
• 
social withdrawal 
• 
heightened fullness 
• 
heightened obsessionality 
figUre 17.2. The cognitive-behavioral theory of the 
maintenance of anorexia nervosa. From Fairburn (2008, 

p. 21). Copyright 2008 by The Guilford Press. Reprinted 
by permission. This figure may be downloaded from www. 
credo-oxford.com. 

CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

Strict dieting; 
noncompensatory 
weight-control behavior 
Binge eating 
Compensatory 
vomiting/laxative 
misuse 
Significantly 
low weight 
Events and 
associated 
mood change 
Overevaluation of shape and 
weight and their control 
figUre 17.3. The “transdiagnostic” cognitivebehavioral 
theory of eating disorders. From Fairburn 
(2008, p. 21). Copyright 2008 by The Guilford Press. Reprinted 
by permission. This figure may be downloaded 
from www.credo-oxford.com. 

tive (as in most cases of binge-eating disorder), whereas 
in others (e.g., cases of anorexia nervosa in which there 
is binge eating and purging) most of the processes are 
operating. In common with the cognitive-behavioral 
account of the maintenance of bulimia nervosa, this 
transdiagnostic account highlights the processes that 
need to be addressed in treatment, thereby helping the 
clinician design a bespoke treatment to fit the individual 
patient’s psychopathology. 

the research oN treatMeNt 

Consistent with the current way of classifying eating 
disorders, the research on their treatment has focused 
on the particular disorders in isolation. This research 
has been reviewed by Hay and Claudino (2010), and an 
authoritative meta-analysis has been conducted by the 

U.K. National Institute for Clinical Excellence (NICE; 
2004). The majority of the randomized controlled trials 
have focused on adults with bulimia nervosa, with 
the treatment of adolescents receiving far less attention. 
The findings indicate that there is a clear leading treatment, 
a specific form of cognitive behavior therapy for 
bulimia nervosa (CBT-BN). However, this treatment 
is far from being a panacea: At best, half the patients 
who start treatment make a full and lasting response. 
Interpersonal psychotherapy (IPT) is a potential alternative 
to CBT-BN, but it takes 8 to 12 months longer 
to achieve a comparable effect. Antidepressant medication 
(especially fluoxetine at a dose of 60 mg in the 
morning) also has a beneficial effect, but this is not as 
great as that obtained with CBT-BN, and the limited 
evidence available suggests it is often not sustained. 
Combining CBT-BN with antidepressant medication 
conveys little, if any, advantage over CBT-BN alone. 

There has been much less research on the treatment 
of anorexia nervosa, with no treatment supported 
by robust research evidence. In this case, most of the 
work has focused on adolescents, and much of it has 
been concerned with a highly specific form of familybased 
treatment (FBT; Lock, le Grange, Agras, & Dare, 
2001). Despite widespread enthusiasm for FBT (often 
described as the “Maudsley method” because it was 
devised at the Maudsley Hospital in London), it is not 
without its limitations (Lock, 2011; Lock et al., 2010): 
The treatment is not acceptable to some families and 
patients; it renders some patients unable to eat without 
the encouragement of their parents; and fewer than half 
the patients make a full treatment response. 

There is a growing body of research on the treatment 
of binge-eating disorder. Various psychological 
treatments seem reasonably effective and more so than 
when they are used to treat bulimia nervosa or anorexia 
nervosa (Wilson, Grilo, & Vitousek, 2007). Three 
treatments have the greatest support, an adaptation of 
CBT-BN, IPT, and a simplified version of CBT-BN 
termed “guided self-help.” The effects of CBT-BN and 
IPT on binge-eating disorder are remarkably similar, 
both in their extent and time course, which is quite unlike 
the response seen in bulimia nervosa. Overall, it 
appears that binge-eating disorder is more treatmentresponsive 
than the other eating disorders, and that 
shared “nonspecific” psychotherapeutic processes may 
have a potent influence. Perhaps most remarkable is the 
effect of guided self-help (Wilson & Zandberg, 2012). 
This brief intervention (typically 8–10, 20-minute sessions 
delivered by a nonspecialist “facilitator”) has 
been shown to be as effective as 20, 50-minute sessions 
of IPT both at the end of treatment and at 2-year followup 
(Wilson, Wilfley, Agras, & Bryson, 2010). There is 
no drug treatment for binge-eating disorder. Finally, 
it should be noted that none of these treatments has a 
significant effect on comorbid obesity. This is not altogether 
surprising given that much of these patients’ excess 
calorie intake comes from overeating outside their 
binges rather than the binges themselves. 


Eating Disorders 

There has been just one study of the treatment of 
the residual eating disorders, a remarkable omission 
given their prevalence. The findings of this study are 
discussed below. 

The Research on Enhanced Cognitive 
Behavior Therapy 

Relatively recently a transdiagnostic form of cognitive 
behavior therapy has been developed that is designed 
for the full range of clinical eating disorders seen in 
adults, including other specified eating disorders (Fairburn, 
2008; Fairburn et al., 2003). It is based on the 
transdiagnostic theory outlined earlier and was derived 
from CBT-BN. The treatment—enhanced cognitive behavior 
therapy (CBT-E) —is described as “enhanced” 
because it uses a variety of new strategies and procedures 
intended to improve treatment adherence and 
outcome. In addition, it has modules designed to address 
certain obstacles to change that are “external” to 
the core eating disorder, namely, clinical perfectionism, 
low self-esteem, and interpersonal difficulties. Thus, 
there are two forms of CBT-E, a focused form that focuses 
exclusively on the eating disorder psychopathology, 
and a broad form that also addresses the three external 
obstacles to change.3 The treatment also exists in 
two lengths, a 20-week version for patients who are not 
significantly underweight, defined as having a BMI of 

18.5 or more, and a version that can be up to double this 
length for patients with a BMI below 18.5. 
CBT-E, primarily an outpatient treatment, is designed 
to be delivered on an individual rather than a 
group basis, although day patient and inpatient versions 
have been developed (Dalle Grave, 2012). It has also 
been adapted for adolescents (Cooper & Stewart, 2008; 
Dalle Grave, Calugi, Doll, & Fairburn, 2013). 

Research on CBT-E is still at a relatively early stage. 
In the first study of its kind, Fairburn and colleagues 
(2009) recruited from two community-based National 
Health Service centers in the United Kingdom a transdiagnostic 
sample of patients with eating disorders, all of 
whom had a BMI over 17.5 (i.e., in DSM-IV terms, they 
either had bulimia nervosa or eating disorder NOS). 
The patients were randomized to a waiting-list control 
condition, or to either the focused or the broad form of 
CBT-E, and they then entered a closed, 60-week period 
of follow-up. There were two main findings: 

1. The two forms of CBT-E were equally effective 
overall. The size of treatment response suggested 
that CBT-E was more effective than its predecessor, 
CBT-BN, especially in light of the use of few 
trial exclusion criteria (Crow & Peterson, 2009). 

2. There was no difference in treatment response 
between the patients with bulimia nervosa and 
those with eating disorder NOS. 
A second (unpublished) study from Oxford has replicated 
these findings. In addition, an open transdiagnostic 
study from Australia obtained very similar results, 
at least among treatment completers (Byrne, Fursland, 
Allen, & Watson, 2011). Unfortunately, the therapists 
in this study were not trained or supervised by anyone 
expert in CBT-E, so it is difficult to have complete confidence 
in its findings. 

The original U.K. study also included a planned 
moderator analysis (Fairburn et al., 2009). Its findings 
suggested that the broad version of the treatment was 
more effective with patients who had extreme external 
psychopathology of the type it was designed to target, 
whereas the focused version was more effective with 
the remaining patients. 

One other study is worth mentioning. It involved a 
remarkable comparison of CBT-E (focused form, 20 
sessions over 20 weeks) with a longer-term psychoanalytic 
treatment (about 100 sessions over 2 years) in the 
treatment of bulimia nervosa (Poulsen et al., in press). 
Two sets of therapists were used, and each was well 
trained and supervised. The findings were striking in 
that CBT-E was found to be far superior to the psychoanalytic 
treatment both after 20 weeks (the end of 
CBT-E) and at 2 years (the end of the psychoanalytic 
treatment). This was despite the marked discrepancy 
in the number of sessions received and the duration of 
treatment; moreover, it was contrary to any allegiance 
effect because the principal investigators were psychoanalysts. 
The finding is one of the clearest refutations 
of the so-called “dodo bird verdict,” which concludes 
that all psychotherapies are equivalent in their effects 
(Luborsky, Singer, & Luborsky, 1975). 

Until recently, the major outstanding question about 
CBT-E was whether it could be used to treat underweight 
patients (i.e., those with anorexia nervosa or 
underweight forms of other specified eating disorders). 
It is now clear that it can. Thus, it has been shown to 
be associated with a good outcome in three cohorts of 
patients with the disorder, two adult cohorts (total N = 

99) (Fairburn, Cooper, Doll, Palmer, & Dalle Grave, 
2013), and one adolescent cohort (N = 49) (Dalle Grave 
et al., 2013), all of whom were seriously underweight. 

CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

To conclude, there are three main points to note from 
the research on CBT-E: 

1. CBT-E can be used to treat all forms of eating 
disorder in adults. Thus, CBT-E is truly transdiagnostic 
in its scope. This applies to no other 
evidence-based treatment for the eating disorders. 
Therefore, the availability of CBT-E renders 
redundant the need to learn different treatments 
for the different eating disorders (Fairburn 
& Wilson, 2013). 
2. It needs emphasizing that there are good data on 
the use of CBT-E to treat adults with anorexia 
nervosa given that this is sometimes questioned. 
Indeed, there are more data on this application of 
CBT-E than on any other treatment. 
3. CBT-E can also be used to treat adolescents with 
anorexia nervosa. This makes it a potential alternative 
to FBT. A comparison of the two approaches 
is definitely indicated (Dalle Grave et 
al., 2013). 
The remainder of this chapter is devoted to a description 
of the main form of CBT-E, the focused version. 
This is the core version of the treatment, and it forms 
the basis of the variants of CBT-E. It is the version used 
to treat the great majority of adults with an eating disorder, 
so long as they can be managed on an outpatient 
basis. A full description of the focused treatment is provided 
in the complete treatment guide (Fairburn, 2008; 
Fairburn, Cooper, Shafran, et al., 2008b) together with 
details of the broad version (Fairburn, Cooper, Shafran, 
Bohn, & Hawker, 2008). A book by Dalle Grave (2012) 
describes how CBT-E may be modified to make it suitable 
for inpatient, day patient, and intensive outpatient 
settings, and there are two descriptions of the modifications 
needed for adolescents (Cooper & Stewart, 2008; 
Dalle Grave et al., 2013). 

the coNtext of treatMeNt 

The Patient 

CBT-E is a treatment for patients with an eating disorder 
of clinical severity (i.e., the eating disorder psychopathology 
is persistent and significantly interferes 
with the patient’s psychosocial functioning or physical 
health). It is designed for patients age 18 years or more, 
and it is equally suitable for men or women. Because 

it is an outpatient-based treatment, it is essential that it 
be safe for the patient to be managed this way, both in 
physical terms and from the psychiatric point of view. 
In practice this means that the patient’s physical state 
must be stable and that he/she must not be at risk of 
suicide. The treatment is designed for patients with a 
BMI between 15 and 40. Although some patients with 
a BMI below 15 can be treated using outpatient CBT-
E, this is probably best left to experienced therapists. 
The management of such patients is discussed by Dalle 
Grave (2012). The book edited by Mitchell and de 
Zwaan (2012) addresses the management of patients 
with a BMI over 40. 

The Therapist 

There are no specific professional qualifications needed 
to practice CBT-E, but certain background knowledge 
and experience are desirable. First, ideally, the therapist 
should be well informed about psychopathology in 
general and about eating disorder psychopathology in 
particular, and he/she should have experience working 
with patients with eating disorders. Second, therapists 
should also be aware of the medical complications of 
eating disorders and be able to manage them appropriately 
(Fairburn, Cooper, & Waller, 2008b). Third, 
therapists should be happy to implement a short-term, 
psychopathology-focused, treatment and, preferably, 
should have some experience working this way. 

In contrast with many other applications of CBT, 
the gender of the therapist is of some relevance to the 
treatment of patients with eating disorders. Most of 
these patients are female; as a result, female therapists 
may have certain advantages. They may be viewed by 
patients as being more likely to understand their difficulties 
and, in addition, may serve as a role model in 
terms of the acceptance of shape and weight. These 
considerations are minor, however, in comparison with 
being competent at delivering the treatment. Our experience 
indicates that both women and men are capable 
of being excellent CBT-E therapists. 

assessiNG PatieNts aND PrePariNG 
theM for treatMeNt 

The Initial Evaluation Interview(s) 

The initial assessment interview has three interrelated 
goals. The first is to put the patient at ease and begin to 


Eating Disorders 

forge a positive therapeutic relationship. This is important 
for a number of reasons. First, many patients with 
an eating disorder are highly ambivalent about treatment 
because of the “ego-syntonic” nature of their psychopathology 
(especially true of underweight patients), 
because of shame (especially true of those who are 
binge eating), or because they have had adverse treatment 
experiences in the past. The assessing clinician 
needs to be sensitive to the patient’s attitude to the assessment 
interview and ask directly about it. The goal 
is that it be a collaborative enterprise ending with the 
clinician being able to give the patient an expert opinion 
as to the nature of his/her problems and, if indicated, 
the treatment options. 

The second goal is to establish the diagnosis. An apparent 
eating disorder may, for example, turn out to be 
an anxiety disorder (e.g., difficulty eating with others 
due to a social phobia), a presentation of a mood disorder 
(e.g., severe weight loss resulting from a clinical 
depression), or simple overeating (in cases of obesity). 
It is therefore critical to diagnose the problem or problems 
(if there is comorbidity) accurately and evaluate 
their severity in order to decide on the most appropriate 
next step. 

The third goal is to ensure that the patient is safe to 
manage on an outpatient basis. This requires checking 
that there are no reasons to be concerned about the patient’s 
physical health or the risk of suicide. Guidance 
for doing so is provided in the complete treatment guide 
(Fairburn, Cooper, Shafran, et al., 2008b; Fairburn, 
Cooper, & Waller, 2008b). 

Patients are invited to bring others to the appointment 
if they wish. They may simply provide moral 
support (and stay in the waiting area) or also serve as 
informants. The informant’s view is of interest, since 
it can provide a different perspective on the patient’s 
difficulties. Problems may be described that were not 
disclosed by the patient (e.g., that the patient takes an 
inordinate time to eat meals or has extremely small 
portions). However, it is not appropriate to insist that 
informants attend given that some adult patients will 
have kept their eating problem hidden from others and 
would not attend if disclosure were required. The situation 
is different with younger patients when involvement 
of the parents is generally essential. 

Toward the end of the first interview, we weigh patients 
and measure their height. This is an extremely 
sensitive matter for most patients, and some are resistant 
to it. As the patient must be weighed for the 
assessment to be complete, we explain this. We do 

not regard it as appropriate to rely on patients’ selfreported 
weight or height, which can be inaccurate. 
In our experience, patients expect their weight to be 
measured, although many prefer that this not happen. 
At this stage we do not insist on patients knowing their 
weight if they do not wish to, but we like to tell them 
their BMI when discussing the outcome of the assessment. 


We are not in favor of lengthy assessment appointments 
because they are exhausting for the patient. On 
the other hand, we routinely see patients twice as part 
of the assessment process, since we find that a second 
appointment, a week or two later, often adds new information 
of value. On the second occasion patients are 
more relaxed; they sometimes disclose material previously 
withheld; and there is an opportunity to pursue 
matters that require particularly careful exploration 
(e.g., the nature and extent of any comorbid depressive 
features). The second appointment is also a good time 
to discuss treatment options. 

We routinely ask patients to complete certain questionnaires 
prior to the initial appointment. This is useful, 
since it gives us standardized information on the 
nature and severity of patients’ eating problems. The 
two questionnaires we favor are the Eating Disorder 
Examination Questionnaire (EDE-Q; Fairburn & Beglin, 
2008) and the Clinical Impairment Assessment 
(CIA; Bohn & Fairburn, 2008). The EDE-Q provides a 
measure of the severity of current eating disorder features, 
and the CIA assesses the impact of this psychopathology 
on psychosocial functioning. Both questionnaires 
are short and easy to fill in, and both focus on 
the previous 28 days and are sensitive to change. In addition, 
we include one of the well-established measures 
of general psychiatric features. 

Outcome of the Evaluation 

By the end of the second appointment it should be possible 
to decide on the best course of action. Generally 
there are five possible next steps: 

1. Do “nothing.” This is appropriate with minor eating 
problems that are likely to be self-limiting. 
2. Observe. This is appropriate if the nature or severity 
of the problem is not clear; for example, if 
it seems to be remitting. 
3. Recommend outpatient-based CBT-E. This is 
appropriate for the vast majority of patients. We 
recommend CBT-E for virtually all patients with 

CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

an eating disorder who have a BMI between 15.0 
and 40.0. 

4. Recommend more intensive treatment. We recommend 
more intensive treatment (mainly day 
patient or inpatient treatment) for patients whose 
BMI is below 15.0 and for those whose physical 
state is not stable. This can be followed by 
outpatient-based CBT-E. We may also recommend 
more intensive treatment when CBT-E 
fails to be of benefit. 
5. Recommend referral elsewhere. This is appropriate 
when the problem is not an eating disorder 
(e.g., an anxiety or mood disorder). 
If patients have not benefited from CBT in the past, 
it merits thought whether it is appropriate to offer them 
the same treatment a second time. On the other hand, 
it is possible that a patient’s circumstances may now 
be more conducive to a good outcome than in the past, 
or the patient may be more motivated than before. It is 
important to note that while patients may report having 
had CBT before, it often emerges that it was quite 
different in character from CBT-E. It is always worth 
finding out exactly what the prior treatment involved. 

Contraindications to Starting CBT‑E 
Immediately 

There are certain contraindications to embarking upon 
CBT-E straightaway. Most of these apply to any psychological 
treatment for an eating disorder. The main 
contraindications are as follows: 

Comorbid Clinical Depression 

Most patients with an eating disorder have secondary 
depressive features but a sizable subgroup has an independent, 
but interacting, clinical depression. The identification 
and management of clinical depression in patients 
with eating disorders is discussed in detail in the 
complete treatment guide (Fairburn, Cooper, & Waller, 
2008a). The presence of a clinical depression interferes 
with psychological treatment in a number of ways. Depressive 
thinking results in patients being unduly negative 
about the possibility of change and the reduction 
in drive has a similar effect. Concentration impairment 
is also a problem, since it results in information not 
being retained. Once the depression has been treated, 
however, CBT-E can start and such patients are often 
particularly highly motivated. 

It is important to add that other, co-occurring forms 
of psychopathology (e.g., anxiety disorders, personality 
disorders) are not contraindications to CBT-E. Thus, 
the research on CBT-BN has typically included patients 
with comorbid Axis I and Axis II disorders, neither of 
which has been shown to be consistent predictors of 
outcome. 

Significant Substance Misuse 

Intoxication in treatment sessions renders the sessions 
virtually worthless, and persistent intoxication outside 
sessions severely undermines the patient’s ability to 
utilize CBT-E. Once the substance misuse has been addressed 
CBT-E can start. 

Major Life Difficulties or Crises 

These are distractions that interfere with treatment. It is 
often best to delay treatment until the crisis has passed. 

Inability to Attend Regularly 

A central feature of CBT-E is establishing and maintaining 
“therapeutic momentum.” This requires that 
appointments be frequent (especially in the early stages) 
and regular. We ask patients to guarantee that there 
will be no breaks in their attendance in the first 6 weeks 
and no breaks of longer than two consecutive weeks 
throughout the rest of treatment. If this is impossible, 
say, because of a prebooked vacation, we prefer to defer 
starting treatment. Patients generally understand and 
respect the rationale behind this stance. They can see 
that we are taking their treatment seriously and do not 
want them to have a “false start.” 

Therapist Absence 

The need to establish and maintain therapeutic momentum 
also places an obligation on the therapist. If 
the therapist is going to be away in the first 6 weeks 
of treatment, it is best to delay its start. Ways of minimizing 
the impact of therapist absence are discussed 
in the treatment guide (Fairburn, Cooper, Shafran, et 
al., 2008b). 

Describing CBT‑E to the Patient 

If CBT-E is to be recommended, it is important that it 
be accurately portrayed. Once this has been done, pos



Eating Disorders 

sibly with the aid of an information sheet (obtainable 
from www.credo-oxford.com), and patients have had 
an opportunity to ask questions, it is our practice to ask 
them to think over what has been proposed and let us 
know within a week what they have decided. In our experience, 
virtually all of them say that they would like 
to proceed with the treatment. 

overview of the treatMeNt 

Length of Treatment 

CBT-E is a short-term, time-limited, highly individualized 
psychological treatment, which is why it is best delivered 
on a one-to-one basis. For patients who are not 
significantly underweight (which may be defined in this 
context as having a BMI above 18.54) an initial assessment 
appointment followed by 20 fifty-minute treatment 
sessions over 20 weeks is generally sufficient. For 
patients below this weight, treatment needs to be longer, 
often involving about 40 sessions over 40 weeks. 
In this chapter, we describe the 20-week treatment first, 
then the adaptations needed for underweight patients. 

The fact that CBT-E is usually time-limited might be 
thought to be inconsistent with the claim that it is individualized. 
To an extent this is true, but our experience 
is that the recommended number of treatment sessions 
is sufficient, but not excessive, for the great majority 
of patients. There are major advantages to working 
within a fixed time frame, and in our view these 
outweigh the potential disadvantage of standardizing 
the length of treatment. The main advantage is that a 
fixed time frame concentrates the minds of both patient 
and therapist. It encourages the establishment of the 
therapeutic momentum that is needed early on, and it 
helps to ensure that therapist and patient keep working 
hard to help the patient change. It also makes it much 
more likely that treatment will have a formal ending 
rather than fizzling out, as sometimes happens when 
treatment is open-ended. Having a definite endpoint is 
important, as it ensures that important future-oriented 
topics (e.g., how to minimize the risk of relapse) are 
covered in the final part of treatment. 

There are circumstances under which it is appropriate 
to adjust the length of treatment. It rarely needs to 
be shortened, although this does apply in occasional 
cases in which change is so profound and rapid that 
there is little or no remaining psychopathology to address. 
Somewhat more often there is a case for extend


ing treatment. The indications for doing this are described 
briefly towards the end of the chapter. 

Structure of the Treatment 

The 20-week version of the treatment has four stages: 

•• 
Stage 1. This is most important. The aims are to 
engage the patient in treatment and change, jointly 
create a formulation of the processes maintaining 
the eating disorder, provide education, address 
weight concerns, and introduce a pattern of regular 
eating. Following the initial preparatory session, 
the appointments are twice weekly for 4 weeks. 

•• 
Stage 2. The aims of this stage is to take stock, review 
progress, identify barriers to change, modify 
the formulation as needed, and plan Stage 3. This 
stage generally comprises two appointments, each 
a week apart. 

•• 
Stage 3. This is the main body of treatment. The 
aim is to address the key mechanisms that are 
maintaining the patient’s eating disorder. There 
are eight weekly appointments. 

•• 
Stage 4. This is the final stage of treatment, and 
the focus is on the future. There are two aims: The 
first is to ensure that the changes made in treatment 
are maintained over the following months, 
and the second is to minimize the risk of relapse 
in the long term. Typically there are three appointments, 
each 2 weeks apart. 

In addition, there is a single review appointment 20 
weeks after treatment has finished. 

The Implementation of CBT‑E 

CBT-E is designed to be a complete treatment in its 
own right. In our view it should not be combined with 
other forms of therapy, nor should it coexist with them. 
Both can detract from the treatment. 

CBT-E should remain focused on the eating disorder, 
more or less, whatever happens. If the patient experiences 
a crisis during treatment that cannot be ignored— 
for example, the parents of one of our younger patients 
disappeared unexpectedly, leaving the patient at a loss 
as to what to do—we arrange one or more “crisis sessions” 
in addition to the CBT-E sessions to address the 
problem in question. This rarely happens, however. 
Very occasionally we suspend CBT-E for a few weeks 
if continuing seems inappropriate. 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

We have observed that some therapists are tempted 
to change therapeutic tack if progress is slow or difficult. 
We think that this is rarely appropriate. Although it 
might be tempting to switch over to another therapeutic 
modality, or add or try to “integrate” other techniques, 
we recommend that the therapist continues to work within 
the framework of CBT-E while trying to understand 
the basis of the relative lack of progress. Indeed, this is 
the strategy that led to the development of CBT-E and 
its broad form in particular (Cooper & Fairburn, 2011). 

the treatMeNt Protocol 

Stage 1: Starting Well 

This is the initial intensive stage of treatment. There 
are a number of interrelated goals, all of which apply, 
regardless of the exact nature of the patient’s eating 
problem. 

The Initial Preparatory Session 

The initial session is typically up to two hours long and 
has four major goals. 

engAging THe PATienT in TreATMenT 
AnD THe ProsPeCT of CHAnge 

A particular challenge in working with patients with 
eating disorders is engaging them in treatment. Many 
come to treatment with misgivings and varying degrees 
of reluctance. It is essential that the therapist understand 
this and be sensitive at all times to the patient’s 
likely ambivalence. 

The initial session is especially important in this 
regard. The patient is evaluating the therapist just as 
much as the therapist is evaluating the patient. Some 
clinicians advocate an initial phase of “motivational 
enhancement.” We agree that engagement in treatment, 
and more especially, in change, is crucial, but contend 
that competently administered CBT-E enhances 
motivation for change and overlaps significantly with 
the strategies of motivational interviewing (Wilson & 
Schlam, 2004). We do not view special non-CBT procedures 
as being required. 

Integral to engaging patients is explaining what 
treatment will involve. With this in mind, it is important 
that patients be fully informed about the treatment 
on which they are embarking. Various topics need to 
be covered: 

1. The nature and style of the treatment. Clearly, 
patients need to be told the name, nature, and 
style of the treatment. 
2. Treatment practicalities. They should also be 
told the number, duration, and frequency of the 
treatment sessions. 
3. In-session weighing. Patients need to be forewarned 
about the in-session weighing that is an 
element of treatment from Sessions 1 or 2 onward. 
The rationale needs to be explained (see 
“Establishing Collaborative Weighing”). We are 
often asked whether patients ever refuse to be 
weighed. The answer is that the occasional patient 
is very reluctant, but in the context of an 
“engaging” initial session and the rationale being 
well explained, we find that refusal is not a problem. 
Our experience is that if one accedes to the 
patient’s fear of in-session weighing, it is difficult 
to introduce the procedure later. 
4. Instillation of “ownership,” enthusiasm, and 
hope. The notion that it is the patient’s treatment, 
not the therapist’s, also needs to be stated. 
Throughout treatment, patients should feel clear 
about what is happening and why. While many 
patients are keen to overcome their eating problem 
and eager for treatment to start, it is important 
to maximize enthusiasm and hope. Part of 
this involves conveying that one is knowledgeable 
about eating disorders in general and the 
patient’s type of eating problem in particular. 
Not infrequently we come across patients who have 
been told that they will never overcome their eating 
disorder. Rarely have we felt that such a statement was 
warranted. Saying something like this sets up a selffulfilling 
prophecy because it undermines any hope of 
recovery that the patient might have had. Research has 
not generated reliable predictors of treatment outcome, 
and our experience over the years has taught us not to 
trust our clinical judgement in this regard. We are continually 
surprised (usually favorably) at our patients’ 
response to treatment. 

Assessing THe nATUre AnD seVeriTy 
of THe PsyCHoPATHology PresenT 

Depending on the context within which one works, the 
person who conducts the initial evaluation interview(s) 
may or may not be the person who subsequently treats 
the patient. In our context, the therapist is often seeing 


Eating Disorders 

the patient for the first time. This means that a second 
assessment of the eating disorder needs to take place, 
so that the therapist is fully in the picture. Inevitably, 
this assessment overlaps to an extent with the initial 
one. This cannot be avoided. 

This particular assessment is treatment-oriented 
rather than diagnostic, so it differs somewhat from the 
one conducted when the patient was first seen. While a 
broad range of topics is covered, the main focus should 
be on the patient’s present state. Mainly, an informationgathering 
style of interviewing is used, but the therapist 
remaining aware of the patient’s likely sensitivity to certain 
topics (e.g., binge eating, self-induced vomiting). 

JoinTly CreATing THe forMUlATion 

The next step is the creation of the “formulation,” that 
is, a personalized visual representation (i.e., a diagram) 
of the processes that appear to be maintaining the patient’s 
eating problem. This is done in the initial session 
unless the patient is significantly underweight (see 
below) or the eating disorder is unusual and difficult 
to understand, in which case it is best delayed until the 
next session, so that the therapist has ample time to 
think over its likely form. 

The creation of the formulation has a number of 
purposes: It helps to engage the patient in treatment; 
it involves “decentering,” which is central to helping 
patients change; it conveys the notion that eating problems 
are understandable and maintained by a variety 
of interacting self-perpetuating mechanisms; and by 
highlighting the maintaining mechanisms, it provides a 
guide to what needs to be targeted in treatment. 

A composite transdiagnostic formulation was shown 
in Figure 17.3. This should be used by the therapist as a 
template from which the personalized formulation can 
be derived, one that matches the particular clinical features 
present. The more familiar the therapist becomes 
with the template formulation, the easier it is to create 
an individualized one. We have not encountered any 
patients whose eating problems cannot be formulated 
in this way. 

The formulation should focus on the main mechanisms 
that appear likely to be maintaining the patient’s 
eating problem. It does not need to be comprehensive 
(as this risks the formulation being over-detailed and 
confusing), and it is not concerned with the origins of 
the problem. 

The formulation, usually referred to as the “diagram” 
or “picture,” should be drawn out, step by step, 

in an unhurried manner, with the therapist taking the 
lead but with the patient’s active involvement. It is best 
to start with something that the patient wants to change 
(e.g., binge eating) or something that is clearly a problem 
(e.g., very low weight). Whenever possible and appropriate, 
the patient’s own terms should be used. Since 
the formulation is based on information only just obtained, 
the therapist should make clear that it is provisional 
and will be modified as needed during treatment. 
It is important that patients accept the formulation as a 
credible explanation of their eating problem. Most resonate 
with it. 

Once the formulation has been created, the therapist 
should discuss its implications for treatment. The 
points to be made are that to overcome the eating disorder, 
the patient will need to address not only the things 
that he/she would like to change (e.g., loss of control 
over eating) but also the mechanisms responsible for 
maintaining them (the “vicious circles”). Thus, for 
example, with patients who binge-eat, treatment commonly 
needs to focus on more than simply stopping 
binge eating; instead, it may also need to address the 
patient’s various forms of dieting, his/her ability to deal 
with adverse events and moods without binge eating, 
and his/her concerns about shape and weight. Not addressing 
the range of maintaining processes markedly 
increases the likelihood of relapse. 

esTABlisHing reAl‑TiMe self‑MoniToring 

The final task in the initial session is to establish real-
time self-monitoring. This is the ongoing, “in-themoment” 
recording of relevant behavior, thoughts, 
feelings, and events. It needs to be initiated from the 
outset of treatment and fine-tuned in Session 1. It continues 
throughout treatment and is central to it. It has 
two main purposes: First, it helps the patient identify 
precisely what is happening on a day-to-day basis; 
second, by gaining such awareness of their thoughts, 
feelings, and behavior at the time it happens, patients 
learn that they have choices, and that many things they 
thought were automatic and beyond their control can 
be changed. 

The monitoring record that we employ is simple for 
patients to complete and to use. Exactly what is recorded 
evolves during treatment. At the beginning, the 
emphasis is largely on the patient’s eating habits. When 
describing how to monitor eating habits, it is our practice 
to go over an example (created for this purpose) 
that roughly matches in form the eating habits of the 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

patient in question. Table 17.1 shows our instructions especially in Session 1, when the patient brings them 
for monitoring, and Figure 17.4 shows a completed back for the first time. Reviewing the records should 
monitoring record. be a joint process, with the patient taking the therapist 

We do not recommend using smartphone apps for through each day’s record in turn. There are two asrecording. 
In our experience they provide a far less pects to the review in Session 1: assessing the quality of 
rich source of information and as a result they impede monitoring and assessing the information gained about 
therapy. the patient’s eating habits. In subsequent sessions, the 

Fundamental to establishing accurate real-time re-focus is largely on what has been recorded, although the 
cording is going over the patient’s records in detail, therapist should intermittently ask the patient about the 

table 17.1. instructions for self-Monitoring 

During treatment, it is important that you record everything that you eat or drink, and what is going on 
at the time. We call this “self-monitoring.” Its purpose is twofold: First, it provides a detailed picture 
of how you eat, thereby bringing to your attention and that of your therapist the exact nature of your 
eating problem; and second, by making you more aware of what you are doing at the very time that you 
are doing it, self-monitoring helps you change behavior that may previously have seemed automatic and 
beyond your control. Accurate “real-time” monitoring is central to treatment. It will help you change. 

At first, writing down everything that you eat may be irritating and inconvenient, but soon it will become 
second nature and of obvious value. We have yet to encounter anyone whose lifestyle made it truly 
impossible to monitor. Regard it as a challenge. 

Look at the sample monitoring record to see how to monitor. A new record (or records) should be started 
each day. 

•• 
The first column is for noting the time when you eat or drink anything, and the second is for recording 
the nature of the food and drink consumed. Calories should not be recorded: Instead, you should write 
down a simple (nontechnical) description of what you ate or drank. Each item should be written down 
as soon as possible after it is consumed. Recalling what you ate or drank some hours afterwards will 
not work, since it will not help you change your behavior at the time. Obviously, if you are to record in 
this way, you need to carry your monitoring sheets with you. It does not matter if your records become 
messy or if the writing or spelling is not good. The important thing is that you record everything you 
eat or drink, as soon as possible afterwards. 

•• 
Episodes of eating that you view as meals should be identified with brackets. Snacks and other episodes 
of eating should not be bracketed. 
•• 
The third column should specify where the food or drink was consumed. If this was in your home, the 
room should be specified. 

•• 
Asterisks should be placed in the fourth column, adjacent to any episodes of eating or drinking that you 
felt (at the time) were excessive. This is your judgment, regardless of what anyone else might think. It 
is essential to record all the food that you eat during “binges.” 

•• 
The fifth column is for recording when you vomit (write “V”) or take laxatives (write “L” and the 
number taken) or diuretics (water tablets; write “D” and the number taken). 

•• 
The last column is used in various ways during treatment. For the moment it should be used as a diary 
to record events and feelings that have influenced your eating: For example, if an argument precipitated 
a binge or led you not to eat, you should write that down. Try to write a brief comment every time you 
eat, recording your thoughts and feelings about what you ate. You may want to record other important 
events or circumstances in this column, even if they had no effect on your eating. The last column 
should also be used to record your weight (and your thoughts about it) each time you weigh yourself. 

Every treatment session will include a detailed review of your latest monitoring sheets. You must 
therefore remember to bring them with you! 

Note. From Fairburn (2008, p. 61). Copyright 2008 by The Guilford Press. Reprinted by permission. This table may be 
downloaded from www.credo-oxford.com. 


Eating Disorders 

Day 
......Thursday........... 
Date 
.....March 
21........... 


Time 
Food 
and 
drink 
consumed 
Place 
* 
p 
Context 
and 
comments 
7.30 
8:10 
10:35 
11:45 
6:40 
to 
7:30 
9:30 
Glass 
water 
Whole 
cinnamon 
raisin 
bagel 
Light 
cream 
cheese 
Black 
coffee 
Half 
banana 
Black 
coffee 
Smoked 
turkey 
on 
wheat 
bread 
Light 
mayo 
Diet 
coke 
Piece 
of 
apple 
pie 
1/2 
gallon 
ice 
cream 
4 
slices 
of 
toast 
with 
peanut 
butter 
Diet 
coke 
Raisin 
bagel 
2 
slices 
of 
toast 
with 
peanut 
butter 
Diet 
coke 
Peanut 
butter 
from 
jar 
Raisin 
bagel 
Snickers 
bar 
Diet 
coke—large 
Rice 
cake 
with 
fat-free 
cheese 
Diet 
coke 
Kitchen 
Cafe 
Work—at 
desk 
Cafe 
Kitchen 
Kitchen 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
V 
V 
[118 
pounds—really 
gross] 
Thirsty 
after 
yesterday 
Should 
have 
only 
had 
half 
the 
bagel. 
Must 
not 
binge 
today. 
Better—on 
track 
Usual 
lunch 
Help—I 
can’t 
stop 
eating. 
I’m 
completely 
out 
of 
control. 
I 
hate 
myself. 
I 
am 
disgusting. 
Why 
do 
I 
do 
this? 
I 
started 
as 
soon 
as 
I 
got 
in. 
I’ve 
ruined 
another 
day. 
Really 
lonely. 
Feel 
fat 
and 
unattractive. 
Feel 
like 
giving 
up. 


figUre 17.4. A completed self-monitoring record. V, vomiting. A blank monitoring record may be downloaded from 
www.credo-oxford.com. 

process of recording and the accuracy of the records. 
In these subsequent sessions the review of the records 
generally takes no longer than 10 minutes. Therapists 
need to remember not to address identified problems 
while doing this, but to acknowledge the problems and 
put them on the session agenda. 

The Main Body of Stage 1 

Following the initial preparatory session, there are 
eight twice-weekly appointments. We find that twiceweekly 
appointments are needed in order to build up 
therapeutic momentum and to begin making inroads 

into the patient’s disturbed way of eating. Once-weekly 
sessions are simply not sufficient for most patients. 
Stage 1 has four distinct elements. 

esTABlisHing CollABorATiVe WeigHing 

The collaborative weighing intervention has a number 
of purposes. First, as the patients’ eating habits will 
be changing in treatment they are likely to be anxious 
about any resulting change in their weight. In-session 
weighing provides good, week-by-week data on their 
weight. Second, regular in-session weighing provides 
an opportunity for the therapist to help patients inter



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

pret the number on the scale, which they otherwise are 
prone to misinterpret. Third, collaborative weighing 
addresses one form of body checking, namely, weight 
checking. Many patients with eating disorders weigh 
themselves at frequent intervals, sometimes many 
times a day. As a result they become concerned with 
day-to-day weight fluctuations that would otherwise 
pass unnoticed. Others actively avoid knowing their 
weight but remain highly concerned about it. Generally 
these patients weighed themselves frequently in 
the past but switched to avoidance when they found 
frequent weight checking too aversive. Avoidance of 
weighing is as problematic as frequent weighing, since 
it results in patients having no data to confirm or disconfirm 
their fears about weight gain. 

Patients need to learn how to assess and interpret 
their weight. They should be informed that body weight 
fluctuates throughout the day and from day-to-day according 
to their state of hydration, the state of their bowels 
and bladder, their point in the menstrual cycle, and 
other factors, too. (All this information may be found in 
the second edition of Overcoming Binge Eating [Fairburn, 
2013]; see the next section.) Frequent weighing 
results in preoccupation with inconsequential weight 
fluctuations that tend to be misinterpreted. This leads 
many patients to restrict their eating, whatever the reading 
on the scales. This important maintaining process 
is disrupted by the collaborative weighing intervention. 

Collaborative weighing involves the therapist and 
patient together checking the patient’s weight at the 
outset of the session. This is done once a week (for 
underweight patients, see below). Therapist and patient 
then plot the latest data point on an individualized 
weight graph and jointly interpret the emerging pattern, 
placing particular emphasis on trends over the past 4 
weeks rather than focusing on the latest reading. A crucial 
element of the intervention is that patients do not 
weigh themselves outside these times. 

Patients are also educated about the BMI. They are 
told their BMI and its significance from a health point 
of view. They are advised against having an exact desired 
weight, since this does not allow for natural, dayto-
day fluctuations. Instead they are advised to accept 
a weight range of approximately 6 lb (or 3 kg) in magnitude. 


Almost all patients are anxious about the effects of 
treatment on their weight. Patients with bulimia nervosa 
or other specified eating disorders (who are not 
underweight) generally do not change much in weight. 
Patients should be told that the aim of treatment is to 
give them control over their eating, and thus they will 

have as much control over their weight as possible. It 
is best that patients postpone deciding upon a specific 
goal weight range until near the end of treatment, 
when their eating habits should have stabilized and they 
should be less sensitive about their weight and shape. 
Later in treatment patients are advised against having 
a goal weight (range) that necessitates anything more 
than slight dietary restraint, since dietary restraint will 
maintain preoccupation with food and eating and increase 
their risk of binge eating. 

eDUCATing THe PATienT 
ABoUT eATing ProBleMs 

Myths abound about eating and weight control, and 
some serve to maintain many patients’ eating problem. 
To ensure that they have a reliable source of information, 
we recommend that they read one of the authoritative 
books on eating disorders. We use Overcoming 
Binge Eating because it provides all the information 
needed and it is popular with patients.5 In addition, it 
has a CBT-E orientation and so is highly compatible 
with the treatment—indeed, some therapists use it as 
a workbook for patients as they progress through CBT-

E. It should be noted that Overcoming Binge Eating is 
relevant to all patients with eating disorders, whether or 
not they binge-eat because it discusses and addresses 
all eating disorder psychopathology and not just binge 
eating. 
It is our practice to provide the patient with a copy 
of the book; this way we can ensure that they have it at 
exactly the right point in treatment (generally Week 2). 
We ask patients to annotate the book in the margins, 
putting ticks by sections that particularly apply to them, 
crosses by sections that do not, and question marks by 
sections that they do not understand or would like to 
discuss. We term this procedure “guided reading.” It 
allows patients to be educated in an efficient, thorough, 
and personalized way. 

esTABlisHing “regUlAr eATing” 

Regular eating is fundamental to successful treatment, 
whatever the form of the eating disorder. For patients 
who binge-eat, it reliably results in a rapid decrease in 
frequency. For patients who have a high level of dietary 
restraint, it addresses an important type of dieting, socalled 
“delayed eating,” that is, putting off eating during 
the day. And for patients who are underweight, it 
introduces regular meals and snacks that can be subsequently 
increased in size (see below). 


Eating Disorders 

Regular eating is introduced around Session 3. It is 
the first time that patients are asked to change the way 
that they eat. There are two aspects to the intervention: 
First, the patient should eat at regular intervals through 
the day (usually three planned meals each day, plus 
two planned snacks); second, patients’ eating should be 
largely confined to these meals and snacks. A number 
of points about the intervention need to be stressed: 

1. Patients should be allowed to choose what they 
eat in their planned meals and snacks. The only 
condition is that the meals and snacks must not 
be followed by vomiting, laxative misuse, or any 
other compensatory behavior. 
2. Patients should not be put under pressure to 
change what, or how much, they eat at this point 
in treatment, since doing so tends to result in 
being unable to adopt the pattern of regular eating. 
3. If patients seek advice on what to eat, they should 
be told that the priority is their pattern of eating 
and not what they eat. Nevertheless, if patients 
want guidance, they should be told that it would 
be ideal if they adopted a varied diet with the 
minimum number of avoided foods. 
4. While the new eating pattern should be adhered 
to whatever the patients’ circumstances or appetite, 
it should be adjusted to suit patients’ day-today 
commitments. 
5. Patients should plan ahead. They should always 
know when they are going to have their next meal 
or snack, and there should rarely be more than a 
4-hour interval between the meals and snacks. If 
the day is going to be unpredictable, they should 
plan ahead as far as possible and identify a time 
when they can take stock and if necessary replan 
the rest of the day. 
6. Patients whose eating habits are either chaotic 
or highly restrictive may need to introduce this 
pattern in stages. Patients should be told that 
their sensations of appetite, hunger, and fullness 
are all likely to be disturbed at present and for 
the time being should not be used to determine 
what they eat. Instead, they should adhere to the 
agreed pattern of eating. 
Two rather different strategies may help patients resist 
eating between the planned meals and snacks. The 
first is to help them identify activities that are incompatible 
with eating or make it less likely. They should 
try to predict when difficulties are likely to arise and 

intervene early by arranging activities that are likely to 
help them adhere to the regular eating pattern. Advice 
on how to do this is contained in Overcoming Binge 
Eating. The other strategy is very different. It involves 
asking patients to focus on the urge to eat, recognize 
that it is a temporary phenomenon, and that one does 
not have to give in to it. In this way patients can learn 
to decenter from the urge and simply observe it rather 
than try to eliminate it. As with feelings of fullness, 
they will find that the urge dissipates over time. This 
latter strategy is a difficult one for most patients, especially 
in the early stages of treatment. If it is to be used 
at all, it is best left until later on in treatment, when 
urges to eat between meals and snacks are intermittent 
and less overwhelming. 

inVolVing signifiCAnT oTHers 

CBT-E was developed as an individual treatment for 
adults; hence, it does not actively involve others. Despite 
this, it is our practice to see “significant others” 
if this is likely to facilitate treatment and the patient 
is willing for this to happen. We do this with the aim 
of creating the optimum environment for the patient to 
change. There are two specific indications for involving 
others: 

1. If others can be of help to the patient in making 
changes. 
2. If others are making it difficult for the patient to 
change, for example, by commenting adversely 
on his/her appearance or eating. 
Typically the sessions with others last about 45 
minutes and take place immediately after a routine 
session. We hold up to three such sessions with about 
three-fourths of our patients (with underweight patients 
there may be more such sessions, as we discuss below). 
Topics other than the eating disorder are not usually 
addressed. With adolescent patients there is far greater 
involvement of others (Cooper & Stewart, 2008; Dalle 
Grave et al., 2013). 

Stage 2: Taking Stock 

Stage 2 is a transitional stage in treatment. It has three 
aims: 

1. To conduct a joint review of progress. 
2. To revise the formulation, if need be. 
3. To design Stage 3. 

CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

At the same time the therapist continues to implement 
the procedures introduced in Stage 1. The sessions are 
now held once weekly. 

The reason for conducting this formal review of 
progress is that there is strong evidence across a variety 
of psychiatric disorders (Wilson, 1999), including bulimia 
nervosa (Fairburn, Agras, Walsh, Wilson, & Stice, 
2004) and binge-eating disorder (Masheb & Grilo, 
2007), that the degree of change during the first few 
weeks of treatment is a potent predictor of outcome. 
Thus, if progress is limited, this needs to be recognized 
early on, and its explanation sought, so that treatment 
can be adjusted as needed. 

Conducting a Joint Review of Progress 

The review of progress is best done systematically, with 
the patient completing once again the EDE-Q, the CIA, 
and the measure of general psychiatric features. In this 
way patient and therapist can both review the extent of 
change. Reviewing the patient’s monitoring records can 
also be helpful. In addition, patient and therapist should 
consider the degree to which the patient has been complying 
with the various elements of treatment. 

Generally patients’ views on their progress are unduly 
negative. An important task for the therapist is therefore 
to help the patient arrive at a balanced appraisal 
of what has changed and what has not. Typically there 
will have been a decrease in the frequency of any binge 
eating and compensatory purging, and an improvement 
in the pattern of eating, whereas concerns about shape 
will not have changed (to a large extent because they 
have not been addressed). 

One important, and sometimes overlooked, reason 
for progress not being as great as might be expected 
is the presence of a clinical depression. Ideally, such 
depressions should be detected and treated before treatment 
but inevitably some are missed and others develop 
afresh. If there appears to be a clinical depression, it is 
our practice to treat it with antidepressant medication 
(Fairburn, Cooper, & Waller, 2008a) and consider suspending 
CBT until the patient has responded. 

Revising the Formulation 

It is important to review the formulation in light of what 
has been learned during Stage 1. Often no change is indicated, 
but sometimes problems and processes are detected 
that were not obvious when the formulation was 
originally created. For example, it may have emerged 

that overexercising is a far greater problem than had 
been thought. If so, the formulation may need to be revised. 
Also, if the patient is receiving the “broad” form 
of CBT-E, it is at this point that the contribution of clinical 
perfectionism, core low self-esteem, and interpersonal 
difficulties is considered (see Fairburn, Cooper, 
Shafran, Bohn, & Hawker, 2008a). 

Designing Stage 3 

Last, Stage 2 is the time when Stage 3 should be designed. 
It is at this stage the treatment becomes highly 
individualized. The therapist has to decide which elements 
of Stage 3 will be of most relevance to the patient 
and in what order they should be implemented (see 
below). 

Stage 3: Addressing the Key 
Maintaining Mechanisms 

This is the main part of treatment. The focus is on addressing 
the key mechanisms that are maintaining the 
patient’s eating problem. These may be categorized 
under six headings: 

1. Overevaluation of shape and weight 
2. Overevaluation of control over eating 
3. Dietary restraint 
4. Event- and mood-related changes in eating 
5. Dietary restriction 
6. Being underweight 
The relative contributions of these mechanisms 
vary from individual to individual. Only a few of the 
mechanisms operate in those with binge-eating disorder, 
whereas most operate in cases of anorexia nervosa 
in which there is binge eating and purging. The first 
four are considered here. Dietary restriction and being 
underweight are addressed separately, when we discuss 
the adaptations required for those who are underweight. 
The order in which these mechanisms are addressed 
depends on their relative importance in maintaining 
the patient’s psychopathology and the length of time it 
takes to address them. Generally it is best to start by addressing 
the concerns about shape and weight because 
this is the most complex mechanism, and it takes the 
longest. 

At the same time the therapist needs to continue 
implementing the procedures introduced in Stage 1. If 
the patient is receiving the broad form of CBT-E, one 


Eating Disorders 

or more of the additional treatment modules will also 
be employed (Fairburn, Cooper, Shafran, et al., 2008a). 

Addressing the Overevaluation of Shape 
and Weight 

At the heart of most eating disorders is the distinctive 
“core psychopathology,” the overevaluation of shape 
and weight, that is, the judging of self-worth largely, 
or even exclusively, in terms of shape and weight, and 
the ability to control them. As described earlier, most 
of the other features of these disorders are secondary 
to this psychopathology and its consequences. This 
psychopathology occupies a central place in most patients’ 
formulation and is a major target of treatment. 
Clinical experience and research evidence suggest that 
unless this psychopathology is successfully addressed, 
patients are at substantial risk of relapse. There are five 
aspects to this process: 

1. Identifying the overevaluation and its consequences 
2. Developing marginalized self-evaluative domains 
3. Addressing body checking 
4. Addressing body avoidance 
5. Addressing “feeling fat” 
Other than the initial aspect, they are not necessarily 
introduced in this order. In addition, towards the end 
of Stage 3 it is important to develop patients’ skills at 
dealing with setbacks. 


iDenTifying THe oVereVAlUATion 
AnD iTs ConseqUenCes 

The starting point is educating the patient about the 
notion of self-evaluation. The therapist then helps the 
patient identify his/her scheme for self-evaluation. Finally, 
the implications of this scheme are discussed and 
a plan for addressing the expressions of the overevaluation 
is devised. Because therapists are often unsure how 
to broach the subject of self-evaluation, the complete 
treatment guide provides a detailed dialogue demonstrating 
how to explain this to patients. 

Briefly the therapist starts by explaining that most 
people tend to judge themselves on the basis of meeting 
personal standards in the areas of life they value. The 
patient is then helped to generate a list of areas in his/ 
her life that make an important contribution to his/her 
self-evaluation. Almost invariably this will include appearance 
and perhaps also controlling eating. The therapist 
then goes on to explore the relative importance of 
these domains of self-evaluation; the clue to their relative 
importance is the magnitude (in terms of intensity 
and duration) of the patient’s response to things going 
badly in the area. In this way the various areas of life 
that have been listed can be ranked and represented by 
means of a pie chart, which the therapist and patient 
draw together. The pie chart of someone without an eating 
disorder is shown in Figure 17.5 and this may be 
contrasted with one typical of someone with an eating 
problem (Figure 17.6), in which there is a large “slice” 
representing the overevaluation of shape and weight. 


Family 
Work 
Shape, weight, 

and eating 
Other 
Friends 
Sport 
Music 

figUre 17.5. The pie chart of a young woman without an eating problem. From Fairburn (2008, p. 99). Copyright 
2008 by The Guilford Press. Reprinted by permission. 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 


Family 

Work 

Shape, weight 
and eating 
Other 

figUre 17.6. The pie chart of a young woman with an eating problem. From Fairburn (2008, p. 98). Copyright 2008 
by The Guilford Press. Reprinted by permission. 

It is useful for the patient to review his/her pie chart 
on several occasions before the next session, so that it 
can be discussed further and adjusted as needed. Generally, 
any revision takes the form of expanding the size 
of the slice representing the importance of shape and 
weight. 

The next step is to ask the patient to consider the 
implications of his/her scheme for self-evaluation (as 
represented by the pie chart) and reflect on whether 
there might be any problems inherent to it. This discussion 
generally leads to the identification of three main 
problems: 

1. Having a pie chart with a dominant slice is 
“risky.” A dominant slice makes people particularly 
vulnerable should anything threaten their 
ability to meet their personal standards in the 
area concerned. 
2. Judging oneself largely on the basis of appearance 
is particularly problematic because this 
aspect of life is only controllable to a limited extent. 
It therefore results in the person feeling like 
a failure at times. 
3. Placing great importance on shape and weight 
drives people to diet, and in the patient’s case, 
this maintains his/her eating problem. 
This discussion naturally leads to the final step in 
the examination of self-evaluation, namely, the creation 
of a formulation that includes the consequences of the 
overevaluation (the “extended formulation”). The ther


apist starts by asking the patient what he/she does, or 
experiences, as a result of the importance placed on 
shape and appearance. The goal is to derive a figure 
resembling that in Figure 17.7, with the therapist adding 
the upward feedback arrows and explaining that these 
consequences of the overevaluation also serve to maintain 
the overevaluation. 

Having done this, the therapist needs to devise with 
the patient a plan to address the concerns about shape 
and weight, with two overarching strategies: 

1. To develop new domains for self-evaluation. 
2. To reduce the importance attached to shape and 
weight. 
Both are important and they complement one another. 

DeVeloPing MArginAlizeD DoMAins 
for self‑eVAlUATion 

Tackling expressions of the overevaluation of shape and 
weight gradually reduces the extent of the overevaluation: 
The shape and weight-related “slice” of the pie 
chart begins to shrivel. But, at the same time, it is most 
important to increase the number and importance of 
other domains for self-evaluation to diminish the relative 
importance of shape and weight. To achieve this, 
patients need help to begin to get actively involved with 
other aspects of life. There are six steps to this process, 
which needs to be a running theme throughout the rest 
of the treatment: 


Eating Disorders 


Overevaluation of shape and weight and their control 


Dietary 
restraint 


Shape and weight 
checking and/or 
avoidance 


Preoccupation 
with thoughts 
about shape 
and weight 

Mislabeling 
adverse states 
as “feeling fat” 
Marginalization 
of other areas of 
life 

figUre 17.7. The overevaluation of shape and weight: an “extended” formulation. From Fairburn (2008, p. 101). 
Copyright 2008 by The Guilford Press. Reprinted by permission. This figure may be downloaded from www.credooxford.
com. 

1. Explaining the rationale for developing new domains 
for self-evaluation. 
2. Helping the patient identify new activities that 
might be engaging. 
3. Agreeing on one, or possibly two, activities that 
the patient can try. 
4. Ensuring that the patient actually does try the 
activity identified, often using a problem-solving 
approach (described later in the chapter). 
5. Reviewing progress each week, with the therapist 
being encouraging and facilitative. 
6. Simultaneously, directly targeting the patient’s 
overevaluation of shape and weight, usually 
starting with body checking, which is often of 
central importance in maintaining the patient’s 
concerns. 
ADDressing BoDy CHeCking 

The importance of body checking and avoidance has 
only recently been appreciated. The reason is quite 
simple: Few clinicians know about it. This is because 
patients do not disclose the behavior unless asked, and 
many are not even aware of it. 

The first step in addressing body checking is to provide 
information about body checking, body avoidance, 
and their consequences, stressing the following 
two points: 

1. Everyone checks his/her body to some extent 
but many people with eating problems repeatedly 
check their bodies and often in a way that 
is unusual. Such checking can become “second 
nature,” so that patients may not be aware they 
are doing it. In people with eating problems this 
checking can maintain dissatisfaction with appearance. 
2. Some people with eating problems avoid seeing 
their bodies and dislike other people seeing 
them too. Usually these people engaged in body 
checking in the past but switched over to avoidance 
because the repeated checking became 
intolerable. Body avoidance is problematic because 
it allows concerns and fears about shape 
and appearance to persist in the absence of any 
accurate information. Therefore it too needs to 
be tackled. 
Next, the therapist needs to find out what checking and 
avoidance the patient engages in. A specific monitoring 
record may be used for this purpose (see www.credooxford.
com). Since recording body checking is highly 
distressing for some patients, it is best to ask patients 
to do it for only two 24-hour periods, one on a working 
day and the other on a day off work. It may be useful to 
forewarn patients that although it might be distressing, 
it will yield information that is helpful in overcoming 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

their eating disorder. It is common for patients to be 
taken aback by how often they check their shape. 

Having identified patients’ various forms of body 
checking, they are then best divided into two groups, 
according to whether they are “normative.” 

Unusual Forms of Body Checking. Unusual forms 
of body checking are best stopped altogether. Examples 
include measuring the dimensions of certain body parts 
and photographing oneself. Patients can usually do this 
if the rationale is well explained and they are provided 
with support. There are two points to emphasize: 

1. Body checking usually involves focusing on aspects 
of one’s appearance that one dislikes, and it 
generally has adverse effects. 
2. Stopping unusual forms of checking is generally 
experienced (after a week or so) as a relief. 
Addressing More Normative Forms of Body Checking. 
A different strategy needs to be adopted with more 
normative forms of body checking. Here the problem is 
the frequency of checking, the way that it is done, and 
patients’ interpretations of what they find. The therapist 
needs to help patients consider the following questions 
each time that they are about to check themselves: 

•• 
What are they trying to find out? 
•• 
Can checking in this way produce the information 
they are seeking? 
•• 
Might there be adverse effects from such checking? 
•• 
Is there a better alternative? 

Mirror use deserves particular attention because 
mirrors have the potential to provide misleading, but 
highly credible, information and as a result they are 
likely to play an important role in the maintenance of 
many patients’ body dissatisfaction. Education about 
mirrors and mirror use is therefore of importance. One 
point to stress is that apparent flaws that would normally 
go unnoticed become the focus of attention when 
people study in detail aspects of their appearance that 
they dislike. Another is that scrutiny is prone to magnify 
apparent defects. Patients therefore need to question 
their use of mirrors as they are the main way that we 
determine how we look. Mirrors are useful for applying 
makeup, brushing/styling hair, shaving, and so forth. 
Full-length mirrors are helpful to see whether clothes 
go well together. But the therapist should ask patients 
whether there is ever a case for looking at themselves 

naked in a full-length mirror. If they are already dissatisfied 
with their appearance, doing so is likely to risk 
increasing their dislike of their shape through the magnification 
process mentioned earlier. This is not to say 
that total avoidance of mirrors is recommended; rather, 
the advice is (for the time being) to restrict the use of 
mirrors to the purposes listed earlier. 

Another form of body checking that actively maintains 
dissatisfaction with shape involves comparing 
oneself with other people. The nature of these comparisons 
generally results in the patient concluding that his/ 
her body is unattractive relative to those of others. As 
noted earlier, the patient’s appraisal of his/her shape 
often involves scrutiny and selective attention to body 
parts that are disliked. The scrutiny is liable to result 
in the magnification of perceived defects, and the selective 
attention increases overall dissatisfaction with 
shape. In contrast patients’ assessment of others is very 
different. They tend to make superficial and often uncritical 
judgements about other people. Furthermore, 
when making these comparisons, they tend to choose 
a biased reference group, generally people who are thin 
and attractive. 

The steps involved in addressing comparisonmaking 
are as follows: 

1. The therapist helps patients identify when and 
how the patient makes comparisons. 
2. Once this information has been collected, the 
therapist helps the patient consider whether the 
comparison was inherently biased in terms of the 
person chosen and how their shape was evaluated. 
Two points are worth highlighting: 
•• 
Body checking provides patients with a perspective 
on their bodies that is difficult, if not 
impossible, to get on someone else’s body. For 
example what they see when looking at themselves 
in the mirror is quite unlike what they 
see when looking at someone else. 

•• 
Comparing themselves with people portrayed 
in the media (models, film stars, and other celebrities) 
is problematic since they are an unrepresentative 
subgroup and images of them 
may well have been manipulated. 

3. Certain homework tasks usefully complement 
these discussions; for example, patients may be 
asked to be more scientific when choosing someone 
to compare themselves with. Instead of selecting 
thin people, the therapist may ask them 
to select every third person (of their age and 
gender) they walk past in a busy street. They can 

Eating Disorders 

also experiment with scrutinizing other people’s 
bodies. One way of doing this is for the patient 
to go to a changing room (e.g., of a swimming 
pool or gym), select someone nearby of about the 
same age and gender who seems at first glance 
attractive, then unobtrusively scrutinize their 
body, focusing exclusively on the parts that the 
patient is personally most sensitive about. What 
patients discover is that even attractive people 
have apparent flaws when scrutinized. 

4. Assuming the patient’s comparison-making 
is biased (as it almost invariably is), the therapist 
should explore the implications of this bias 
in terms of the validity of the patient’s views 
relative to his/her appearance. The goal is that 
patients become aware that their checking and 
making comparisons has yielded misleading information 
about other peoples’ bodies and their 
own. 
ADDressing BoDy AVoiDAnCe 

“Exposure” in its technical and literal sense is the strategy 
here. Therapists need to help patients get used to 
the sight and feel of their bodies and to learn to make 
even-handed comparisons of their own bodies with 
those of others. They need to get used to seeing their 
own bodies and letting others see them, too. Dressing 
and undressing in the dark needs to be phased out, 
and patients should gradually abandon wearing baggy, 
shape-disguising clothes. Participation in activities that 
involve a degree of body exposure can be helpful (e.g., 
swimming). Depending on the extent of the problem, 
tackling body avoidance may take many successive sessions. 
As there is a risk of a patient returning to repeated 
body checking, the therapist needs to help the patient 
adopt normative and risk-free forms of checking. 

ADDressing “feeling fAT” 

“Feeling fat” is an experience reported by many women, 
but the intensity and frequency of this feeling appears 
to be far greater among people with eating disorders. 
It is an important target for treatment, since it tends to 
be equated with being fat, whatever the patient’s actual 
weight or shape. Hence, feeling fat is not only an expression 
of overconcern with shape and weight but it 
also maintains it. 

There has been almost no research on feeling fat, 
and little has been written about it. What is striking 
is that it tends to fluctuate markedly from day-to-day 

and even within a single day. This is quite unlike many 
other aspects of these patients’ core psychopathology, 
which is relatively stable. It is our impression that in 
people with eating disorders, feeling fat is a result of 
the mislabeling of certain emotions and bodily experiences. 
It is important to stress that “feeling fat” and 
“being fat” are quite different, but they can co-occur. 
Many people with obesity are not troubled by feeling 
fat, despite being dissatisfied with their shape, but some 
are dissatisfied, and in the same way as people with 
an eating disorder. Since feeling fat contributes to the 
maintenance of their body dissatisfaction, it is essential 
that this be addressed in these patients, too. 

In general it is best to focus on feeling fat once one 
has begun to make inroads into body checking and 
avoidance, but this is not invariably the case. In patients 
in whom feeling fat is a particularly prominent feature, 
it is advisable to address it before tackling body checking 
and avoidance. 

There are five steps in addressing “feeling fat”: 

1. The therapist should first explain that “feeling 
fat” should not be equated with “being fat,” and 
that feeling fat may mask other feelings or sensations 
occurring at the same time. 
2. Patients should be asked to record times when 
they have particularly intense feelings of fatness. 
This can be done as part of the normal recording 
process, using the right-hand column of the recording 
sheet for this purpose. This requires accurate 
real-time recording. When patients record 
feeling fat, they should also think (and record) 
what else they are feeling at the time. 
3. Once patients have mastered this, they should 
ask themselves two questions each time they feel 
fat: 
•• 
What has happened in the last hour that might 
have triggered this feeling? 
•• 
What else am I feeling just now? 

4. It usually emerges that the patient’s experiences 
of feeling fat are triggered either by the occurrence 
of certain negative mood states or physical 
sensations that heighten body awareness. Examples 
of these two types of stimulus include the 
following: 
•• 
Feeling bored, depressed, lonely, or tired. 

•• 
Feeling full, bloated, or sweaty; feeling one’s 
body wobble or one’s thighs rubbing together; 
clothing that feels tight. 

5. Over subsequent weeks patients should continue 
to do this whenever they have strong feelings 

CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

of fatness. In addition, they should address any 
masked problem (e.g., feeling bored) using the 
problem-solving approach (described later in 
this chapter). In some patients, problem solving 
will already have been taught in the context of 
addressing event-triggered changes in eating. In 
others, the approach needs to be introduced at 
this point. With regard to tackling patients’ response 
to heightened body awareness, therapists 
should help them appreciate that the problem is 
their negative interpretation of these sensations 
rather than the sensations themselves. 

Addressing feeling fat typically takes many weeks 
and will be a recurring item on the session agenda. 
What generally happens is that the frequency and intensity 
of feeling fat progressively decline, and patients’ 
“relationship” to the experience changes, such that it is 
no longer equated with being fat. This metacognitive 
change is important, since once it happens, feeling fat 
ceases to maintain body dissatisfaction. 

Addressing Dietary Restraint and Food Avoidance 

Dieting is one of the most prominent features of patients 
with eating disorders. A major goal of treatment is to 
reduce, if not eliminate altogether, the strong tendency 
of these patients to diet. As noted earlier, attempts to 
restrict eating (“dietary restraint”) may or may not be 
successful. Thus, it is far from inevitable that they result 
in true undereating in physiological terms (“dietary 
restriction”) and weight loss. In this section we focus on 
addressing dietary restraint and dietary rules. The tackling 
of dietary restriction is addressed in a later section 
on treatment of those who are underweight. 

The dietary restraint of patients with eating disorders 
is both extreme in intensity and rigid in form. 
These patients set themselves multiple demanding dietary 
rules. These may concern when they eat (e.g., not 
before 6:00 P.M.), how much they should eat (e.g., less 
than 600 kcal per day) and, most especially, what they 
should eat, with most patients having a large number 
of foods that they are attempting to avoid (“food avoidance”). 
Many have all three types of dietary rule. As 
a result of these rules, patients’ eating is inflexible and 
restricted in nature. Despite this, dietary restraint is 
valued, and patients tend to be oblivious to its adverse 
effects. 

When addressing dietary restraint, an important first 
step is for the therapist to help patients to see that their 

dieting is indeed a problem. This can be done with reference 
to their formulation, which in most cases shows 
that dieting plays a central role in the maintenance of 
their eating problem. If this is the case, it will need to 
be addressed to overcome the problem. Second their 
dieting may well have many adverse effects on their 
day-to-day life. These may be uncovered using the CIA 
(Bohn & Fairburn, 2008); for example, it may preclude 
eating out; it may result in tension about mealtimes; 
and it may cause preoccupation with thoughts about 
food and eating. 

Once it has been agreed that dietary restraint is a 
problem, therapist and patient need to identify the various 
dietary rules present. Many will be evident by this 
stage in treatment. The principles that underlie addressing 
these rules are as follows: 

1. Identifying a specific rule and what is motivating 
it. 
2. Exploring with the patient the likely consequences 
of breaking the rule. The patient may believe 
that breaking the rule will lead to weight gain or 
invariably result in binge eating. 
3. Devising a plan with the patient for breaking 
the rule in question in order to explore the consequences 
of doing so, and helping the patient 
implement this plan. 
4. Analyzing the implications of the planned rulebreaking. 
5. Planning further occasions of breaking the same 
rule, until the rule ceases to have significance. 
With patients who binge-eat it is important to pay 
particular attention to food avoidance. The first step 
is to identify any foods being avoided. A good way of 
doing this is to ask patients to visit a local supermarket 
and write down all foods they would be reluctant 
to eat because of their possible effect on their shape 
or weight, or because they fear that eating them might 
trigger a binge. The patient and therapist should rank 
these foods (often comprising 40 or more items) according 
to the difficulty the patient would experience 
eating them. Patients should be helped to introduce 
these foods progressively into their diet, starting with 
the easiest and gradually moving on to the most difficult. 
The amount eaten is not important, although the 
eventual goal is that the patient should be capable of 
eating normal quantities with impunity. The systematic 
introduction of avoided foods should continue until patients 
are no longer anxious about eating them. Often 


Eating Disorders 

this will take the remainder of treatment and sometime 
beyond it. 

Other dietary rules should be tackled in a similar 
fashion, with a focus on both the belief that is maintaining 
the rule and breaking the rule itself. It is especially 
important to address rules that interfere with 
social eating. 

Addressing Event- and Mood-Related Changes 
in Eating 

In patients with eating disorders, eating habits may 
change in response to outside events and moods. This 
is particularly true of binge eating. The variety of different 
mechanisms involved include the following: 

•• 
Binge eating or vomiting, or both, to cope with 
negative events or adverse moods. Binge eating 
has two relevant properties: It is distracting and 
may take the patient’s mind off aversive thoughts, 
and it has a direct mood-modulatory effect, in that 
it dampens strong mood states. The latter property 
is also true of vomiting and intense exercising. 

•• 
Eating less or stopping eating to gain a sense of 
personal control when external events feel outside 
the patient’s control. This is seen most often in underweight 
patients. 

•• 
Eating less to influence others; for example, it may 
be a way of exhibiting feelings of distress or anger, 
or it may be an act of defiance. 

If in Stage 3 events and moods appear to contribute 
to the maintenance of the eating disorder, this contribution 
needs to be assessed and in all likelihood addressed, 
with the goal of helping patients deal with 
events and moods directly and effectively, without 
influencing patients’ eating. With most patients, the 
first step is to identify such changes in eating through 
real-time recording, and in the following session go 
over in detail one or more examples in an attempt to 
identify the triggers involved. Then, the patient should 
be trained in a variant of standard cognitive-behavioral 
technique of problem solving, termed “proactive problem 
solving.” The distinctive feature of this approach is 
its emphasis on spotting problems early. It is described 
in detail in the complete treatment guide and it is also 
covered from the patient’s perspective in Overcoming 
Binge Eating. The approach, if well taught, is remarkably 
effective in most cases. The exception is those patients 
who have difficulty tolerating mood states that 

involve arousal. These patients (who tend to attract the 
diagnosis of borderline personality disorder) have what 
we term “mood intolerance.” They benefit from proactive 
problem solving, but they also need more direct 
help coping with their moods. To this end we use an 
approach that overlaps with elements of dialectical behavior 
therapy (Linehan, 1993) and is described in the 
treatment guide. 

Setbacks and Mindsets 

The core psychopathology of eating disorders may be 
viewed as a “mindset” or frame of mind. While normally 
one’s “mind-in-place” varies with changing circumstances, 
in people with eating disorders it tends to 
get locked in, and patients’ thinking becomes persistently 
dominated by eating disorder thoughts. It leads 
patients to filter both internal and external stimuli in a 
distinctive way; it leads to the forms of behavior characteristic 
of eating disorders; and it results in the mislabeling 
of various physical and emotional experiences 
as “feeling fat.” 

The cognitive-behavioral strategies used in CBT-E 
are designed to address both the key features of the eating 
disorders and, most importantly, the processes that 
are maintaining them. In patients who are making good 
progress these mechanisms gradually erode during 
Stage 3, with the result that healthier and situationally 
more appropriate mindsets start to move into place, albeit 
temporarily at first. Such shifts in mindset usually 
become evident during the last third of treatment. They 
are reported by patients with surprise, using statements 
such as “On Sunday evening I forgot I had an eating 
disorder!” At first, the eating disorder mindset is prone 
to come back into place with even minor provocations 
(e.g., a friend discussing a diet she has just started) and 
with it returns the patient’s eating disorder behavior, 
thoughts, and feelings. These “setbacks” can readily 
escalate into full-blown relapse unless they are promptly 
nipped in the bud. It is therefore import to raise the 
topic of mindsets at this stage in treatment so that patients 
can learn to spot their eating disorder mindset 
coming into place by detecting the characteristic early 
changes in their behavior. Once patients can do this, 
they can then go on to learn how to “eject” the mindset, 
thereby preventing the setback from becoming established. 
Practice spotting the mindset coming back into 
place and dealing with it effectively is of great value, 
as this skill—intervening very early at the beginnings 
of a setback—may account for the low relapse rate fol



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

lowing CBT-E. It is therefore helpful if patients experience 
occasional setbacks later in treatment because this 
gives them the opportunity to utilize these strategies 
and procedures while still in treatment. Full details of 
how to help patients manipulate their mindset and address 
setbacks are provided in the treatment guide. 

Stage 4: Ending Well 

This is the final stage in treatment. With patients who 
are receiving 20 sessions of treatment, it comprises 
three sessions over 5 weeks (i.e., the sessions are 2 
weeks apart). It has two broad aims: 

1. To ensure that the changes made in treatment are 
maintained and built upon 
2. To minimize the risk of relapse in the future 
At the same time, patients discontinue self-monitoring 
and transfer from in-session weighing to weighing 
themselves at home. 

Ensuring that the Changes Made in Treatment 
Are Maintained 

The first step in doing this is to review in detail the 
patient’s progress and what problems remain. This can 
be done in much the same way as in Stage 2, using the 
EDE-Q and CIA as a guide. Then, depending on what 
problems remain, therapist and patient jointly devise a 
specific short-term plan for the patient to follow until 
the posttreatment review appointment in 5 months’ 
time. Typically, this includes further work on body 
checking and food avoidance, as well as encouraging 
the patient to maintain efforts to develop new interests 
and activities. 

Minimizing the Risk of Relapse in the Future 

Relapses are not all-or-nothing phenomena. They occur 
in degrees and may start as a “slip” or setback that then 
becomes established. Commonly, the slip comprises the 
resumption of dietary restraint, often triggered by an 
adverse, shape-related event (e.g., a critical comment, 
clothes feeling tighter than usual). In patients who were 
previously prone to binge-eat, this return of dietary restraint 
may lead to an episode of binge eating through 
the mechanisms described earlier, which in turn will 
encourage yet greater dietary restraint, thereby increasing 
the risk of further episodes of binge eating. Within 

days, most aspects of the eating disorder may have returned. 
The patient’s reaction to this sequence of events 
is crucial in determining what happens. If it is detected 
early on, as discussed earlier, it is relatively easy to intervene, 
but if it is not, it becomes progressively more 
difficult to deal with the setback. 

To minimize the risk of relapse in the long term, the 
therapist needs to do the following: 

1. Educate the patient about the risk of relapse, 
highlighting common triggers and the likely sequence 
of events in the patient’s case. There is in some patients 
a tendency to hope that they will never have an eating 
problem again. This is especially common in those 
who have ceased to binge-eat, but it is seen in other 
patients, too. Without casting a negative light on patients’ 
hopes for the future, therapists need to ensure 
that patients’ expectations are realistic; otherwise there 
is a risk that patients will not take seriously the need 
to devise a “maintenance plan.” Also, they will be vulnerable 
to react negatively to any emerging setback. 
Patients should learn to view their eating disorder as 
their Achilles’ heel: that is, their responses to stress in 
general and to certain triggers. 
2. Stress the importance of detecting problems 
early, before they become entrenched. With this in 
mind, therapist and patient should identify likely early 
warning signs of an impending relapse. For patients 
who are prone to binge or purge, these forms of behavior 
occur early on in the course of any setback and 
are readily noticeable. Patients whose eating disorder is 
primarily characterized by dietary restriction may need 
help to spot ominous signs. 
3. Construct with the patient a plan of action (a 
written personalized “long-term maintenance plan”) 
for use in the future should problems arise. There are 
two important elements: focusing on the emerging eating 
problem and correcting it, and addressing the trigger 
of the setback. In general the former is achieved by 
doing what was learned in treatment (doing the right 
thing), possibly following the guidance in Overcoming 
Binge Eating, while the latter is achieved using problem 
solving. 
4. Discuss when the patient should seek further 
help. It is important that patients seek further help if it 
is needed. The strategy described earlier should get patients 
back on track within a few weeks. If, after some 
weeks of trying to correct matters, the problem has 

Eating Disorders 

not substantially resolved, we suggest that the patient 
should seek outside help. 

Ending or Extending Treatment 

It is unusual not to end CBT-E as planned. So long as 
patients have got to the point where the central maintaining 
mechanisms have been disrupted, treatment 
can and should finish. Otherwise, patients (and therapists) 
are at risk of ascribing continued improvement 
to the ongoing therapy rather than natural resolution 
of the eating disorder. In practice, this means that it is 
acceptable to end treatment with patients who are still 
dieting to an extent, perhaps binge eating and vomiting 
on occasions, and having residual concerns about shape 
and weight. 

At times there are grounds for extending treatment. 
In our view, the main indication for doing this is the 
presence of eating disorder features that continue to interfere 
significantly with the patient’s functioning and 
are unlikely to resolve of their own accord. Another 
reason to extend treatment is to compensate for the deleterious 
impact of disruptions to treatment, generally 
due to the emergence of a clinical depression or the occurrence 
of a life crisis. 

The occasional patient benefits little from CBT-E. It 
is our practice to refer such patients for day patient or 
inpatient treatment. 

The Posttreatment Review Appointment 

We routinely hold a posttreatment review appointment 
about 20 weeks after the completion of treatment. During 
the intervening period, patients do not receive any 
further therapeutic input. The review session has several 
purposes: 

1. To reassess the patient’s state and need for further 
treatment. If residual eating disorder features 
are significantly interfering with the patient’s 
functioning, then further treatment should 
be considered. If there has been a setback, a few 
brief sessions may be needed to get the patient 
back on track. 
2. To review the patient’s implementation of the 
short-term maintenance plan. The therapist 
should review the plan with the aim of identifying 
residual eating disorder features that the patient 
needs to continue to address. 
3. To discuss how any setbacks have been handled. 
The patient’s ability to detect and address setbacks 
should be reviewed in detail. 

4. To review the long-term maintenance plan. 
cBt‑e for uNDerweiGht PatieNts 

The great majority of patients with an eating disorder 
undereat at some stage and many may become underweight 
for a time. Generally this does not last, and they 
regain the lost weight, but a minority maintain strict 
control over their eating and stay underweight. A proportion 
of these patients meet current diagnostic criteria 
for anorexia nervosa, whereas others are eligible 
for one or other of the two residual eating disorder diagnoses. 


CBT-E for underweight patients does not require 
major modifications because the core psychopathology 
and behavior of these patients is very similar to 
that of the majority of patients with an eating disorder. 
However, it does need to be adjusted to accommodate 
three problems seen in this group, but not necessarily 
confined to it: 

1. Limited motivation to change 
2. Being underweight 
3. Undereating (“dietary restriction”). 
To do this, CBT-E needs to be extended in length because 
it takes time to engender motivation to change 
and even more time to regain weight. Hence, as mentioned 
earlier, for those with a BMI between 15.0 and 
18.5, treatment generally takes up to 40 weeks, with 
sessions generally held twice weekly until the patient 
is consistently gaining weight. Once this is happening, 
sessions are weekly; then, toward the end of treatment, 
they are every 2–3 weeks. 

Patients’ health and safety are always of paramount 
importance, and this is especially true of patients who 
are underweight because their physical health is invariably 
compromised. Therapists need to be aware of potential 
physical complications, and those who are not 
medically qualified should have good access to a physician 
who can advise on the management of medical 
problems. 

Overview 

The four stages of the 20-week version of CBT-E do not 
neatly map onto the version for underweight patients. 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

Treatment for these patients may be thought of as having 
three phases: 

•• 
Phase I. This lasts up to 8 weeks and the focus is 
on engaging patients and helping them arrive at the 
decision that they need to regain weight. 

•• 
Phase II. This is the weight-gain phase. The goal is 
that patients gain weight at the rate of about 0.5 kg 
per week. Therefore, the length of this phase is determined 
by the amount of weight to be regained. 
During this phase the patient’s eating disorder psychopathology 
is addressed. 

•• 
Phase III. This is the weight-maintenance phase, 
in which patients practice maintaining their new 
healthy weight. It lasts about 8 weeks. 

As a result of the particular emphases of these phases, 
patients’ weight graphs generally have a distinct threephase 
pattern to them, as shown in Figure 17.8. 

Phase I 

The first two treatment sessions are similar to those 
of the 20-week treatment, although there are certain 
modifications to accommodate education about the ef


170 
160 
150 
140 

Weight 
(lbs) 130 
120 
110 
100 

fects of being underweight and to incorporate this information 
in the formulation. In practice this involves 
the following: 

•• 
Inquiring carefully in the initial assessment about 
the features that are likely to being underweight. 
This inquiry should be embedded within the usual 
assessment. 

•• 
Providing personalized education about the effects 
of being underweight before jointly creating 
the formulation. This involves delaying the formulation 
to the second treatment session rather than 
creating it in the initial session as in the 20-week 
version. 

•• 
Jointly creating a formulation that highlights the 
likely contribution of being underweight to the 
maintenance of the patient’s eating problem (e.g., 
preoccupation with food and eating, increased 
need for routines and predictability, indecisiveness, 
heightened feelings of fullness, low mood, 
social withdrawal). A patient-oriented description 
of these features is provided in the second edition 
of Overcoming Binge Eating (Fairburn, 2013). 

•• 
Discussing the implications of the formulation for 
treatment. The major point is that almost all of the 

Weeks 

BMI 20.0 (126 lbs) 
BMI 25.0 (157 lbs) 
BMI 19.0 (120 lbs) 
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 


figUre 17.8. The weight graph of a patient with anorexia nervosa. From Fairburn (2008, p. 180). Copyright 2008 by 
The Guilford Press. Adapted by permission. 


Eating Disorders 

effects identified will resolve if the patient regains 
weight, and at the same time patients will discover 
their true personality, which has been masked by 
being underweight. Simultaneously it is emphasized 
that treatment will involve much more than 
mere weight regain. 

The emphasis then moves on to helping patients 
decide to change. The goal is that patients make this 
decision themselves rather than having the decision imposed 
on them. The aim is to interest the patient in the 
benefits of change and the possibility of a “fresh start.” 
There are five steps in this process: 

1. Creating a “Current Pros and Cons of Change” 
table. 
2. Creating a “Future Pros and Cons of Change” 
table. 
3. Creating a “Conclusions” table. An example is 
shown in Table 17.2. 
4. Helping the patient identify and accept the implications 
of these conclusions. 
5. Helping the patient decide to act and “take the 
plunge.” 
At the same time, collaborative weighing and regular 
eating are also introduced, much as in the 20-week 
treatment. One difference is that weighing takes place 
every session because patients’ low weight is a significant 
health problem and a major target of treatment. 
Another is that the pattern of regular eating should 
include three meals and three snacks; that is, patients 
should have six episodes of eating rather than five, as in 
the 20-week treatment. 

If the patient decides to regain weight, then Phase II 
begins. If, however, the patient never reaches this decision 
despite extensive nondirective exploration of the 
topic (over at least 8 weeks), then CBT-E has failed and 
other treatment options should be considered. This applies 
in about one in five cases. 

Phase II 

In Phase Two the focus is on weight regain while at 
the same time addressing the patient’s eating disorder 
psychopathology in much the same way as described 
earlier. Thus, there will be emphasis on modifying the 
overevaluation of shape and weight, dietary restraint, 
and event- and mood-related changes in eating. 

table 17.2. Pros and Cons of Change: 
a Patient’s “Conclusions” 

I want to get better and regain weight because . . . 

•• 
I will be able to have a full-life not one that is 
just about eating and weight. 

•• 
I will be healthier: my bones and heart will be 
stronger; I won’t be cold and faint and will be 
able to sleep properly. I won’t be ill! 

•• 
I will be able to have good relationships with 
other people and hopefully a partner and 
children who I can be a good role model to. 

•• 
I will be able to enjoy my job and be successful 
at it. 

•• 
At the moment the eating problem stops me 
from being able to do things well. When I am 
better I won’t need an excuse. 

•• 
Regaining weight will mean that I will become 
slim and healthy. It does not mean that I will 
become fat. 

•• 
Getting better won’t be giving in. Not getting 
better would be giving in. Getting better is 
about choosing to give myself a life. 

•• 
I want to show how strong I can be by eating as 
right now not eating is the easy thing. 
•• 
Eating enough food to be a healthy weight isn’t 
greedy. It is being normal. 

•• 
Being a healthy weight and eating enough will 
help to give me true control over my eating. I 
will be able to make choices about what I eat. 
At the moment the eating problem has control 
over me. Becoming well will protect me from 
out-of-control eating and uncontrolled weight 
gain. 

•• 
Being well will enable me to develop my talents 
as a person and to discover my true self. 

•• 
Getting better will give me choices in life. The 
eating problem has been holding me back. 
Change can only be good. 

Note. From Fairburn (2008, p. 167). Copyright 2008 by The Guilford 
Press. Reprinted by permission. 

Weight regain is very difficult for these patients. It 
is a long and laborious process. It requires that patients 
maintain an energy surplus each day of about 500 kcal 
if they are to regain weight at a rate of about 0.5 kg per 
week. 

It is our practice to have as a goal a BMI over 19.0. 
This figure ensures that the great majority of patients 
are free from the psychobiological effects of being underweight, 
while still being slim. It is important not to 
compromise on this figure. Many female patients want 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

to stop regaining weight when their BMI is in the 17.0– 

18.0 range, possibly because this is when their shape 
begins to become more feminine. This is a serious mistake 
because they are still experiencing the adverse effects 
of being underweight and have experienced few 
of the advantages of the weight regain. Patients with a 
BMI at this level also tend to go on to lose weight. 
Full details of how to help patients regain weight are 
provided in the complete treatment guide. 

Phase III 

The goal of this phase is to help patients maintain a 
weight, such that their BMI fluctuates between 19.0 and 

20.0. Patients and therapists have opposite concerns at 
this point. While patients are afraid that their weight 
will continue to rise, therapists fear that it will fall. The 
therapists’ fears are usually the more realistic ones. The 
risks and dangers of weight loss should be discussed 
openly with patients. 
This phase of treatment usually runs smoothly, and 
certainly so in comparison with Phase II. Therapists 
should encourage patients to live life fully now that 
they are free from the debilitating effects of being underweight. 
Patients should be helped to flourish, take 
risks, and enjoy themselves, while not forgetting the 
importance of maintaining their new healthy weight. 

The final few sessions need to cover the same topics 
as those covered in the 20-week version. Thus, they address 
(along the same lines): 

1. Mindsets and setbacks. 
2. Ensuring that achieved changes achieved are 
maintained. 
3. Procedures for minimizing the risk of relapse in 
the future. 
coNcluDiNG reMarks 

Myths and misconceptions concerning CBT abound. 
Two are particularly prevalent. The first is that treatment 
is diagnosis-driven; that is, the form of the treatment 
is almost exclusively determined by the patient’s 
DSM diagnosis. The second is that the treatment is 
rigidly structured. We hope that it is clear that neither 
criticism applies to CBT-E. In CBT-E, the form of the 
patient’s treatment is dictated by a highly personalized 
formulation that is diagnosis-independent. It is based 
on patients’ eating disorder psychopathology, not their 

DSM diagnosis. Moreover, this formulation is modified 
and further personalized as treatment progresses and 
the patient’s psychopathology evolves. What happens in 
Session 10 with Patient A may bear little relation to what 
happens in Session 10 with Patient B. What is specified 
in CBT-E are the strategies and substrategies used, and 
the procedures employed to bring about change, but 
how and when they are applied varies markedly from 
case to case. As a result, CBT-E is more of a challenge 
to learn than more prescriptive treatments, but the compensation 
is that it is more rewarding to implement, not 
least because of its effectiveness.6 

aCknowledgMents 

We are grateful to the Wellcome Trust for its support: Christopher 
G. Fairburn is supported by a Principal Research 
Fellowship (046386), and Zafra Cooper is supported by a 
strategic award (094585). Our research on eating disorders 
is supported by a programme grant from the Wellcome Trust 
(046386). Sarah Collins provided valuable feedback on the 
manuscript. 

notes 

1. Body mass index (BMI) is a widely used way of representing 
weight adjusted for height. It is weight in kilograms 
divided by height in meters squared [i.e., wt/(ht)2]. The 
BMI applies to adults of both sexes between the ages of 18 
and 60. The healthy range is 18.5–25.0. 
2. If there is a difference in their core psychopathology, it 
is that some patients with anorexia nervosa are primarily 
concerned with controlling their eating per se, rather than 
their shape and weight. This is especially true of younger 
cases of short duration. 
3. Originally, the broad version of the treatment addressed 
a fourth obstacle to change, termed “mood intolerance.” 
This has subsequently been incorporated into the focused 
form of CBT-E. 
4. Our research on the 20-week version of CBT-E has included 
patients with a BMI over 17.5, but our clinical experience 
suggests that patients who are somewhat underweight 
do better with a longer treatment. We are therefore recommending 
a lower BMI threshold of 18.5. 
5. C. G. F. acknowledges the obvious conflict of interest. 
6. The website www.credo-oxford.com provides up-to-date 
information on the empirical status of CBT-E and opportunities 
to obtain training. All the materials needed to 
implement CBT-E may be downloaded free of charge from 
this website. 

Eating Disorders 

referenCes 

American Psychiatric Association. (1994). Diagnostic and 
statistical manual of mental disorders (4th ed.). Washington, 
DC: Author. 

American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and 
statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.). Arlington, 
VA: Author. 

Bohn, K., & Fairburn, C. G. (2008). The Clinical Impairment 
Assessment Questionnaire (CIA 3.0). In C. G. Fairburn, 
Cognitive behavior therapy and eating disorders 
(pp. 315–317). New York: Guilford Press. 

Byrne, S. M., Fursland, A., Allen, K. L., & Watson, H. (2011). 
The effectiveness of enhanced cognitive behavioural 
therapy for eating disorders: An open trial. Behaviour Research 
and Therapy, 49, 219–226. 

Cooper, Z., & Fairburn, C. G. (2011). The evolution of “enhanced” 
cognitive behavior therapy for eating disorders: 
Learning from treatment non-response. Cognitive and Behavioral 
Practice, 18, 394–402. 

Cooper, Z., & Stewart, A. (2008). CBT-E and the younger 
patient. In C. G. Fairburn, Cognitive behavior therapy and 
eating disorders (pp. 221–230). New York: Guilford Press. 

Crow, S., & Peterson, C. B. (2009). Refining treatments for 
eating disorders. American Journal of Psychiatry, 166, 
266–267. 

Dalle Grave, R. (2012). Intensive cognitive behavior therapy 
for eating disorders. New York: Nova Science. 

Dalle Grave, R., Calugi, S., Doll, H. A., & Fairburn, C. 

G. (2013). Enhanced cognitive behaviour therapy for 
adolescents with anorexia nervosa: An alternative to family 
therapy? Behaviour Research and Therapy, 51, R9– 
R12. 
Fairburn, C. G. (2005). Evidence-based treatment of anorexia 
nervosa. International Journal of Eating Disorders, 37, 
S26–S30. 

Fairburn, C. G. (2008). Cognitive behavior therapy and eating 
disorders. New York: Guilford Press. 

Fairburn, C. G. (2013). Overcoming binge eating (2nd ed.). 
New York: Guilford Press. 

Fairburn, C. G., Agras, W. S., Walsh, B. T., Wilson, G. T., & 
Stice, E. (2004). Early change in treatment predicts outcome 
in bulimia nervosa. American Journal of Psychiatry, 
161, 2322–2324. 

Fairburn, C. G., & Beglin, S. J. (2008). Eating Disorder 
Examination Questionnaire (EDE-Q 6.0). In C. G. Fairburn, 
Cognitive behavior therapy and eating disorders 
(pp. 309–313). New York: Guilford Press. 

Fairburn, C. G., & Bohn, K. (2005). Eating disorder NOS 
(EDNOS): An example of the troublesome “not otherwise 
specified” (NOS) category in DSM-IV. Behaviour Research 
and Therapy, 43, 691–701. 

Fairburn, C. G., & Cooper, Z. (2011). Eating disorders, 
DSM-5 and clinical reality. British Journal of Psychiatry, 
198, 8–10. 

Fairburn, C. G., Cooper, Z., Bohn, K., O’Connor, M. E., Doll, 

H. A., & Palmer, R. L. (2007). The severity and status of 
eating disorder NOS: Implications for DSM-V. Behaviour 
Research and Therapy, 45, 1705–1715. 
Fairburn, C. G., Cooper, Z., Doll, H. A., O’Connor, M. E., 
Bohn, K., Hawker, D. M., et al. (2009). Transdiagnostic 
cognitive-behavioral therapy for patients with eating disorders: 
A two-site trial with 60-week follow-up. American 
Journal of Psychiatry, 166, 311–319. 

Fairburn, C. G., Cooper, Z., Doll, H. A., Palmer, R. L., & 
Dalle Grave, R. (2013). Enhanced cognitive behaviour 
therapy for adults with anorexia nervosa: A UK–Italy 
study. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 51, R2–R8. 

Fairburn, C. G., Cooper, Z., & Shafran, R. (2003). Cognitive 
behaviour therapy for eating disorders: A “transdiagnostic” 
theory and treatment. Behaviour Research and 
Therapy, 41, 509–528. 

Fairburn, C. G., Cooper, Z., & Shafran, R. (2008). Enhanced 
cognitive behavior therapy for eating disorders (“CBT-
E”): An overview. In C. G. Fairburn, Cognitive behavior 
therapy and eating disorders (pp. 23–34). New York: 
Guilford Press. 

Fairburn, C. G., Cooper, Z., Shafran, R., Bohn, K., & 
Hawker, D. M. (2008a). Clinical perfectionism, core low 
self-esteem and interpersonal problems. In C. G. Fairburn, 
Cognitive behavior therapy and eating disorders 
(pp. 197–220). New York: Guilford Press. 

Fairburn, C. G., Cooper, Z., Shafran, R., Bohn, K., Hawker, 

D. M., Murphy, R., et al. (2008b). Enhanced cognitive 
behavior therapy for eating disorders: The core protocol. 
In C. G. Fairburn, Cognitive behavior therapy and eating 
disorders (pp. 47–193). New York: Guilford Press. 
Fairburn, C. G., Cooper, Z., & Waller, D. (2008a). “Complex 
cases” and comorbidity. In C. G. Fairburn, Cognitive behavior 
therapy and eating disorders (pp. 245–258). New 
York: Guilford Press. 

Fairburn, C. G., Cooper, Z., & Waller, D. (2008b). The patients: 
Their assessment, preparation for treatment and 
medical management. In C. G. Fairburn, Cognitive behavior 
therapy and eating disorders (pp. 35–44). New York: 
Guilford Press. 

Fairburn, C. G., & Harrison, P. J. (2003). Eating disorders. 
Lancet, 361, 407–416. 

Fairburn, C. G., & Wilson, G. T. (2013). The dissemination 
and implementation of psychological treatments: Problems 
and solutions. International Journal of Eating Disorders, 
46, 516–521. 

Hay, P. J., & Claudino, A. M. (2010). Evidence-based treatment 
for the eating disorders. In W. S. Agras (Ed.), The 
Oxford handbook of eating disorders (pp. 452–479). Oxford, 
UK: Oxford University Press. 

Linehan, M. M. (1993). Cognitive behavioral treatment of 
borderline personality disorder. New York: Guilford 
Press. 

Lock, J. (2011). Evaluation of family treatment models for 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

eating disorders. Current Opinion in Psychiatry, 24, 274– 
279. 

Lock, J., le Grange, D., Agras, W. S., & Dare, C. (2001). 
Treatment manual for anorexia nervosa: A family-based 
approach. New York: Guilford Press. 

Lock, J., le Grange, D., Agras, S., Moye, A., Bryson, S. W., 
& Jo, B. (2010). Randomized clinical trial comparing 
family-based treatment with adolescent-focused individual 
therapy for adolescents with anorexia nervosa. Archives 
of General Psychiatry, 67, 1025–1032. 

Luborsky, L., Singer, B., & Luborsky, L. (1975). Comparative 
studies of psychotherapies. Archives of General Psychiatry, 
32, 995–1008. 

Lundgren, J. D., Allison, K. C., & Stunkard, A. J. (Eds.). 
(2012). Night eating syndrome: Research, assessment, 
and treatment. New York: Guilford Press. 

Masheb, R. M., & Grilo, C. M. (2007). Rapid response predicts 
treatment outcomes in binge eating disorder: Implications 
for stepped care. Journal of Consulting and Clinical 
Psychology, 75, 639–644. 

Mitchell, J. E., & de Zwaan, M. (2012). Psychosocial evaluation 
and treatment in bariatric surgery. New York: Routledge. 


National Institute for Clinical Excellence. (2004). Eating dis


orders: Core interventions in the treatment and management 
of anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa and related 
eating disorders. London: Author. 

Poulsen, S., Lunn, S., Daniel, S. I. F., Folke, S., Mathiesen, 

B. B., Katznelson, H., et al. (in press). A randomized controlled 
trial of psychoanalytic psychotherapy versus cognitive 
behavior therapy for bulimia nervosa. American Journal 
of Psychiatry. 
Wilson, G. T. (1999). Rapid response to cognitive behavior 
therapy. Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 6, 
289–292. 

Wilson, G. T., Grilo, C. M., & Vitousek, K. M. (2007). Psychological 
treatment of eating disorders. American Psychologist, 
62, 199–216. 

Wilson, G. T., & Schlam, T. R. (2004). The transtheoretical 
model and motivational interviewing in the treatment of 
eating and weight disorders. Clinical Psychology Review, 
24, 361–378. 

Wilson, G. T., Wilfley, D. E., Agras, W. S., & Bryson, S. W. 
(2010). Psychological treatments of binge eating disorder. 
Archives of General Psychiatry, 67, 94–101. 

Wilson, G. T., & Zandberg, L. (2012). Cognitive-behavioral 
guided self-help for eating disorders: Effectiveness and 
scalability. Clinical Psychology Review, 32, 343–357. 


C H a P t e rC H a P t e r 
1 8 
Couple Distress 

aNDrew christeNseN 
JeNNifer G. wheeler 
BriaN D. Doss 
Neil s. JacoBsoN 

The second edition of this book presented, for the first time, a substantially different approach 
to couple therapy—different both in conceptualization and in treatment strategies. 
it was noted that these changes in technique and conceptualization were profound 
enough to warrant a new name for the approach: “integrative behavioral couple therapy” 
(iBCT). As described in this fifth edition, iBCT has matured into a sophisticated and 
intuitively appealing set of strategies. These strategies are very nicely illustrated in this 
chapter in the context of the comprehensive treatment of one couple in substantial distress. 
Because these strategies require considerable clinical skill and talent, beginning 
therapists in particular should learn much from the case descriptions presented in this 
very readable and engaging chapter.—D. H. B. 

Unlike other chapters in this Handbook, the term 
“couple distress” does not refer to a specific clinical or 
personality disorder. In DSM-5, couple distress is handled 
as it was in DSM-IV-TR: not considered a “mental 
disorder” but relegated to the category of “other conditions 
that may be a focus of clinical attention” and assigned 
a lesser “V code” of “relationship distress with 
spouse or intimate partner.” Yet it is certainly arguable 
that couple distress creates as much psychological and 
physical pain as many, if not most, of the DSM disorders 
(e.g., Beach et al., 2006). Furthermore, couple 
distress can initiate, exacerbate, and complicate DSM 
disorders such as depression, or trigger their relapse 
(Whisman, 2007; Whisman & Bruce, 1999). Additionally, 
couple distress can have a major impact on children, 
and can trigger or exacerbate externalizing and 
internalizing disorders (Buehler et al., 1997). Indeed, 
there was a push to give relationship processes such as 
couple distress greater attention in DSM-5, and perhaps 

include some relationship problems as disorders; however, 
such efforts seem to have faltered (American Psychiatric 
Association, 2013; Beach et al., 2006). Whatever 
the merits and outcome of these efforts, there is 
no doubt that couple distress has serious psychological 
consequences and is deserving of therapeutic attention. 

In this chapter we describe one promising approach 
to the treatment of couple distress called integrative behavioral 
couple therapy (IBCT; Christensen & Jacobson, 
2000; Christensen, Jacobson, & Babcock, 1995; 
Jacobson & Christensen, 1998). We briefly review the 
development of this approach from its origins in traditional 
behavioral couple therapy, followed by a description 
of IBCT theories and techniques. Then we 
describe the application of IBCT, including the stages 
of therapy and the use of specific interventions. Finally, 
we discuss the empirical evidence in support of IBCT 
and provide a case example to demonstrate the application 
of IBCT to the treatment of couple distress. 

703 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

traDitioNal Behavioral 
couPle theraPy 

The term “couple therapy” (as opposed to “individual” 
or “group” therapy) refers to clinical approaches for improving 
the functioning of two individuals within the 
context of their romantic relationship to one another.1 
Although couple therapy is unique in its emphasis on 
a specific dyad, by its very definition, it is a contextual 
approach to the treatment of two individuals. Accordingly, 
successful treatments for couple distress have 
emphasized the assessment and modification of each 
individual’s contribution and response to specific interactions 
in their relationship (e.g., Baucom & Hoffman, 
1986; Gurman, Knickerson, & Pinsof, 1986; 
Holtzworth-Munroe & Jacobson, 1991; Jacobson, 
1978a, 1984; Jacobson & Holtzworth-Munroe, 1986; 
Jacobson & Margolin, 1979; Stuart, 1980; Weiss, Hops, 
& Patterson, 1973). 

For over three decades, the “gold standard” for the 
treatment of couple distress has been behavioral couple 
therapy (for reviews of couple therapies, see Baucom, 
Shoham, Kim, Daiuto, & Stickle, 1998; Christensen & 
Heavey, 1999; Jacobson & Addis, 1993; Snyder, Castellani, 
& Whisman, 2006). First applied to couple 
distress by Stuart (1969) and Weiss and colleagues 
(1973), traditional behavioral couple therapy (TBCT) 
uses basic behavioral principles of reinforcement, modeling, 
and behavioral rehearsal to facilitate collaboration 
and compromise between partners. With an eye 
toward facilitating changes in the partners’ behavior, 
TBCT teaches them how to increase or decrease target 
behaviors (behavior exchange), to communicate more 
effectively (communication training), and to assess and 
solve problems (problem solving) to improve overall 
relationship satisfaction. The monograph by Jacobson 
and Margolin (1979) is a commonly used treatment 
manual for TBCT. 

In early studies, TBCT demonstrated significant empirical 
success (Jacobson 1977, 1978b) and soon became 
the focus of numerous treatment manuals, programs, 
and publications supporting the application of behavioral 
techniques to the treatment of couple distress (e.g., 
Floyd & Markman, 1983; Gottman, Notarius, Gonso, 
& Markman, 1976; Jacobson & Margolin, 1979; Knox, 
1971; Liberman, 1970; Liberman, Wheeler, deVisser, 
Kuehnel, & Kuehnel, 1981; Stuart, 1980). Subsequent 
outcome research has consistently supported the efficacy 
of behavioral approaches for the treatment of 
couple distress (Baucom & Hoffman, 1986; Gurman 

et al., 1986; Jacobson, 1984; Jacobson, Schmaling, & 
Holtzworth-Munroe, 1987). Research has even shown 
the positive impact of TBCT for couples in which one 
partner has an individual disorder, such as depression 
(Gupta, Coyne, & Beach, 2003), alcoholism (O’Farrell 
& Fals-Stewart, 2000), and/or anxiety (Baucom et al., 
1998). 

Despite the apparent success of TBCT, however, 
outcome research also revealed some limitations in its 
efficacy and generalizability. For example, approximately 
one-third of couples failed to show measurable 
improvement in relationship quality following treatment 
with TBCT (Jacobson et al., 1987). Furthermore, 
many couples who initially responded to treatment relapsed 
within 1 or 2 years after therapy (Jacobson et al., 
1984, 1987). Four years after therapy, Snyder, Wills, 
and Grady-Fletcher (1991) found a divorce rate of 37% 
in couples treated with TBCT. 

Findings about the limited effectiveness of TBCT 
encouraged the development of additional therapeutic 
approaches. Various modifications and enhancements 
have been made to TBCT in an effort to improve its 
effectiveness (e.g., Baucom & Epstein, 1990; Baucom, 
Epstein, & Rankin, 1995; Epstein & Baucom, 2002; 
Floyd, Markman, Kelly, Blumberg, & Stanley, 1995; 
Halford, 2001), yet the existing comparative treatment 
studies have failed to demonstrate any incremental efficacy 
in various enhancements to TBCT. For example, 
the addition of cognitive strategies created a treatment 
that was as good as but not better than TBCT (e.g., Baucom 
et al., 1998). 

In addition to examining treatment outcome, couple 
therapy research aimed at understanding how “treatment 
successes” differ from “treatment failures.” Early 
research on treatment response identified several factors 
that appear to affect the success of TBCT. Compared 
to couples who responded positively to TBCT, 
couples who were regarded as “treatment failures” or 
“difficult to treat” were generally older, more emotionally 
disengaged, more polarized on basic issues, and 
more severely distressed (Baucom & Hoffman, 1986; 
Hahlweg, Schindler, Revenstorf, & Brengelmann, 
1984; Jacobson, Follette, & Pagel, 1986; see Jacobson 
& Christensen, 1998, for a review). Despite the fact that 
these couples arguably had the greatest need for effective 
treatment, each of these factors has an obvious deleterious 
effect on their ability to collaborate, compromise, 
and facilitate behavioral change. Older couples, 
for example, have had more time than younger couples 
to become “stuck” in their destructive behavioral pat



Couple Distress 705 

terns; couples who are more polarized on fundamental 
issues (e.g., how traditional they are with respect to 
their gender roles) may never be able to reach a mutually 
satisfying compromise; and extremely disengaged 
couples may be unable to collaborate. Each of these 
factors is likely to be associated with long-standing, 
deeply entrenched, and seemingly “unchangeable” behavioral 
patterns. Thus, it should come as no surprise 
that the change-oriented techniques of TBCT are ineffective 
for these couples. 

aN “iNteGrative” theraPy 

These findings served as the impetus for the development 
of IBCT. Evidence on the limited success of 
TBCT, particularly during follow-up, spurred an effort 
to find a treatment with more enduring effects. Evidence 
on TBCT’s failures spurred efforts to find treatments 
that would be applicable even to these difficult 
cases. Three developments in IBCT are directed toward 
making treatment more enduring and more broadly applicable: 
(1) a focus on the couple’s relational “themes” 
rather than on specific target behaviors; (2) an emphasis 
on “contingency-shaped” versus “rule-governed” 
behavior; and (3) a focus on emotional acceptance. 

The first aspect that is intended to make IBCT’s effectiveness 
more broadly applicable and more enduring 
is its focus on a couple’s relational “themes,” that is, 
their long-standing patterns of disparate yet functionally 
similar behaviors. Although this focus is similar to 
TBCT in that it requires a comprehensive assessment of 
the couple’s behavioral patterns, it differs from TBCT 
in that multiple and complex behavioral interactions— 
and not just specific behavioral targets—are considered 
for therapeutic intervention. 

A highlight of all behavioral approaches, and certainly 
of TBCT, is an assessment process that transforms 
broad, global complaints into specific, observable 
behaviors. For example, a wife may come into 
therapy complaining that her husband does not love her, 
while her husband complains that his wife does not believe 
in him. The TBCT therapist would assist the wife 
in defining her general complaint into specific behavioral 
targets for her husband, such as kissing and hugging 
her more often. The therapist would also assist the 
husband in defining his general complaint into specific 
behavioral targets for his wife, such as complimenting 
his achievements more often. However, IBCT suggests 
that valuable information may be lost in the transfor


mation of a global complaint into a specific behavioral 
target. By quickly narrowing down global complaints 
into specific behavioral targets, TBCT inadvertently 
limits the means by which partners may satisfy each 
other. For example, if “feeling loved” is defined solely 
in terms of physical affection and the husband has difficulty 
in increasing and/or sustaining a higher level of 
physical affection, then his wife’s desires to feel loved 
will not be satisfied. Indeed, the husband could perform 
a variety of other behaviors in addition to physical affection 
that function to make his wife feel loved, such 
as calling her during work to see how she is doing, listening 
to her troubles with her family, or noticing that 
the air in her car tires is dangerously low. She may not 
be able to articulate many behaviors that might function 
in ways to make her feel loved, either because she 
is not aware of the desired behaviors or perhaps she 
feels too vulnerable to express this need. Without more 
elaborate exploration of and functional analysis of the 
wife’s and husband’s thoughts, feelings, and behaviors, 
such important opportunities for facilitating therapeutic 
change may be lost. Furthermore, these very specific 
behavioral definitions may have iatrogenic effects. In 
the previous example, the wife may begin to define her 
husband’s love more and more in terms of his limited 
ability to be affectionate because this is how “love” was 
operationalized in the context of the TBCT intervention. 
If the husband is unable to make her feel “loved” 
via physical affection alone, then her anger and sense 
of loss could be heightened rather than ameliorated by 
the treatment. 

In contrast to TBCT’s emphasis on specific behavioral 
targets, IBCT focuses on broader “themes” in the 
couple’s history, that is, developing a shared understanding 
of the many circumstances in which the wife 
has felt loved and unloved, and in which the husband 
has felt that his wife believed or did not believe in him. 
Certainly this shared understanding includes some 
specific behavioral examples illustrating what makes 
the wife feel unloved and what would make her feel 
loved, and what makes the husband feel that his wife 
does not believe in him and what would make him feel 
that she does. However, IBCT tries to keep open all 
possibilities of behaviors that function to provide each 
spouse with his/her desired emotional state. Thus, if 
one partner has difficulty performing a particular behavior 
(e.g., physical affection), he/she may still be able 
to perform other, perhaps less obvious behaviors that 
serve the same function (e.g., calling one’s wife from 
work). By focusing on the broader emotional “theme” 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

(her history of feeling unloved, his history of feeling 
not believed in), rather than attempting to operationalize 
that theme completely into one or more specific 
behaviors, IBCT maintains its functional roots, while 
increasing the chances that each partner is able to meet 
the other’s needs. 

A second development that is designed to make 
IBCT applicable to more couples and to create more 
enduring change is based on the distinction between 
“rule-governed” versus “contingency-shaped” behavior 
(Skinner, 1966). In the former, an individual is 
provided with a rule to guide his/her behavior and is 
then reinforced when he/she follows the rule. Using 
the previous example, a therapist could develop a list 
of possible affectionate behaviors for the husband, such 
as giving his wife a kiss when he leaves for work and 
when he returns, then encourage the husband to implement 
these behaviors. Upon implementing them, the 
husband would be reinforced by both his wife and the 
therapist. TBCT is largely based on employing “rulegoverned” 
strategies to create positive change. Not only 
is behavioral exchange a “rule-governed” strategy, but 
even more importantly, the TBCT strategies of communication 
training and problem-solving training are 
also dominated by “rule-governed” strategies. In both, 
the TBCT therapist teaches the partners certain rules 
of good communication or good problem solving to use 
during their discussions of problems. The guidelines to 
use “I statements” and to “define the problem clearly 
before proposing solutions” are examples. 

With “contingency-shaped” behavior, naturally occurring 
events in the situation serve to elicit and reinforce 
the desired behavior. For example, the husband 
would be affectionate with his wife when something 
in their interaction triggered a desire for him to hug or 
kiss her; the experience of closeness or physical contact 
in the affectionate gesture itself, or his wife’s response 
to his gesture, would serve to reinforce his affectionate 
behavior. In contrast to TBCT, IBCT engages in 
“contingency-shaped” behavior change. IBCT therapists 
try to discover the events that function to trigger 
desired experiences in each partner, then attempt to 
orchestrate these events. For example, IBCT therapists 
might hypothesize that a wife’s criticisms push her husband 
away, but that her expressions of loneliness could 
bring him toward her. The IBCT therapist listens to her 
criticisms (e.g., that her husband ignores her), suggests 
that she may be lonely (as a result of feeling “ignored”), 
and, if she acknowledges such a feeling, encourages her 
to talk about it. The therapeutic goal is that this “shift” 

in her conversation (from criticism to self-disclosure) 
might also “shift” her husband’s typically defensive 
posture in listening to (or ignoring) his wife. Although 
such a strategy of emphasizing “contingency-shaped” 
behavior makes intervention more complicated and 
less straightforward than a purely “rule-governed” approach, 
IBCT suggests that a “contingency-shaped” approach 
leads to more profound and enduring changes in 
the couple’s relational patterns. 

A third development in IBCT that is designed to 
make it applicable to more couples and to create more 
enduring change is its focus on emotional acceptance. 
In TBCT, the approach to solving couple problems is to 
create positive change. If the husband in the couple we 
discussed could be more physically affectionate, and 
the wife more verbally complimentary, then the couple’s 
problems would presumably be solved. However, 
if the husband is unable or unwilling to be more physically 
affectionate, and if the wife is unable or unwilling 
to be more complimentary, then the case will be a treatment 
failure. If the husband and wife are able to make 
these changes initially but are unable to maintain them 
over the long run, then the case becomes a temporary 
success followed by relapse. 

In contrast to TBCT, the focus of IBCT is on emotional 
acceptance, as well as change. Unlike the 
change-oriented goal of TBCT, the primary goal of 
IBCT is to promote each partner’s acceptance of the 
other and their differences. Rather than trying to eliminate 
a couple’s long-standing conflicts, a goal of IBCT 
is to help couples develop a new understanding of their 
apparently irreconcilable differences, and to use these 
differences to promote intimacy, empathy, and compassion 
for one another. With its focus on acceptance 
rather than change, IBCT creates an environment for 
couples to understand each other’s behavior before deciding 
whether and how they might modify it. In the 
earlier example, IBCT would explore the husband’s 
difficulties in expressing affection and the wife’s difficulties 
in giving him compliments—difficulties that 
may have little to do with how much love they feel for 
one another. Through this exploration of the individuals, 
the partners may come to a greater understanding 
of one another and experience more emotional closeness, 
thus achieving the feelings of love they previously 
pursued by requesting changes in each other’s behavior 
(i.e., increased physical affection and verbal compliments). 


While there is an expectation of “change” in IBCT, 
this expectation differs significantly from that of TBCT 


Couple Distress 

in regard to which partner and what behavior is expected 
to change. In TBCT, the “change” involves Partner 
A changing the frequency or intensity of a specified behavior 
in response to a complaint from Partner B. But 
in IBCT, the therapeutic “change” also involves Partner 
B modifying his/her emotional reaction to Partner A’s 
“problem” behavior. When a difference between partners 
is identified to be “irreconcilable,” the therapeutic 
strategy of IBCT is to change the “complaining” partner’s 
response to the “offending” partner’s behavior 
rather than directing all therapeutic efforts at attempting 
to change what has historically been an essentially 
“unchangeable” behavior. Ideally, through exploration 
of the thoughts and feelings underlying Partner A’s 
behaviors, Partner B develops a new understanding of 
his/her partner’s behavior, and the “complaint” is transformed 
into a less destructive response. In turn, this 
change in Partner B’s reaction often then has a salutary 
impact on the frequency or intensity of Partner A’s behavior. 
Using this approach, as opposed to an exclusively 
change-focused approach, even the most polarized, 
disengaged, and “unchangeable” couples have an opportunity 
to increase their overall marital satisfaction. 

It is important to note that in this context acceptance 
is not confused with resignation. Whereas “resignation” 
involves one partner grudgingly giving in and giving 
up on the hope for a better relationship, “acceptance” 
involves one partner “letting go” of the struggle to 
change the other. Ideally, partners “let go” of the struggle 
not grudgingly but as a result of a new appreciation 
for their partner’s experience. By understanding their 
couple distress in terms of their individual differences, 
and by learning to accept each other’s differences, it is 
hoped that the distress that has historically been generated 
by their struggle to change one another will be reduced. 
Thus, for IBCT to be effective in treating couple 
distress, it is important for partners to understand the 
factors that have contributed to the development and 
maintenance of their distress. 

the etioloGy of couPle Distress 

According to IBCT, relationship distress develops as a 
result of two basic influences—decreases in reinforcing 
exchanges, such as through reinforcement erosion, 
and the development of punishing exchanges, such as 
through conflict development. “Reinforcement erosion” 
refers to the phenomenon whereby behaviors that were 
once reinforcing become less reinforcing with repeated 

exposure. For example, demonstrations of physical affection 
may generate powerful feelings of warmth and 
pleasure for each partner during the early stages of their 
relationship. But after partners have spent many years 
together, the reinforcing properties of these affectionate 
behaviors may disappear. For some couples, oncereinforcing 
behaviors may become “taken for granted,” 
whereas for others, once-reinforcing behaviors may actually 
become aversive. In some cases, behaviors that 
were once considered attractive, endearing, or pleasing 
become the very same behaviors that generate or exacerbate 
the couple’s distress. 

As with the erosion of reinforcing behaviors, conflicts 
may emerge as couples spend more and more 
time together. In the early stages of a relationship, differences 
in partners’ backgrounds, goals, and interests 
may initially be downplayed or ignored. For example, if 
Partner A prefers to save money and Partner B prefers 
to spend money, this difference may not be apparent 
during courtship, when spending money is a tacit expectation 
of both partners. If this difference is detected 
early on, perhaps it is be regarded as a “positive” difference, 
in that each partner is encouraged to be a little 
more like the other in his/her spending habits. Or perhaps 
each partner expects the other to eventually compromise 
or change to his/her way of doing things. But 
over time, these incompatibilities and their relevance 
to the relationship are inevitably exposed. Differences 
that were once regarded as novel, interesting, or challenging 
may ultimately be perceived as impediments 
to one’s own goals and interests. Furthermore, in addition 
to any extant incompatibilities, other unanticipated 
incompatibilities may emerge with new life experiences 
(e.g., having children, changing careers). Thus, 
even those couples who had initially made a realistic 
appraisal of their differences may discover unexpected 
incompatibilities over time. 

These incompatibilities, while challenging in their 
own right, can be further exacerbated by each partner’s 
emotional sensitivities or vulnerabilities. Returning to 
our earlier example, if our “saver” comes from a background 
of economic deprivation and has developed a 
justifiable fear of being destitute, then the issues related 
to saving may be motivated by powerful emotions, 
which may impair his/her ability to understand 
the partner’s desire to spend and enjoy what they have. 
Incompatibilities can also be exacerbated by external 
stressors. For example, if one member of our “saver– 
spender” couple loses his/her job, that might put their 
differences into even sharper relief. Efforts by the part



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

ners to deal with their struggle over money might paradoxically 
make the problem worse. If the saver, for example, 
engages in behaviors such as investigating and 
interrogating the spender while the spender avoids and 
hides his/her purchases from the other, their problem 
might increase in intensity. One goal of IBCT is to help 
the partners identify and reframe their incompatibilities 
in a way that minimizes the destructive nature of these 
incompatibilities, by encouraging a more effective way 
of communicating about them, while maximizing their 
level of intimacy and relationship satisfaction. 

aPPlicatioN of iBct 

The Formulation 

The most important organizing principle of IBCT is the 
“formulation,” a term used to describe how the therapist 
conceptualizes and describes the couple’s problems. 
The formulation is based on a functional analysis 
of the couple’s problems and comprises three basic 
components: a theme, a DEEP analysis, and a mutual 
trap. The therapist refers back to the formulation and its 
components throughout the treatment process, whenever 
couples have conflicts during or between therapy 
sessions. 

One of the most basic goals of IBCT is for the partners 
to adopt the formulation as part of their relationship 
history. From that point forward, they can use the 
formulation as a context for understanding their relationship 
and their conflicts. The formulation also gives 
couples a language to discuss their problems, and allows 
partners to distance themselves from their problems. 
It is important to remember, however, that the 
formulation is a dynamic concept that may require alteration 
and modification (or “reformulation”) throughout 
treatment. 

The Theme 

The “theme,” the description of the couple’s primary 
conflict, is usually described by a word or phrase that 
captures the issues with which the couple struggles. 
For example, a common theme of many distressed 
couples is that of “closeness–independence,” in which 
one partner seeks greater closeness, whereas the other 
seeks greater independence. Other common themes 
center around trust, sexuality, money, and parenting. A 
couple may struggle about any particular topic and cer


tainly with many issues, but often their struggles center 
around one or two broad themes. 

The DEEP Analysis 

In IBCT, therapists conduct a DEEP analysis of the 
couple’s theme or issue, an acronym that outlines the 
four major factors contributing to a couple’s problems: 
Differences, Emotional sensitivities, External circumstances, 
and Patterns of interaction. IBCT suggests 
that partners have their primary conflict, or theme, 
because of Differences between them and because of 
each partner’s Emotional sensitivities or vulnerabilities 
linked to those differences, both of which can be exacerbated 
by External circumstances. For example, in 
the theme of closeness–independence, Partner A may 
want more closeness and connection, and Partner B 
may want more independence simply because they are 
different people with different genes and different social 
learning histories. Perhaps this difference was not 
readily apparent early on because both partners were 
enchanted by their developing relationship. Or perhaps 
there really was little difference in their desires for 
closeness and independence until they had children, or 
until one partner’s career took off. Whatever the basis 
for the difference, it creates problems for the couple 
as Differences are perceived as deficiencies. For example, 
the closeness seeker may see the other as being 
“afraid of intimacy”; the independence seeker may see 
the other as being “neurotically dependent.” Partners 
find that they cannot both get their needs fully satisfied. 
Compromise may be relatively easy unless Emotional 
sensitivities or vulnerabilities are also present, which 
provide emotional fuel for the differences. If Partner A 
wants greater closeness than Partner B and is emotionally 
vulnerable to easily feeling abandoned, then negotiations 
about closeness may be threatening to Partner 

A. Similarly, if Partner B wants greater independence 
and is emotionally vulnerable to easily feeling controlled 
and restrained, then negotiations about closeness 
may be threatening for Partner B as well. External 
circumstances may conspire to make the problem even 
greater. If the couple lives in an area where Partner 
A, who wants more closeness, is far away from other 
sources of social support, and where Partner B, who 
wants more independence, is close to leisure activities 
in which he/she wants to engage independently, the 
struggle between them will be even greater. The combination 
of their differences (D), their emotional sensitivities 
(E), and the external circumstances (E) may 

Couple Distress 709 

lead the two to engage in a destructive pattern (P) of 
interaction that can polarize them even further. 

The “pattern of interaction” refers to the often frustrating 
and destructive communication that ensues 
when a distressed couple enters into a theme-related 
conflict. A natural response for partners confronted 
with their differences is for each partner to try to 
change the other. In many cases these efforts at changing 
each other may be successful. However, many times 
the result may be that their differences are exacerbated 
and the two partners become polarized in their conflicting 
positions. When partners have become polarized 
on an issue, further attempts to change each other 
only increase the conflict and perpetuate their polarized 
stance. For example, in a couple whose theme 
is closeness–independence, the polarization process 
is likely to occur when the independence seeker “retreats” 
from attempts by the closeness seeker to gain 
more intimacy, which then creates more “intrusive” efforts 
by the closeness seeker. The more the one partner 
“advances,” the more the other partner “retreats”; the 
more that partner “retreats,” the more the other partner 
“advances.” Furthermore, being deprived of a desired 
goal can make that goal seem even more important: 
Partners can become desperate, escalating their futile 
efforts, and their differences become magnified. It can 
begin to look like the closeness seeker has no needs 
for independence and the independence seeker has no 
needs for closeness. Through their interaction, they 
have become more different than they were originally. 

The Mutual Trap 

The mutual trap, which describes the outcome of the 
polarization process, is called a “trap” because it typically 
leaves the partners feeling “stuck” or “trapped” 
in their conflict. Partners in a mutual trap feel that they 
have done everything they can to change the other, and 
nothing seems to work. But they are reluctant to give 
up their efforts to change each other because this would 
mean resigning themselves to a dissatisfying relationship. 
As a result, they become more entrenched in their 
respective positions. 

The experience of partners who are so polarized is 
one of helplessness and futility, and this experience 
is rarely discussed openly between them. As a result, 
each partner may be unaware that the other also feels 
trapped. Making each partner aware of the other’s 
sense of entrapment is an important part of acceptance 
work, and encouraging each partner to experience the 

other’s sense of “stuckness” can sometimes be the first 
step toward promoting empathy and intimacy between 
partners. 

Stages of Therapy 

In IBCT there is a clear distinction between the assessment 
phase and the treatment itself. The assessment 
phase comprises at least one conjoint session with the 
couple, followed by individual sessions with each partner. 
It is followed by a feedback session, during which 
the therapist describes his/her formulation of the partners 
and their problems as well as the therapist’s plan 
for their treatment. The feedback session is followed 
by the treatment sessions, the exact number of which 
should be determined on a case-by-case basis depending 
on each couple’s treatment needs. However, the protocol 
used in a recent clinical trial of IBCT for seriously 
and chronically distressed couples (discussed below) 
was a maximum of 26 sessions, including both the assessment 
and treatment phases. 

The Use of Objective Measures 

Objective assessment instruments (see Table 18.1) may 
be useful for both initial assessment and for monitoring 
a couple’s progress at various points throughout 
treatment. Although such objective measures are not 
necessary to conduct IBCT, they may provide additional 
information about areas of disagreement that 
have not been covered in the session, or they may provide 
objective data about a couple’s levels of distress 
and satisfaction. Additionally, research has shown 
that sharing and actively discussing a couple’s progress 
(or lack thereof) in therapy can improve therapy 
outcomes (e.g., Halford et al., 2012). For example, a 
couple’s relationship satisfaction can be assessed using 
the Couples Satisfaction Index (Funk & Rogge, 2007); 
partners’ commitment to the relationship and steps 
taken toward separation or divorce can be assessed 
using the Marital Status Inventory (Crane & Mead, 
1980; Weiss & Cerreto, 1980); partner’s areas of conflict 
and troubling behaviors can be assessed with the 
Problem Areas Questionnaire (Heavey, Christensen, 
& Malamuth, 1995) and the Frequency and Acceptability 
of Partner Behavior Inventory (Christensen & 
Jacobson, 1997; Doss & Christensen, 2006), and the 
couple’s level of physical violence, with the Revised 
Conflict Tactics Scales (CTS2; Straus, Hamby, Boney-
McCoy, & Sugarman, 1996). 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

table 18.1. Useful assessment 
and screening instruments 

•• 
Couples Satisfaction Index (Funk & Rogge, 2007): 
Measures relationship distress. (To obtain this freely 
available measure, go to www.courses.rochester.edu/ 
surveys/funk.) 

•• 
Couple Questionnaire (Christensen, 2009): Brief 
screening assessment for couple satisfaction, intimate 
partner violence, and commitment, as well as open-ended 
descriptions of typical positive and negative interactions. 
(To obtain this freely available measure, go to http://ibct. 
psych.ucla.edu.) 

•• 
Frequency and Acceptability of Partner Behavior 
Inventory (Christensen & Jacobson, 1997; Doss & 
Christensen, 2006): Assesses frequency and acceptability 
of behavior for 24 categories of spouse behavior. (To 
obtain this freely available measure, go to http://ibct. 
psych.ucla.edu.) 

•• 
Marital Status Inventory (Crane & Mead, 1980; Weiss & 
Cerreto, 1980): Assesses commitment to the relationship 
and steps taken toward separation or divorce. (To obtain 
this measure, contact Robert L. Weiss, PhD, Oregon 
Marital Studies Program, Department of Psychology, 
University of Oregon, Eugene, OR 97403-1227; darkwing. 
uoregon.edu/~rlweiss/msi.htm.) 

•• 
Problem Areas Questionnaire (Heavey, Christensen, & 
Malamuth, 1995): Assesses common problem areas or 
areas of disagreement in couples. (To obtain this freely 
available measure, go to http://ibct.psych.ucla.edu.) 

•• 
Revised Conflict Tactics Scales (Straus, Hamby, Boney-
McCoy, & Sugarman, 1996): Assesses domestic violence. 
(To obtain this measure, contact Multi-Health Systems, 

P.O. Box 950, North Tonawanda, NY 14120; www.mhs. 
com.) 
•• 
Weekly Questionnaire (Christensen, 2010): Assesses 
significant positive and negative events since the 
last session and includes a brief form of the Couples 
Satisfaction Index. (To obtain this freely available 
measure, go to http://ibct.psych.ucla.edu.) 

We recommend that, at a minimum, clinicians administer 
measures that assess relationship satisfaction, 
intimate partner violence, commitment, and problem 
areas. The measure of relationship satisfaction serves 
as a measure of outcome and should be repeated periodically. 
Measures of violence, commitment, and problem 
areas are needed because partners may indicate 
concerns on a questionnaire that they do not bring up 
spontaneously. For example, couples often do not mention 
topics such as violence or sexual problems during 
therapy, even when these are present. Christensen 

(2010) has developed a brief Couple Questionnaire 
(Christensen, 2010) that clinicians can use to assess 
baseline satisfaction, violence, and commitment. Typically, 
partners are given questionnaires at their first 
session to complete then return at their individual sessions. 
In addition to being part of the assessment phase, 
the questionnaires can be administered later in treatment, 
at the end of treatment, and at follow-up to assess 
changes from partners’ presenting baseline levels of 
distress and satisfaction. 

Assessment of Domestic Violence 

Objective measures are particularly useful in assessing 
a couple’s history of physical violence. Assessing 
for domestic violence is a critical part of every couple’s 
intake—not only to determine whether the personal 
safety of either partner is in imminent danger but also 
because couple therapy may actually be contraindicated 
for some violent couples (Jacobson & Gottman, 
1998; Simpson, Doss, Wheeler, & Christensen, 2007). 
Couple therapy requires that both partners take some 
degree of responsibility for their problems, but such 
a perspective is inappropriate when a couple’s problems 
include domestic violence because perpetrators 
of violence must assume sole responsibility for their 
behavior. Furthermore, because therapy sessions can 
elicit strong emotions, the couple therapy itself may 
trigger postsession violence in some couples. In such 
cases, treatment that focuses on the violent behavior of 
the perpetrator—and not the interactive distress of the 
couple—is indicated. The CTS2 (Straus et al., 1996) 
and the Couple Questionnaire (Christensen, 2010) are 
useful screening tools for evaluating the frequency and 
severity of a couple’s physical aggression, and to determine 
whether couple therapy is contraindicated. Finally, 
a couple’s history of violence should be directly 
addressed during the assessment phase, primarily during 
the individual sessions, when each partner can talk 
freely without fearing consequences from the other. 

Assessment 

The assessment phase typically comprises one joint 
session with the partners (Session 1), followed by individual 
sessions with each partner (Sessions 2 and 3). 
The primary goal of the assessment phase is for the 
therapist to evaluate whether the couple is appropriate 
for therapy and, if so, to develop the formulation. 
However, the therapist should also use the assessment 


Couple Distress 

period to orient the couple to the therapy process. In 
addition, although the IBCT therapist is not actively intervening 
during the assessment phase, it is possible for 
the therapist to have a therapeutic impact in these first 
few sessions. 

Orientation (Session 1) 

After greetings and introductions, the couple is oriented 
to the upcoming therapy process. This orientation 
likely includes reviewing and signing an informed consent 
form, which explains billing procedures, defines 
confidentiality and its exclusions, and outlines the possible 
risks and benefits of participating in IBCT. 

In addition to the general information provided during 
informed consent, the couple is also oriented to the 
specific process of IBCT. Therapists should explain 
the difference between the assessment and treatment 
phases of therapy, and ask the couple whether this is 
different from the couple’s expectations in coming to 
therapy. Therapists should be prepared for couples’ disappointment 
when they learn that therapy is not going 
to begin immediately. Therapists may need to explain 
to couples why an assessment period is needed before 
therapists can provide any useful help to them. 

Also during the first session, couples are introduced 
to their manual, Reconcilable Differences (Christensen, 
Doss, & Jacobson, 2014; Christensen & Jacobson, 
2000). Couples are asked to complete Part I of this 
book prior to the feedback session. Ideally, this reading 
helps couples begin to conceptualize their problems in 
a way that is similar to how their therapist will frame 
them during the feedback session. 

Therapists should be aware that at least one partner, 
if not both, may likely be ambivalent about participating 
in therapy. Such ambivalence should be normalized 
and validated, and the therapist should explain to partners 
that the assessment period is also their opportunity 
to get to know the therapist and to determine whether 
this treatment is going to be a “good match” for them. 

Problem Areas (Sessions 1, 2, and 3) 

After the couple has been oriented to the therapy process, 
the therapist begins the evaluation by reviewing 
the couple’s presenting problem(s). Much of this information 
can be gathered from objective measures and 
also during each partner’s individual session, so this 
discussion during Session 1 should not consume the 
entire session. However, it is important during the first 

session that the partners feel heard and validated, and 
that their problems and distress are clearly understood 
by the therapist. 

From the information gathered from objective measures 
and during the evaluation sessions, therapists 
should be able to describe the partners’ problem areas 
and develop their formulation. The following six questions 
provide a guideline for this assessment, and each 
should be answered by the end of the assessment period. 


1. How distressed is the couple? 
2. How committed is this couple to the relationship? 
3. What issues divide this couple? 
4. Why are these issues a problem for them (the 
DEEP analysis)? 
5. What strengths keep this couple together? 
6. What can treatment do to help them? 
The first three questions can be addressed with objective 
questionnaires. However, even questions that 
can be addressed with questionnaires should usually be 
explored in further detail in interviews. For example, 
the individual sessions may be particularly useful for 
assessing whether distress is so great that separation is 
imminent, for assessing each partner’s level of commitment 
to the relationship and the possible presence of 
affairs, and for assessing the couple’s history of physical 
violence. 

The assessment of problem areas should also include 
a determination of the couple’s “collaborative 
set” (Jacobson & Margolin, 1979). This term refers to 
the couple’s joint perspective that they share responsibility 
for the problems in their relationship, and that 
both will have to change if the relationship is to change. 
The strength of this set determines whether change- 
or acceptance-oriented interventions are indicated. 
The stronger the couple’s collaborative set, the more 
successful initial change-oriented interventions are 
likely to be. But partners who lack this collaborative 
set—who enter therapy believing they are the innocent 
victim of the other’s behavior—first need to focus on 
acceptance work. 

The fourth question—why the partners’ issues are a 
problem for them—requires a functional analysis along 
the lines of the DEEP analysis described earlier. It is 
usually possible to obtain initial information about all 
four aspects of the DEEP analysis in the joint interview, 
but more nuanced understandings about these factors, 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

particularly Emotional sensitivities and Patterns of 
interaction, are typically best left to the individual interviews. 
Because adults are often unaware of the contingencies 
controlling their behavior, or may be embarrassed 
to admit those contingencies even if they know 
them, a functional analysis of emotions and patterns 
involves much more than a simple, straightforward inquiry. 
The therapist must be particularly sensitive to 
the emotional reactions of partners, which may indicate 
important reinforcers and punishers. For example, 
let us assume that our partners with the closeness– 
independence theme argue frequently about the amount 
of time they spend together. However, that specific 
issue may not be where the most powerful contingencies 
are found. Perhaps the wife’s history includes having 
been abandoned by her family members at a time 
when she was in particular need of their support and 
comfort. Her fear in her marital relationship is that her 
husband may do likewise. For her, the time they spend 
together is simply a poor proxy for her concerns that 
he may not always be there when she needs him. If she 
felt confident of that, then she could tolerate much less 
time together. For her husband’s part, let us assume that 
his social learning history has led him to be especially 
sensitive to being controlled or restricted by another 
person. Therefore, he battles his wife over their time 
together not so much because he does not want the time 
together, but because he feels controlled by her and 
naturally resists. In such a situation, the IBCT therapist 
needs to move the discussion away from the repetitive 
arguments about time spent together, toward the more 
important contingencies that affect each spouse’s behaviors, 
for example, the emotional sensitivities that 
each partner brings to the relationship and the pattern 
of interaction that triggers their emotional responses. 

Answers to the fifth question, about the couple’s 
strengths, also come from the joint and individual interviews. 
It is helpful for couples to keep their strengths 
in mind even as they focus on their difficulties. Sometimes 
there is an interesting relation between a couple’s 
strengths and its problems, in that the latter may involve 
some variation of the former. For example, let 
us assume that two partners were initially attracted to 
each other in part because of their different approaches 
to life. He is much more spontaneous; she is more deliberate 
and planful. Those differences may be attractive 
and helpful at times, but they can also be a source 
of irritation and conflict. 

In answering the final question, what treatment can 
do to help, the therapist must first be sure the couple is 

appropriate for couple therapy. If the couple has serious 
violence or a substance dependence problem, for example, 
then couple therapy as usual will not be the recommendation. 
Treatment directed at those particular 
problems will be necessary. If the couple is appropriate 
for couple therapy, the therapist will need to outline the 
focus of the therapy and what it comprises. 

The Couple’s History (Session 1) 

After the partners have been oriented to therapy and 
their problem areas have been assessed, the therapist 
then takes the history of the couple’s relationship. The 
therapist’s obvious objective for taking this history is 
to gain a good understanding of the partners’ attachment 
to one another. Often the distress has escalated to 
the degree that it has overshadowed the reasons the two 
became a couple in the first place. In addition, this history 
can provide some immediate therapeutic benefit to 
the couple. Generally, when partners discuss the earlier 
(and usually happier) stages of their relationship, their 
affect is likely to become more positive. They have 
been focused for so long on the negative aspects of their 
relationship that they probably have not thought about 
their early romance, courtship, and attraction to each 
other for a very long time. In this way, having couples 
describe the evolution of their relationship can be therapeutic 
in and of itself. Although some couples may be 
in too much pain to discuss their history without blaming 
and accusatory remarks (in which case the therapist 
should abandon the following guidelines and instead 
use the session to validate their pain), most couples 
enjoy reminiscing about their happier times. 

The following series of questions provides the therapist 
with useful information about the couple’s history 
and allow the partners an opportunity to reflect on the 
reasons they fell in love in the first place: 

•• 
“How did you get together?” 

•• 
“What was your courtship like?” 

•• 
“What attracted each of you to the other?” 

•• 
“What was your relationship like before your 

problems began?” 

•• 
“How is your relationship different now on days 

when you are getting along?” 

•• 
“How would the relationship be different if your 

current problems no longer existed? 

These and other, related questions may also reveal 
useful information about each partner, such as his/her 


Couple Distress 

hopes and dreams for the future. Information about the 
couple’s history is useful for the therapist in developing 
the couple’s formulation, which is presented to the 
partners during their feedback session. 

Individual History (Sessions 2 and 3) 

Each partner’s individual history can often provide useful 
information for the formulation, in that it provides 
a context for each partner’s behavior and illuminates 
possible emotional vulnerabilities in each. For example, 
perhaps the husband experienced his mother as 
very demanding of him and learned to cope with this 
through withdrawal, so the withdrawal continues in response 
to his wife’s demands. Or perhaps the wife had 
two previous boyfriends who cheated on her, so she is 
sensitive to any indication of betrayal by her husband. 

The following questions may be useful in guiding a 
discussion of each partner’s individual history: 

•• 
“What was your parents’ marriage like?” 
•• 
“What was your relationship with your father 
like?” 
•• 
“What was your relationship with your mother 
like?” 
•• 
“What were your relationships with your siblings 
like?” 
•• 
“What were your relationships with previous important 
romantic partners like?” 

Each of these questions could potentially take an 
inordinate amount of time. The IBCT therapist tries 
to elicit features of these early relationships that are 
similar to or may inform the current relationship. For 
example, if the therapist were aware of a difference between 
husband and wife in terms of how comfortable 
they were with conflict, he/she would guide the husband 
away from details about where his family lived 
and focus on the expression of conflict that occurred 
in his family. 

Feedback 

From the information gathered during the assessment 
sessions and from the questionnaires, the therapist 
develops the couple’s formulation, which is discussed 
with the couple in the feedback session (usually Session 
4). The feedback session can follow the outline 
of the six questions above used to assess the couple’s 
problem areas. It is important that the feedback session 

be a dialogue and not a lecture from the therapist— 
with the therapist continually getting feedback from 
the couple about the formulation being presented. The 
partners are the experts on their relationship and should 
be treated as such. 

The feedback session is also used to describe the 
proposed treatment plan for the couples, based on the 
therapist’s formulation. The therapist describes for the 
couple the goals for treatment and the procedures for 
accomplishing these goals. The goals for therapy are to 
create an in-session environment in which the couple’s 
problems can be resolved through some combination 
of acceptance and change techniques. In relation to the 
DEEP analysis, IBCT promotes emotional acceptance 
for the partners’ Differences and Emotional Sensitivities, 
in that these factors are likely to change only slowly, 
if at all. External stressors can sometimes be changed 
but often they too require acceptance. It is the Pattern 
of interaction that can be changed and is the focus of 
change efforts in IBCT. The procedures for meeting 
these goals of acceptance and change are usually (1) insession 
discussions of incidents and issues related to the 
formulation, and (2) homework to be conducted outside 
the session to further the in-session work. During the 
feedback session, the therapist introduces the couple 
to the Weekly Questionnaire (Christensen, 2010), goes 
over it, and asks that each partner to complete it prior 
to each session. It provides information on the couple’s 
experiences since the last session and serves as the 
basis for treatment sessions. This questionnaire includes 
the four-item version of the Couples Satisfaction 
Index (Funk & Rogge, 2007), so therapists can monitor 
the couple’s relationship satisfaction on a weekly 
basis. The questionnaire asks whether there have been 
any major changes in the couple’s life, and whether any 
incidents of violence, or any problematic incidents of 
substance/drug use have occurred. Then the questionnaire 
asks each partner to describe the most positive or 
meaningful interaction they had in the last week, the 
most difficult or negative interaction in the last week, 
and whether they anticipate any upcoming, challenging 
events. Finally, the partners rank what they think would 
be most important to discuss: the positive, negative, or 
upcoming event, or some issue not tied to a particular 
incident (e.g., saving money). Finally there is a place 
for the couple’s homework assignment, if there is any. 
These positive, negative, and challenging upcoming 
events, as well as the general issues the partners indicate 
on their questionnaires, provide the usual content 
for the therapy sessions. 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

The purpose of the feedback session is to orient 
partners to the goals of change and acceptance through 
open communication and finding new ways of looking 
at their problems. In addition, the feedback session 
gives partners some idea of what they can expect from 
therapy, and it elicits their willingness to participate. 
Finally, the feedback session may be used to implement 
some interventions. The first intervention is the therapist’s 
description of the couple’s strengths. From this 
discussion, partners may be able to see some solutions 
to their problems. The therapist can begin assigning 
relevant chapters from Part II of Reconcilable Differences 
(Christensen & Jacobson, 2000; Christensen 
et al., 2014), which specifically addresses the topic of 
acceptance. After the formulation and treatment plan 
have been described and the partners have agreed to 
proceed with therapy, the remaining sessions are devoted 
to building acceptance between partners and promoting 
change in each partner. 

Treatment 

IBCT Techniques for Building 
Emotional Acceptance 

Typically, treatment begins with a focus on promoting 
acceptance. The exception is when partners are able to 
collaborate with one another (“the collaborative set”) 
and both want to make specific changes in their relationship. 
In that case, the therapist begins with change 
strategies. 

In the context of acceptance work, the actual content 
of each session is determined by the partners and 
what they “bring in” every week. The therapist looks 
for emotionally salient material that is relevant to the 
formulation. Recent negative or positive events listed 
on the Weekly Questionnaire and related to the formulation 
are often the topics of discussion. For example, 
a couple with a closeness–independence theme might 
discuss a difficult incident in which the independence 
seeker wanted to spend the night out with friends and 
the closeness seeker protested. Discussions also may be 
centered around upcoming events listed on the Weekly 
Questionnaire, such as a weekend trip for the couple, in 
which the independence seeker fears that there will not 
be space for him/her to be alone. Broad issues related 
to the formulation and listed on the questionnaire are 
also appropriate for discussion, such as whether separate 
weekend trips apart with friends are acceptable for 
the couple. 

Sometimes salient events relevant to the formulation 
occur between partners during the session, and 
the therapist should generally make these the top priority 
because the emotions involving events during 
sessions tend to be more accessible than events that 
occur between sessions. For example, when the independence 
seeker turns away as the closeness seeker 
gets emotionally agitated during a discussion, the IBCT 
therapist focuses on this “in the moment” example of 
their closeness–independence theme and explores 
and frames it using the DEEP analysis. The therapist 
might also structure interactions during the session that 
mimic their difficulties or create possibilities for a different 
kind of interaction. For example, the therapist 
may have the couple replay a recent, difficult interaction 
to learn from it, or encourage the couple to attempt 
a different and more positive interaction around the 
topic. All of these topics are useful means for implementing 
the three acceptance-building strategies of 
empathic joining, unified detachment from the problem, 
and tolerance building. Because they can create 
greater closeness, as well as greater acceptance, the 
first two strategies are more commonly employed than 
the last one. 

eMPATHiC Joining 

“Empathic joining” refers to the process by which partners 
cease to blame one another for their emotional 
suffering and instead develop empathy for each other’s 
experience. To foster empathic joining, the IBCT therapist 
reformulates the couple’s problem as a result of 
common differences rather than deficiencies in either 
partner, and highlights the emotional sensitivities that 
make these differences especially difficult to handle. 
Partners’ behaviors are described in terms of their differences 
from one another, and their responses to these 
differences are validated as normal and understandable, 
especially given the emotional sensitivities that 
each may possess. 

In making this reformulation of each partner’s behavior, 
it is important that the IBCT therapist emphasize 
the pain that each partner is experiencing rather 
than the pain each has delivered. One strategy for 
building empathy between partners is through the 
use of “soft disclosures.” Often partners express their 
emotional pain by using “hard” disclosures of feelings 
such as anger or disgust. Although hard disclosures are 
easier to make because they do not reveal vulnerability, 
they are more difficult for the other partner to hear be



Couple Distress 

cause they imply blame. It is the combination of “pain 
and blame” that results in discord. But if the therapist 
can encourage partners to express their pain without 
expressing blame, the result may be increased acceptance 
from the other partner. IBCT therapists often encourage 
soft disclosures by suggesting “soft” feelings, 
such as the fear, hurt, and shame that may underlie each 
partner’s behavior. Although soft disclosures are more 
difficult to make because they reveal vulnerability, they 
are easier for the other partner to hear and arouse more 
empathy. Thus, empathic joining is promoted by (1) reformulation 
of a couple’s discord as a result of partners’ 
common differences and their understandable emotional 
reactions to those differences, and (2) the use 
of soft disclosures to express painful emotions. These 
disclosures can come through interaction between the 
therapist and each partner or the therapist can prompt 
the partners to make these disclosures directly to each 
other, increasing the emotional intensity of the disclosure 
and allowing the partners to have the conversation 
they did not have but could have had (Wile, 2008). 

UnifieD DeTACHMenT froM THe ProBleM 

This IBCT technique allows partners to “step back” 
from their problems and describe them without placing 
blame—or responsibility for change—on either 
partner. In this way, partners engage in “unified detachment” 
from their problems. This strategy can be 
used to engage a couple in a DEEP discussion about 
their Differences (how these differences resulted from 
their backgrounds), their Emotional sensitivities (what 
past experiences may have understandably led to these 
sensitivities), their External stressors (how these stressors 
came to be), and their Patterns of interaction (how 
each interacts in ways that make sense from his/her 
perspective). However, most often it is used to help the 
couple understand, accept, and eventually alter their 
Patterns of interaction. For example, the therapist may 
engage partners in a dialogue in which they use nonjudgmental 
terms to describe the sequence of a particular 
conflict, including what factors typically trigger 
their reactions, how specific events are connected to 
one another, and how they can defuse or override the 
conflict in the future. The approach is an intellectual 
analysis of the problem that is described in an emotionally 
detached manner as a third-party “it” rather than 
in terms of “you” or “me.” When possible, the therapist 
should give the couple’s theme, pattern of interaction, 
or mutual trap a name, and use this to define the prob


lem further as an “it.” By detaching themselves from 
the problem, partners have an opportunity to discuss 
their conflict without becoming emotionally “charged” 
by it. In this way, they can try to understand the conflict 
from a more neutral, objective stance. They engage in 
a kind of joint mindfulness about their problem. The 
therapist can also use metaphor and humor to distance 
the couple emotionally from the problem, as long as the 
humor does not in any way belittle either partner. 

TolerAnCe BUilDing 

Building acceptance may be most challenging when 
one partner experiences intense emotional pain as a 
result of the other partner’s behavior. In these circumstances, 
the IBCT therapist must help one partner build 
tolerance for the other partner’s “offending” behavior. 
By building tolerance, the partner ideally experiences a 
reduction in the pain caused by the behavior. To build 
tolerance, however, the partner must cease efforts to 
prevent, avoid, or escape the “offending” partner’s behavior. 
Instead, by exposing him/herself to the behavior 
without the associated struggle, the partner reduces 
his/her sensitivity to the behavior and, ideally, experiences 
the “offending” behavior as less painful. 

One strategy for building tolerance is through “positive 
reemphasis,” or focusing on the positive aspects 
of a partner’s negative behavior. This strategy may 
be relatively easy when a negative behavior is in some 
way related to a quality the partner once found attractive 
about the other. For example, what she sees as her 
partner’s “uptightness” might be the “stability” that 
first attracted her. Alternatively, what he sees as her 
“flakiness” or “irresponsibility” might be the “freespiritedness” 
or “rebelliousness” that so attracted him 
in the beginning of their relationship. The positive reemphasis 
does not deny the negative qualities of the 
behavior in question, but it helps partners gain the perspective 
that any quality often has both good and bad 
features. 

Another strategy for building tolerance for differences 
is to focus on the ways these differences complement 
each other, and to present these differences as part of 
what makes the relationship “work.” One partner’s stability 
might balance the other’s free-spiritedness. The 
therapist might describe for the partners the ways they 
would be “worse off” if those differences did not exist. 
The differences can become a positive aspect of the relationship, 
something in which the partners take pride 
rather than something they see as a destructive threat. 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

A third technique for building tolerance to a partner’s 
behavior is to prepare couples for inevitable slipups 
and lapses in behavior. This is especially important 
when the partners first begin to detect changes in their 
behavior and begin to feel positive about the progress 
they are making in therapy. It is during this time that 
the therapist should congratulate them for their hard 
work and progress, then warn them that “backsliding” 
is still a likely occurrence. The partners should be 
asked to imagine some of the circumstances in which 
a slipup is likely to occur, and to consider possible responses 
to the slipup in advance. Working out how they 
will face such lapses helps partners build their tolerance 
for them. 

A related strategy for building tolerance is to instruct 
couples to fake negative behavior while they are in session 
or at home. Each partner is instructed to engage in 
a designated “bad behavior”—with the stipulation that 
he/she is to engage in this behavior only when he/she 
does not feel like doing so. The instructions are given 
to the couple, so that each partner knows that a bad behavior 
he/she is about to witness in session or may see 
in the future might actually be faked. Ideally this introduces 
an ambiguity about future negative behaviors 
that may mitigate the partner’s emotional response to 
them. More importantly, however, is that faking behavior 
gives both partners an opportunity to observe the 
effects of their negative behavior on the other. Specifically, 
because they are performing the “bad behavior” 
during a time when they do not feel like it, they make 
these observations when they are in a calm emotional 
state that allows them to be more sympathetic. When 
done in session, the therapist can help debrief the reactions 
to the “bad” behavior. When done at home, the 
faker is instructed to let the other partner know about 
the faked behavior soon after is it performed, so the 
situation does not escalate and the partners have an opportunity 
to “debrief” following their “experiment.” 

One unavoidable source of pain for many partners 
is the feeling that the other fails to meet their needs in 
some important way. However, rarely is a partner able 
to fulfill all of the needs of the other. An important aspect 
of acceptance building is for partners to increase 
their own self-reliance, or self-care, in getting their 
needs met. They should be encouraged to find alternative 
ways to care for themselves when their partners are 
not able to do so. Partners may need to learn to seek 
support from friends and family in times of stress, or 
to find new ways to define and solve a problem on their 
own. As their self-reliance increases, reliance on part


ners to meet all of their emotional needs decreases. 
Ideally, this results in decreased sensitivity to their 
partners’ failure to meet their needs, thereby reducing 
conflict. 

Traditional Strategies for Promoting Change 

For some couples, change interventions may be indicated. 
Whether an IBCT therapist begins by implementing 
“acceptance” rather than “change” techniques depends 
primarily on the couple’s collaborative set and the partners’ 
specific treatment needs. In general, however, 
change techniques are most effective if implemented 
later in therapy, after acceptance work has been done. 
Often acceptance work is sufficient for bringing about 
change by itself: Once the collaborative set is restored 
through acceptance, the couple is able to bring about 
change by applying skills and strategies they already 
possess. In these situations, no deliberate change strategies 
need to be employed. 

BeHAVior exCHAnge 

The primary goal of behavior exchange (BE) is to increase 
the proportion of a couple’s daily positive behaviors 
and interactions. These techniques are instigative, 
in that they are intended to increase each partner’s performance 
of positive behaviors. Because BE requires a 
great deal of collaboration between partners, it is best 
implemented later in therapy, after acceptance work 
has been done. In addition to using BE to increase 
a couple’s positive interactions, the IBCT therapist 
should also consider BE a diagnostic tool for assessing 
possible areas in need of more acceptance work. 

The three basic steps in BE are (1) to identify behaviors 
that each partner can do for the other that would 
increase relationship satisfaction, (2) to increase the 
frequency of those behaviors in the couple’s daily behavioral 
repertoire, and (3) to debrief the experience 
of providing and receiving positive behaviors. Partners 
are often given a homework assignment to generate a 
list of actions to do for the other to increase his/her satisfaction. 
Partners are instructed not to discuss these 
lists with each other to reduce the threat of criticism 
from the other and to keep each partner focused on 
his/her own assignment. In the next session, partners’ 
lists are reviewed and discussed. Their next assignment 
might be to perform one or more of the actions on the 
list during the next week, but they are not to tell the 
partner which action they are performing. In the sub



Couple Distress 

sequent therapy session, partners review the success of 
their assignment and whether it had the desired effect 
on the other. The list can be modified to eliminate items 
that do not seem to have an effect, and in later sessions 
each partner can elicit feedback from the other to optimize 
the benefit of the actions on the list. 

CoMMUniCATion TrAining 

Although many couples are effective communicators 
without having had any formal “training,” poor communication 
may exacerbate or even cause many problems 
for distressed couples. In their attempts to get 
the other to change, partners may resort to maladaptive 
communication tactics such as coercion (crying, 
threatening, withholding affection). Although coercion 
may be effective in the short term, in that the other 
may eventually comply with the demand, the use of 
coercion is likely to escalate such that increasingly coercive 
tactics are required to achieve the desired effect. 
Also, coercion tends to beget coercion, so that coercion 
by one partner leads to coercion by the other. The inevitable 
result of such interactions is that partners become 
extremely polarized. The goal of communication 
and problem-solving training is to teach couples how 
to discuss their problems and to negotiate change without 
resorting to such destructive tactics. Ideally, these 
skills will be useful to couples even after therapy has 
ended. 

As part of communication training, couples are 
taught both “speaker” and “listener” skills. To become 
more effective “speakers,” couples are instructed to (1) 
focus on the self by expressing “I statements”; (2) focus 
on expressing emotional reactions, such as “I feel disappointed 
. . . ” or “I feel angry . . . ”; and (3) focus on 
the partner’s specific behaviors that lead to emotional 
reactions, such as “I feel disappointed when you don’t 
call me when you are away.” To become more effective 
listeners, partners are instructed to paraphrase and reflect 
what the other has just said. Paraphrasing ensures 
that neither partner is being misread during the conversation, 
and it decreases the tendency to jump to conclusions 
about what is being said, in addition to generally 
slowing down the interaction. 

Once partners have been given some instruction in 
these communication skills, they are directed to use 
these skills in practice conversations in the therapy 
session. Communicating with these guidelines may 
feel awkward during practice conversations, so therapists 
should try to adapt the guidelines to the couple’s 

style of conversation and explain that following the 
guidelines will feel more natural with increased use. 
The therapist should be prepared to interrupt and make 
corrections if the partners deviate from the guidelines 
and engage in destructive communication. The therapist 
should provide the couple with feedback after each 
practice session, and the exercise should be adequately 
debriefed. When the therapist is confident that the partners 
have improved their in-session communication 
skills, he/she then encourages them to practice these 
skills as homework. 

These basic communication skills often enable partners 
to share their feelings with one another and to discuss 
difficult issues that arise, such as when one partner 
gets upset with the other’s action. However, sometimes 
partners need to do more than share feelings or debrief 
an event. They need to solve an upcoming or recurrent 
problem, which is the purpose of problem-solving communication 
skills. 

ProBleM‑solVing TrAining 

Often what is more damaging in partners’ struggles 
around daily problems than the problems themselves is 
their destructive attempts to solve them. These attempts 
may begin with an accusation by one partner, which is 
met by defensiveness and anger from the other. Soon 
the argument may escalate to counterblaming and character 
assassination—and the problem itself gets lost in 
the conflict around it. In problem-solving training, couples 
are taught to have constructive problem-solving 
discussions while employing three sets of skills: problem 
definition skills, problem solution skills, and structuring 
skills. 

First, partners are taught to define the problem as 
specifically as possible by specifying the behavior of 
concern and the circumstances surrounding it. Partners 
are encouraged to describe some of the emotions they 
experience as a result of the problem, in an effort to 
increase emotional acceptance. Finally, both partners 
are asked to define their respective roles in perpetuating 
the problem. 

Once the problem has been defined, the couple can 
begin working toward problem solution. The first step 
in problem solution is brainstorming, in which the 
couple tries to come up with as many solutions to the 
problem as possible. The couple is told that any and 
all solutions may be considered, even impossible or 
silly ones. Immediate evaluative comments about the 
brainstormed solutions are discouraged, and discus



CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

sions of which options are actually viable are held off 
for later. Suggestions are written down so that they can 
be reviewed later. This exercise can be lighthearted and 
playful, often generating positive affect during the session. 
After the list has been generated, the couple goes 
through the list, eliminating those suggestions that are 
obviously impossible, silly, or unlikely to be effective. 
After the list is pruned, each item is considered for its 
potential to solve the problem. For each item, the couple 
considers the pros and cons, and the list is further modified, 
until a final list of options has been generated. The 
remaining items are used to formulate a possible solution 
to the problem. The agreement that is made about 
this solution is written down and sometimes signed by 
each partner. Finally, the couple is asked to consider 
any obstacles to executing the agreement, and to work 
out strategies for combating these. The partners are told 
to post the agreement in a place where they both can 
see it often, and a date is set to review their progress in 
solving the problem. During the next few sessions, the 
therapist checks in with them on their progress, and the 
agreement may be renegotiated, if necessary. 

Finally, the partners learn structuring skills for their 
problem-solving discussions. They structure these discussions 
by setting aside a specific time and place to 
have them. They are also instructed not to discuss the 
problem at the “scene of the crime,” that is, to hold off 
discussing a problem until the designated time. Finally, 
the couple is instructed to focus on only one problem 
at a time. Throughout their problem-solving discussions, 
partners are asked to follow the basic guidelines 
of paraphrasing each other’s statements, and to avoid 
both negative inferences about each other’s intent, and 
negative verbal and nonverbal communication. 

The couple’s first attempts at using these problemsolving 
skills should occur in session, under the supervision 
of the therapist. But after the partners have 
practiced and received feedback about their problemsolving 
skills, they are encouraged to apply these techniques 
at home to help them discuss and negotiate their 
problems. 

In implementing these behavior change skills, the 
IBCT therapist tries to adapt them to the particular 
needs of the couple. For example, if a couple finds it 
helpful to go back and forth between definition and solution 
while discussing a problem, the therapist would 
eliminate the guideline specifying that the problem be 
carefully defined before solutions are considered. Or if 
a couple finds it distracting to generate silly or impossible 
solutions, the therapist would not encourage that. 

The therapist also tries to adapt these strategies to the 
formulation for the couple. For example, if the closeness 
seeker tends to dominate discussions and make 
proposals for solving a problem about time together, 
while the independence seeker tends to withdraw from 
the discussion, the therapist might shift the focus on 
problem solving to the independence seeker. 

Therapist and Client Variables Relevant 
to IBCT 

As in any therapy, it is important that IBCT therapists 
maintain a nonjudgmental stance toward their clients. 
But in the context of IBCT, it is particularly important 
that the therapist practice acceptance with both partners 
in the same way that partners are asked to practice 
acceptance with one another. The IBCT therapist must 
validate the experiences and responses of both partners, 
and find ways to develop empathy and compassion 
for them no matter how challenging this may be. 

In addition to practicing acceptance, it is important 
that IBCT therapists listen carefully to couples’ 
in-session interactions and look for the functions of 
their various problematic behaviors. IBCT therapists 
must be particularly attentive to subtle verbal and 
nonverbal cues that may be relevant to the formulation 
of couples’ problems. IBCT therapists must also 
be prepared to abandon any prescribed agenda to address 
the immediate needs of the couple at any given 
time. When destructive interactions occur in session, 
the IBCT therapist must not only be able to maintain 
a nonconfrontational demeanor but also stop the interaction 
effectively. Other important IBCT skills include 
using couples’ language and jargon when making interventions. 
Finally, it is not a goal of IBCT therapists to 
“cheerlead” for the success of the relationship; rather, 
they create an environment in which couples can experience 
the hope of finding a different way of being, and 
safely discuss and evaluate their own relationships. 

The Efficacy of IBCT 

Three studies attest to the efficacy of IBCT—two small 
pilot investigations and one major outcome study. 
Wimberly (1998) randomly assigned eight couples to a 
group format of IBCT and nine couples to a waiting-list 
control group, and found superior results for the IBCT 
couples. Jacobson, Christensen, Prince, Cordova, and 
Eldridge (2000) randomly assigned 21 couples to either 
IBCT or TBCT. At the end of treatment, 80% of 


Couple Distress 

couples who had received IBCT showed clinically significant 
improvements in relationship satisfaction compared 
to 64% of couples who received TBCT. 

To date, the largest study of couple therapy in general 
and of IBCT in particular was reported by Christensen 
and colleagues (2004). In a two-site clinical 
trial conducted at UCLA and the University of Washington, 
Christensen and colleagues randomly assigned 
134 seriously and chronically distressed couples to 
either IBCT or TBCT. Couples received a maximum 
of 26 sessions of couple therapy delivered by professional 
PhD-level therapists, who provided both IBCT 
and TBCT treatments and were carefully supervised 
in both. Adherence and competence data provided evidence 
that treatments were delivered as expected. At 
termination, 70% of IBCT couples and 61% of TBCT 
couples had clinically significant improvements in relationship 
satisfaction. Pre- to posttreatment effect sizes 
on marital satisfaction were d = 0.90 for IBCT and d = 

0.71 for TBCT (see Christensen, Atkins, Baucom, & 
Yi, 2010) Although the termination results were not 
significantly different, the trajectory of change was different 
for both IBCT and TBCT couples. IBCT couples 
improved steadily in satisfaction throughout treatment, 
but TBCT couples improved more rapidly early on in 
treatment, with their gains flattening out more than 
those of IBCT couples later in treatment. 
Atkins and colleagues (2005) examined the predictors 
of response to treatment in the previous study. A 
variety of interpersonal variables, such as quality of 
communication, predicted the initial status of couples, 
but precious few variables predicted change from intake 
to termination. Couples who were married longer 
showed greater improvements in satisfaction, and exploratory 
analyses indicated that sexually dissatisfied 
couples showed slower initial gains but overall more 
consistent gains in IBCT than in TBCT. 

Doss, Thum, Sevier, Atkins, and Christensen (2005) 
analyzed the mechanisms of change in this study of couple 
therapy. Early in therapy, changes in the frequency 
of targeted behaviors were associated with increases 
in satisfaction for both treatment conditions. However, 
later in therapy, changes in the acceptance of targeted 
behaviors were associated with increases in satisfaction 
for both treatment conditions. TBCT generated 
significantly greater increases than IBCT in targeted 
behaviors early in treatment. However, IBCT generated 
significantly greater increases in the acceptance of targeted 
behaviors throughout treatment. Thus, the study 
validated some of the putative mechanisms of change 

and differences between the treatments in their impact 
on these mechanisms. 

Subsequently, studies have examined these couples 
over follow-up: Christensen, Atkins, Yi, Baucom, and 
George (2006) looked at relationship satisfaction data 
in couples every 6 months over a 2-year follow-up; Baucom, 
Sevier, Eldridge, Doss, and Christensen (2011) 
looked at observational data at 2-year follow-up; and 
Christensen and colleagues (2010) examined relationship 
satisfaction and relationship status approximately 
every 6 months over a 5-year follow-up. Couples generally 
maintained their treatment gains in satisfaction 
over 2 years, and IBCT couples had significantly superior 
relationship satisfaction compared to TBCT 
couples at each time point during the first 2 years of 
follow-up. Although TBCT couples, having been 
trained explicitly in communication, showed greater 
improvements in observed communication at termination 
than IBCT couples (Sevier, Eldridge, Jones, Doss, 
& Christensen, 2008), IBCT couples showed greater 
maintenance of gains over 2 years (Baucom et al., 
2011). Over the subsequent 3 years, couples lost some 
of their gains, and results from IBCT and TBCT converged. 
At 5-year follow-up, results for marital satisfaction 
relative to pretreatment revealed effect sizes of d = 

1.03 for IBCT and d = 0.92 for TBCT; 50.0% of IBCT 
couples and 45.9% of TBCT couples showed clinically 
significant improvement. Relationship status, obtained 
on all 134 couples, revealed that 25.7% of IBCT couples 
and 27.9% of TBCT couples were separated or divorced. 
None of these findings at 5-year follow-up were 
statistically significant. These follow-up data compared 
favorably to other, long-term results of couple therapy. 
Baucom, Atkins, Simpson, and Christensen (2009) 
examined predictors of 2-year follow-up. As in the 
earlier prediction study, there were few predictors of 
outcome. Perhaps because of greater commitment, 
length of marriage predicted better outcomes at 2-year 
follow-up. Two objective predictor variables not used 
in the earlier prediction study were used here: a measure 
of arousal obtained from voice recordings during 
the observational data, and measures of influence tactics 
obtained through linguistic analysis of transcribed 
observational data. Using these measures, moderately 
distressed couples in which the wife had lower levels 
of arousal during problem-solving discussions and in 
which hard influence tactics (that give the partner little 
room to respond) were used less frequently tended to 
perform better in treatment than moderately distressed 
couples with higher levels of arousal or those who used 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

more hard influence tactics. Couples in IBCT tended 
to do better than their counterparts in TBCT when the 
wife had higher levels of arousal and when couples 
used soft influence tactics. Clearly these findings need 
to be replicated, However, it may be that the strategies 
of IBCT, which emphasize emotional expression, work 
better than TBCT strategies when there is high emotional 
arousal and when partners are more open to influence. 


It is important to note that this sample, although designed 
to include seriously and chronically distressed 
couples, excluded couples in which one or both partners 
were experiencing bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, 
or serious suicidality; met criteria for current drug or 
alcohol abuse or dependence; met criteria for borderline, 
antisocial, or schizotypal personality disorders; or 
had a history of severe physical violence. The rationale 
for these exclusionary criteria is that for such individuals, 
a primary treatment other than couple therapy is 
likely to be indicated. However, the sample did not exclude 
couples in which one or both partners suffered 
from other psychological disorders, such as anxiety or 
depression. The rationale for including these couples is 
that their relationship can still be treated despite partners 
having such individual problems. Furthermore, 
some of the couples’ relationship problems may even 
be contributing to these individual problems. Thus, 
preliminary data suggest that IBCT can be successfully 
applied to many couples, including those in which a 
partner has certain other psychological disorders. For 
example, the preceding predictor studies found that indices 
of mental illness, including Structured Clinical 
Interview for DSM-IV diagnoses, were not related to 
improvements during couple therapy. Furthermore, Atkins, 
Dimidjian, Bedics, and Christensen (2009) found 
that depression in this sample improved as relationship 
satisfaction improved. 

Ongoing research with this sample will examine in 
greater detail the process of couple therapy, potential 
mechanisms of change as they relate to 5-year outcome, 
and predictors of 5-year outcome. Apart from research 
on this particular sample, additional research is being 
done to expand the reach of IBCT. Brian Doss and 
Andrew Christensen have adapted IBCT for an online 
treatment and with support from the National Institute 
of Child Health and Development are testing the efficacy 
of this treatment. Also, IBCT has been chosen 
as one of the evidence-based treatments that the U.S. 
Veteran’s Administration (VA) is implementing nation


wide. VA therapists throughout the country are being 
given intensive training that involves several days of 
workshop followed by 6 months of weekly supervision 
as therapists see two or more couples using IBCT. A 
trained IBCT consultant listens to therapists’ recorded 
sessions; therapists must reach proficiency on a rating 
scale of IBCT criteria in order to complete the training 
program successfully. Program evaluation data are 
being collected as part of that work, and initial results 
suggest positive outcomes for IBCT with this VA population 
of couples. For additional information on IBCT, 
including access to online research articles and a national 
database of therapists trained in the approach, 
see ibct.psych.ucla.edu. 

case stuDy 

We use the case example of Anne and Mark2 to demonstrate 
the application of IBCT. We have included excerpts 
from the assessment and feedback sessions, in 
addition to treatment sessions selected for their effective 
use of IBCT acceptance-building interventions.3 

Anne and Mark were a middle-aged couple married 
for 10 years at treatment onset. Anne had three children 
from her previous marriage. 

Assessment 

Session 1 

After greetings and introductions, Anne and Mark’s 
therapist (Dr. S) began Session 1 by orienting them to 
the assessment process as follows: 

“We’ll be working together for the next 25 sessions. 
You have already done the first step of the assessment 
process by completing all of those questionnaires. 
Your next three visits, including today, will 
be the second step of the assessment phase. Today 
I’m meeting with the two of you to get to know you, 
to hear about your relationship . . . as you share some 
of the history about meeting and dating, and bring 
us up until today. Then over the next two visits, I’d 
like to meet with the two of you individually. After 
that, at the fourth visit, I’ll give you feedback. That’s 
where I’ll put together all of the information from 
the questionnaires and our time together today, as 
well as our time individually, to paint a picture to 


Couple Distress 

present some understanding of what could be going 
on.” 

Particularly if the couple expresses hesitation or ambivalence 
about being in therapy, the therapist should 
include the following: 

“This assessment period is also your opportunity to 
get to know me and the kind of therapy we’ll be 
doing, so that you can get a feeling for whether this is 
going to be a good match for your needs right now.” 

After checking in with Anne and Mark to see whether 
they understood this explanation, Dr. S elicited from 
them a brief description of their presenting problems: 

“Before we get into your history, maybe you could 
give me a sense of some of the problems that have 
been going on that led you to decide, “Let’s get some 
help.” 

After Mark and Anne took turns describing their 
sides of the problems in the relationship, Dr. S gathered 
the couple’s developmental history, using probing 
phrases such as the following: 

“Let’s start at the beginning. Why don’t you tell me 
where and how the two of you met?” 

“Mark, what was it about Anne that attracted you 
initially? What about you, Anne?” 

“Anne, how could you tell that Mark was interested 
in you? . . . What kinds of things did he say? . . . 
How did you flirt with him? Which one of you 
made the first move?” 

“When you decided to go from living together to getting 
married, how did that happen?” 

In the course of their description, Anne and Mark 
had many opportunities to say complimentary things 
about each other. Mark described Anne as sensual, 
a quality that he found very attractive, and Anne described 
Mark as very nice and easygoing. Dr. S was 
very thorough and specific when eliciting details of 
Mark and Anne’s behavior during courtship, such as 
the fact that both partners agreed that their first kiss 
was very good. 

Even during this part of the assessment phase, opportunities 
for building acceptance may present them


selves. At one point during Session 1, Anne made a soft 
disclosure when she discussed a time when she had 
initially rejected Mark (who had asked her to dance). 
Anne said that when Mark did not get angry with her 
after she rejected him, she felt safe with him because 
she could be herself and he would not get mad at her. 
She reported that this quality about Mark attracted her 
to him. Mark, who had initially reported feeling humiliated 
by Anne’s rejection, responded to Anne’s soft 
disclosure by saying, “I’m kind of surprised by that. I 
know that is an important feeling for her, but I didn’t 
realize she was feeling that back then.” Anne said that 
she had not realized she felt that way either, until describing 
the incident in the therapy session. 

By the end of Session 1, Dr. S had a good understanding 
of Anne and Mark’s history together, the qualities 
that first attracted each to the other, and some idea 
of their problem areas. The next two individual sessions 
helped Dr. S “fill-in” any missing information that he 
needed for their formulation. 

Sessions 2 and 3 

Dr. S introduced these individual sessions with a brief 
orientation, followed by an introduction to the ongoing 
assessment of the couple’s problem areas: 

“There are a lot of different topics that we’ll be covering 
today as we go along. I’d like to spend some 
time clarifying some of the problems both you and 
[Anne/Mark] have had. In our first meeting, you described 
some problems that you’ve perceived about 
[problem area]. Can you tell me what you meant by 
that?” 

In addition to the problems that Anne and Mark 
raised in their conjoint session, Dr. S used the individual 
sessions to address problem areas that Anne and 
Mark had indicated on the Frequency and Acceptability 
of Partner Behavior Questionnaire: 

“When I looked over your list of problem areas, the 
item of most concern to you was [problem area]. Can 
you describe that to me?” 

Dr. S was very specific in his efforts to get Anne and 
Mark to describe their disagreements and arguments. 
To encourage Mark and Anne to be behaviorally specific 
in these descriptions, Dr. S used probing questions: 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

“Do the two of you have fights about [problem area]? 
What do those fights look like?” 

“When you are both angry, what do you tend to do?” 

“Describe for me your most recent argument. Describe 
for me the worst argument you’ve ever 
had. If I had a video camera there with you, what 
would I have seen?” 

In addition to understanding their conflict patterns, 
Dr. S also asked how problems were addressed in their 
families growing up (“How did your own parents deal 
with conflict?”). This information may be useful in understanding 
the developmental history and emotional 
vulnerabilities that each partner brings into a conflict, 
and the patterns that each may risk repeating or is trying 
to avoid (e.g., physical violence). 

When eliciting descriptions of Anne and Mark’s arguments, 
Dr. S also assessed whether the couple had 
ever engaged in physical violence. This assessment is 
a critical part of every couple therapy evaluation, and 
it is a major rationale for conducting these individual 
interviews. A simple direct question is useful here: 

“Have your arguments ever led to pushing, shoving, 
or any type of physical violence?” 

If either partner endorses this question, or has indicated 
violence on a questionnaire such as the CTS2, a 
more thorough assessment of violence should be conducted, 
and appropriate referrals should be made as 
indicated (Jacobson & Gottman, 1998). In this case example, 
violence was not an issue for Anne and Mark.4 

Finally, the individual sessions provide a good opportunity 
for the therapist to assess each partner’s 
level of commitment to the relationship. This assessment 
also includes inquiry as to whether one or both 
partners are engaging in extramarital affairs. Affairs 
require special treatment in IBCT (Jacobson & Christensen, 
1998), which is beyond the scope of this chapter. 
Fortunately, Anne and Mark’s relationship was not 
troubled by affairs. With Anne and Mark individually, 
Dr. S asked: 

“On a scale of 1 to 10, how would you rate your level 
of commitment to [Mark/Anne]?” 

By the end of Anne’s and Mark’s respective assessment 
sessions, Dr. S had sufficient information about 
their problem areas, patterns of conflict (including their 

lack of a history of violence), relevant family history, 
and level of commitment to come up with their formulation 
and proceed with their feedback session. 

Feedback and Formulation 

Session 4 

Dr. S began the feedback session by orienting Anne and 
Mark about what to expect, and also eliciting their participation 
in giving him feedback about his formulation 
and description of their problem areas: 

“During this session, I’d like to share with you some 
feedback, as I mentioned in our first session together. 
I’ve spent some time looking over your questionnaires, 
and we’ve spent some time talking, which has 
been very helpful in helping me get a better sense 
of the two of you. As I go along, I’d really like your 
input, your reactions, because that’s an important 
part of our work together—with you both responding, 
as opposed to me directing, interjecting any 
thoughts you have, as well as adding any information 
that fits or telling me when information doesn’t fit.” 

Dr. S began giving Anne and Mark feedback by ex


plaining the information gathered from questionnaires 

they completed: 

“The measures we gave you were designed to give us 
a sense of where you are as a couple, in terms of the 
range of couples, from the very happily married to 
those with “everyday,” normal distress, to the other 
end of the spectrum—couples who are very similar 
to ones who have divorced. Both of you are in the 
area of couples who are experiencing distress, couples 
who would like things to be better. You are both 
distressed, although Anne reported higher levels of 
distress.” 

Dr. S moved on to summarize Anne’s and Mark’s 

levels of commitment, which he characterizes as a 

strength for their work on therapy: 

“With regard to commitment, both of you are committed 
to the relationship, which is very important 
to both of you. And that is very important in couple 
work—that in spite of everything that has gone on, 
there is still the commitment. That is very telling— 
you’ve both shown and expressed that.” 


Couple Distress 723 

Dr. S then moved on to summarize the content of 
Anne and Mark’s problem areas. Dr. S had distilled 
their questionnaire data and their in-session descriptions 
to the following three basic problem areas: 

“So let’s talk about the areas of your relationship that 
are troubling. One area is finances; that tends to be 
an area of dispute. For you, Anne, feeling resentful 
sometimes, feeling the burden of the responsibility, 
and for you, Mark, feeling guilty about how things 
are financially. This area really brings out lots of different 
feelings—feelings of resentment, feelings of 
guilt, feelings of burden—and rather than feelings of 
closeness and togetherness, feelings of control. Does 
that sound accurate? Are there any other aspects of 
finances that the two of you can think of? 

“The other area I saw was with regard to Anne’s 
children. You both feel very differently about the 
subject of Anne’s children: Anne, you feel like Mark 
is not involved with your children, and Mark, you 
feel as though you have not been invited. For you, 
Mark, the experience of being rejected [by the children] 
is Anne’s fault. This is an area that brings out 
very strong feelings for both of you, whether it gets 
expressed directly or not. You may not talk about it, 
but I definitely got the sense that this is a real pressure 
cooker for both of you. This is an area that I 
imagine will come up in different ways, especially 
with the holidays coming up. 

“The third area I saw concerns responsiveness. 
‘How responsive are you to me?’ Whether you are 
being physical (‘You’re not responsive enough’ or 
‘You’re too responsive’), listening (‘Are you listening 
to me?’), touching, or asking a question, your actions 
can carry a message of what you want to express, or 
a feeling that you are having. So part of what we will 
work on is expressing those feelings you are having. 
Those may be a surprise for each of you.” 

Throughout each of his descriptions, Dr. S checked 
in with Anne and Mark for their feedback about each 
problem area, and the ways that they might add to his 
description. 

Even during this part of the feedback session, an opportunity 
for acceptance work presented itself. When 
Mark discussed his relationship with Anne’s children, 
he was initially making only “hard” disclosures, by 
describing her children as rude, and only able to talk 
about themselves. Because Mark made such critical 
statements about Anne’s children, Dr. S elicited from 

Mark some softer disclosures about his emotions with 
regard to Anne’s children: 

Dr. S: Besides them being rude, what is the feeling 
you are left with when [Anne’s children] don’t talk 
to you? 

mark: The feeling I’m left with is being ignored. 

Dr. s: Besides being ignored, how did it feel? 

mark: Like I don’t matter, like I am only there to serve 
them. 

Dr. s: Like you are not a part of the family. 

mark: Yeah. I think I’ve just resigned myself to hoping 
that they’ll show their love for their mother. 

Dr. s: So it upsets you that they don’t take an interest 
in their mother? So it isn’t just about you, you have 
some feelings about how Anne’s sons interact with 
her? 

mark: Yeah, yeah, I do. 

Dr. s: And that upsets you? 

mark: Yeah, it does. I feel protective. I’d like them to 
show more appreciation to her. But then, I’d like myself 
to show more appreciation to her. I don’t think I 
show enough appreciation to her. Maybe they’re related 
. . . it’s a reminder of the things I’m not doing 
well. 

By moving Mark from criticizing Anne’s children to 

making softer statements about his feelings, Dr. S gave 

Mark an unexpected opportunity to make important 

realizations about his own behavior—his emotional 

sensitivity. 
After reviewing their problem areas, Dr. S proceed


ed to describe the two themes he had observed from his 

assessment of Anne and Mark: 

“It seems to me from what you’ve both described in 
your individual sessions, your questionnaires, and 
even today, there are two themes that come up for 
you. When I say ‘theme,’ it’s like in our sessions; 
whatever the topic is for the day, there’s usually a 
theme. The theme is something I’ll bring up from 
time to time. Again, it’s clearly something that we’ll 
work on together. It may take a different form, so I 
want to share it with you to make sure that it’s on the 
mark, OK? 

“I think the first theme is that you both have feelings 
of being unloved and unappreciated. You have 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

an idea of what it means to be loved. You have an 
idea of what it means to be appreciated. But your definitions 
are different. And because of those different 
definitions, because of your different experiences, if 
something does happen, it leaves you feeling unappreciated 
and unloved. Within the arguments about 
finances or children, there is something about that— 
about feeling unappreciated. How does that sound to 
you? 

“The second theme is that you both have your insecurities. 
You both have feelings of insecurity, for 
whatever reason. Some of the arguments, the differences, 
the conflicts, the big fights, come from that 
also. That feeling comes up and can create the whole 
battle. A concrete example is that you, Anne, described 
feeling insecure about yourself in relation to 
some of your family members. That affects how you 
feel about yourself in comparison to other women. 
Mark, you described feeling insecure about the fact 
that Anne has not annulled her previous marriage. 
That may affect how confident you feel in comparison 
to other men. Again, these feelings of insecurity, 
feeling not loved, unappreciated—these are the 
themes.” 

After Dr. S described each theme—some of the related 
differences, emotional sensitivities, and external 
stressors—and received feedback from Anne and Mark 
about these themes, he moved on to discuss their pattern 
of communication or polarization and the resultant 
mutual trap: 

“Now, what is this thing we call the ‘trap’ that you 
both get into? You each have different ways of responding 
to feeling unloved and insecure. The sense 
that I get is that, Mark, when you start to feel those 
things, you use distance. The sense I get from you, 
Anne, is that you become critical. Put the two of you 
together, and you have a cycle: The feelings come 
up, Mark gets distant, and Anne gets critical. Mark 
feels criticism, he gets distant. Anne experiences the 
distance, she gets critical. Distance, criticism, criticism, 
distance. That’s what we call the trap. It may 
be that you take turns being critical and distant, and 
that each response makes the other person feel even 
more insecure.” 

After reviewing the polarization process and mutual 

trap, Dr. S proceeded to explain to Anne and Mark 

what to expect from the upcoming therapy sessions: 

“So this is what we’re going to do in the upcoming 
weeks, the kinds of things we’ve talked about today. 
We’ll talk about whatever is going on for the two of 
you on a given day. It isn’t going to be structured in 
terms of things we have to do each day—it’s up to 
you, whatever you bring in. 

“What I hope to do is create in here a place of 
comfort, enough that you can both take risks in 
opening up, in sharing—sharing some of your reactions, 
your questions, your experiences. There is a 
desire for closeness here that is going to take some 
sharing and some risk taking. Now, there’s no guarantee 
about how the other person is going to react. It 
may not always be pleasant. But on the other hand, 
that’s the price we have to pay to get there, to open 
up. You can do some more thinking about this and 
from week to week we can reformulate, and we’ll 
keep getting a clearer, better picture.” 

Having set the stage with the formulation, including the 
themes, the DEEP analysis, and mutual trap, Dr. S is 
prepared to begin work on building acceptance. 

###CUT###
Treatment: Building Acceptance 

Most of Anne and Mark’s subsequent sessions were 
focused on building acceptance. Below are excerpts 
from a few sessions in which Dr. S helped Anne and 
Mark to increase acceptance by using techniques such 
as empathic joining, unified detachment, and tolerance 
building. 

Session 12 

The content of this session is about Anne and Mark’s 
search for a condominium, and some of the difficulties 
they were experiencing. The discussion includes 
Mark’s admission that he feels inadequate and insecure 
because he does not make enough money for 
them to afford Anne’s dream condo. This led to an 
opportunity to explore Anne and Mark’s theme of insecurity: 


mark: If we settle for a condominium that we don’t 
really want, it will forever be a monument to my inability 
to get the condo she wants. 

Dr. S: I’m wondering if there’s another part that wonders, 
“Will I ever really be able to give her what she 
wants?” 


Couple Distress 725 

mark: Yeah. If she married somebody who had a lot 
of money, she could get whatever condo she wanted. 

anne: But if you married someone who was gorgeous, 
who was 20 years younger, you could have a trophy 
wife, but that’s not what happened. (Both laugh.) 

Dr. S: So that may be part of your insecurity. If you 
looked the way that you experience as “the way he 
wants things,” then maybe he’d be happier. 

mark: (to Dr. S) I think that’s how she feels about herself 
at her worst moments. Like maybe all men are 
attracted to younger women and that you have to harness 
yourself not to lose what’s important to you . . . 
(to Anne) maybe that’s how you look at your desire 
to have your dream condo. How do you keep from 
saying, “There’s that rich lawyer who looks at me all 
of the time”? ... (to Dr. S) I think that would be a 
pretty natural thing for her to think about. 

This dialogue also reveals the unified detachment 
Anne and Mark are developing, when they both laugh 
at Anne’s comment about a “trophy wife.” What has 
previously been a very painful subject for Anne is 
becoming something about which they can joke. The 
discussion then moved to exploring Anne’s insecurities 
about Mark’s relationships with other women: 

Dr. S: So what in your eyes is Mark’s ideal “bill”? You 
made reference to a “bill” that is his ideal. 

anne: Well, probably someone younger, who is able to 
have children, someone who plays tennis, who goes 
running and also cooks and cleans, makes a good 
living, is very good in bed . . . 

Dr. S: (to Mark) Because this is comparable to the richer 
man that you view with Anne. (to Anne) For you, 
it’s the woman who . . . 

anne: But that woman’s out there. A lot of women are 
like that. 

Dr. S: And the way that you see and experience Mark 
talking to women. And at times you kind of wonder 
to what extent he enjoys it, and you think it’s just a 
matter of time if you’re not willing to live up to it . . . 

anne: Right, that some other women is going to be 
able to step right in there without a problem. 

Dr. S: When the insecurities come up for both of you. 
For you, Mark, it’s the rich man who could come 
along and provide what Anne longs for, and for you, 
Anne, it’s that you don’t compete physically—with 

the workout—so it’s just a matter of time until a 
woman comes along and decides, “I’m going after 
him.” Anne, can you tell me some of the things Mark 
does that make you feel threatened? 

anne: When he makes comments about how attractive 
a woman is, like I’m one of the guys. When he tells 
me I’m fat, or makes comments like I have a double 
chin . .. 

Dr. S: Which then tells you that you’re not cutting it. 

anne: Yeah. 

Dr. S then brought back the subject of condominium 
buying, and used this as a metaphor for Anne and 
Mark’s concerns about “settling” for less than what 
they want in making a major commitment: 

Dr. S: When you make a commitment, whether it’s committing 
to a condo, committing to a relationship—it’s 
settling, you’re settling—you’re saying, “This is it.” 

anne: That’s a good way of looking at it. I hadn’t 
thought of that. That’s what we’re having trouble 
with . . . the reality that we’re not going to get everything 
that we want. The insecurity, the scariness 
of making the purchase, is knowing that we’re never 
going to get what we want. 

mark: Part of it is our concern that the next condominium 
we see is going to be the one we want. 

anne: Right, it’s the condo over the next hill. 

mark: So you have to think, “Is 60% of what we want 
what we should settle for?” I’m thinking, 60? I was 
thinking it’s more like 90. So I don’t know when 
you’re supposed to cut your losses and say we have 
to go for this—this is what reality dictates. 

Dr. S: And if we can take it a step further, it might be 
that when you both decided to get married, you both 
made a settlement. You both start to wonder whether 
the other settled for 60 or 90%. You wonder, “What 
did I settle for? Did I settle for 60 or 90%?” 

mark: Yeah. 

anne: Right. 

Dr. S: Now let’s put yourselves in a situation where 
you’re insecure. What’s gonna happen? When you’re 
in an insecure place, that 90% might feel like . . . 

anne: 50%. 

Dr. S: Exactly. When you’re feeling good, you think, 
“She got 90% of what she wanted in me,” or “I got 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

90%.” But when you’re in an insecure place, you 
think, “I settled for 50%.” Then when you look at 
your own insecurity, you think, “My God, she settled 
for 35 or 40%.” You both made a settlement when 
you married each other. You decided, “This is it, 
we’re gonna get married,” and you settled. 

mark: But “settled” has such negative connotations. 
Dr. S: I think there’s some feelings associated with 
that. And a parallel to the word “settlement” is “acceptance.” 


mark: Oh, I see. 

Dr. S: When you go through the settlement, you think, 
“This is who this person is.” Whether it’s 90, 80, 60, 
or 35%, you’ve settled—you’ve basically said, “I accept 
this.” 

By using condominium buying as a metaphor, Dr. 
S has underscored how Anne and Mark’s theme of 
insecurity feeds itself, and how it leads them both to 
question whether each has “settled” for less than he/she 
wanted in the relationship. Adding the additional component 
of “insecurity about settlement” to their theme 
helped Anne and Mark understand the things each of 
them do that “threaten” the other (e.g., when Mark 
talks about his attraction to younger women), and also 
build a bridge toward working on acceptance. 

Session 17 

In this session, Dr. S continues to process the theme 
of insecurity with Anne and Mark. In this particular 
part of the dialogue, when Anne and Mark are discussing 
a familiar polarization process, Mark suggests to 
Anne that she work out more. Anne interprets Mark’s 
suggestion as a criticism about her appearance, which 
makes her feel insecure and threatened. Anne then 
“fights back” against Mark’s suggestions by becoming 
depressed and “doing nothing,” which in turn makes 
Mark more critical of her. 

Here Dr. S uses two IBCT acceptance-building techniques. 
The first technique is empathic joining. As Dr. 
S tries to “get to the bottom of” Mark’s suggestions/ 
criticisms of Anne’s appearance, Mark makes the following 
soft disclosure about his own insecurities: 

Dr. S: This is a real, central question. There are some 
basic limits that you have, where you say, “Up to here, 
I accept you, but beyond that, you’d better change.” 
On the other hand, this is who you are. This is who 

you are. But the irony of it is, that once we accept, 
change can come about. But there’s that push to determine 
within ourselves not only the other person’s 
limits but also our own. I get the sense that you’re 
both exploring yourselves and your own limits. 

anne: Perhaps, yes. 

Dr. S: You’re both looking at your own limits. With 
you, Anne, it’s about your looks, your appearance. 
And for you, Mark, it’s about you as a financial provider. 
And the temptation is, when that gets uncomfortable, 
that’s where your partner comes in kind of, 
to redirect your focus from that versus being able to 
talk about how you’re feeling. 

anne: Yeah. 

mark: Yeah, I think I’ve noticed, since we’ve started 
therapy, that’s what I do. When I get insecure about 
myself, I start looking outwards, saying, “You should 
do this,” and that makes me feel better. 

Dr. S: Right, it’s active. It can be advice giving—it can 
be a real male thing, “Do this, do that.” 
mark: Right, I do that with her kids, too. I know I do. 

Instead of focusing on the critical nature of Mark’s 
suggestions, Dr. S has placed an emphasis on why Mark 
becomes critical. Mark is encouraged to consider the 
reasons for his behavior, and as a result he discloses 
that he becomes critical when he himself is feeling 
insecure. Mark recognizes that this happens not only 
with regard to his attempts to direct Anne’s behavior 
but also in his interactions with Anne’s children. 

The second acceptance-building technique Dr. S 
uses in this portion of the session is a tolerance intervention: 
emphasizing the positive aspects of a partner’s 
negative behavior. Dr. S continues: 

Dr. S: In some situations it might work really well [to 
give advice]. People might like that—like in your 
work as a counselor, Mark. You feel really productive. 


mark: Yeah, I change people’s lives. I know I do. 

Dr. S: On the other hand, there might be some circumstances 
where it’s experienced as being critical, and 
I think of this in terms of the two of you. It feeds into 
Anne’s feeling criticized. 

anne: Yes. 

Dr. S: And then it feels threatening, like “If you don’t 
do something about it, then . . . ” 


Couple Distress 

Here Dr. S has positively reemphasized Mark’s suggestions 
to Anne as his attempts to give her guidance 
or advice. Mark, an employment counselor, is used to 
giving such suggestions to others as a way of being 
constructive or helpful. Dr. S underscores this aspect 
of Mark’s behavior—that this same “counselor” quality 
makes Mark very good at what he does in his career. 
However, Dr. S does not try to reframe Mark’s behavior 
as completely positive. Dr. S also underscores how 
Mark’s “advice” is experienced by Anne as critical and 
threatening. 

At the end of the session, Dr. S recharacterizes Anne 
and Mark’s polarization process in terms of the information 
that has emerged from these two interventions: 

Dr. S: I think you put it really well, Mark. When you 
start to feel uncomfortable, this is your process, this 
is what you do. You start to look outside yourself. 
From your end, it might be like you’re being a counselor 
when you start with Anne. You want to advise. 
But from her end, it might be like you’re being authoritarian, 
the drill sergeant, rather than the counselor. 
And you, Anne, start to feel you’re being berated. 
You start to feel worse about yourself. 

anne: Yeah. 

Dr. S: So you feel like you’ve gotta either take it, or 
you’ve gotta fight back. 
mark: I think I can . . . the fighting back is . . . well, I 
can understand that. I really can. 

Session 25 

In their final session, Anne described a recent insight 
she had had about feeling “undeserving” of happiness, 
and her belief that happiness comes at a cost of some 
kind. She said that happiness made her feel guilty because 
she felt that someone else must be suffering for 
her happiness, or that somehow she would suffer negative 
repercussions for being happy. Anne connected 
some of these feelings to her bout with an eating disorder 
as a teenager, and to the depressive episodes she 
sometimes experienced as an adult. 

In the dialogue below, Dr. S uses several IBCT techniques 
to discuss Anne’s insights and the way that her 
feelings contribute to the couple’s polarization process. 
First, Dr. S uses empathic joining to help Mark understand 
the experience Anne is having when she gets 
depressed (a time when Mark regularly makes suggestions 
about how Anne “should” think, feel, or be


have). Then Dr. S detaches Anne and Mark from their 
problem—that Anne feels criticized whenever Mark 
makes these suggestions. Rather than engaging Anne 
and Mark in their emotional responses to each other’s 
behavior, Dr. S framed this problem as a consequence 
of basic communication problems. By describing their 
problem in terms of their methods of communication, 
Dr. S detaches Anne and Mark from the problem itself, 
and provides each with a new way of reacting to an 
old problem (without doing any formal communication 
training): 

Dr. S: I think the idea around the conflict over 
happiness—having the happiness—is like savoring 
a good meal, and that it will cost you: “OK, so it has 
some high fat, but I’m going to enjoy it because I 
deserve this, I deserve this moment—the same way 
that I deserve this moment of happiness, even if soand-
so doesn’t have it together. I deserve this happiness.” 
And that’s going to be the struggle, to be able 
to react to Mark in a way that expresses, “God, I’m 
really feeling guilty.” 

anne: When I’m on the couch, and I’m totally immobile 
in my depression, that’s a lot of what’s going on. 
I’m beating myself up. 

Dr. S: And so Mark needs to listen, to just listen and 
say, “Gee, that must be really hard.” Now there may 
be a pull, Mark, to problem-solve, to say, “Well, you 
shouldn’t feel that way,” or “So-and-so is that way 
because . . . ,” but that will only bring out Anne’s 
self-criticism and it could become argumentative. 
When you sense the pain, Mark, and what it’s costing 
Anne, the reaction that you have is “Let me show 
you what to do.” But that is only going to bring out 
in Anne the feeling of “You see, you idiot, you’re 
not doing it right,” which will then feed into the 
self-criticism. So it’s going to help to just listen, and 
simply to paraphrase, and she will hear that it’s not 
reasonable. If, rather than criticizing, you just say, 
“Gee, you really don’t feel worthy of these things,” 
if you just paraphrase those themes of her insecurity, 
her self-criticalness, that is kind of maintaining 
a connection. 

Finally, Dr. S uses tolerance interventions to allow 
Anne and Mark to see their problem as a difference in 
their communication styles. As he continues to describe 
their problem in terms of communication difficulties, 
Dr. S describes Anne as responding to situations based 


CliniCAl HAnDBook of PsyCHologiCAl DisorDers 

on how she feels, while Mark is more likely to use logic 
or reason to determine his responses to situations. Dr. S 
also points out how Anne and Mark’s problem is often a 
result of this difference, and that these differences actually 
complement one another: 

Dr. S: (to Mark) And that’s what I want to encourage, 
maybe a new way of responding rather than using 
reason when you start to feel like Anne’s feelings 
don’t make sense. Rather than saying, “This doesn’t 
make sense,” say instead, “What I’m hearing you say 
is that you don’t deserve this”—whatever it is. And 
what I’m expecting, Anne, is that to hear Mark express 
that he understands you would make you feel 
close to him. 

anne: Yeah, and it would definitely not be the wedge 
of “you should.” (Mark laughs.) 

Dr. S: Anne, you talk about things from the emotional 
experience, and Mark, you talk about things from 
the rational experience—and both are needed, both 
are important. 

This section of the dialogue also reveals how Anne 
and Mark have developed unified detachment from 
their problem. Anne uses the phrase “the wedge of ‘you 
should’ ” to describe what had previously been the “hot 
topic” of feeling criticized by Mark, and Mark is able to 
laugh about his own behavior. 

coNclusioN 

Although a single case study is useful for illustrative 
purposes, it obviously does not establish generalizable 
conclusions about treatment outcome. However, the 
studies we have described give some promising results 
for the efficacy of IBCT. 

IBCT is part of what Hayes (2004) has called the 
“third wave” of behavior therapy. The “first wave” 
encompassed traditional classical and operant conditioning 
approaches. The “second wave” incorporated 
cognitive strategies. The third wave emphasizes “contextual 
and experiential change strategies in addition to 
more direct and didactic ones” (p. 6). Acceptance and 
mindfulness are key aspects of these third-wave therapies. 
Although these therapies have generated considerable 
enthusiasm and confirming data, only additional 
outcome research will establish whether these therapies 
in general or IBCT in particular will work to alleviate 

human suffering, including the substantial suffering 
that occurs in couple relationships, in more powerful 
ways than the first two waves of behavior therapy. 

notes 

1. We use the more inclusive term “couple therapy” rather 
than the more limited “marital therapy,” because “couple 
therapy” can refer to unmarried couples, gay and lesbian 
couples, as well as married couples. 
2. Identifying information has been changed to protect confidentiality, 
but clinical dynamics are accurately portrayed 
and quotations are taken directly from tapes of the therapy 
sessions but altered slightly to increase readability. 
3. Not included here are case examples of the application of 
TBCT interventions, which can be found elsewhere (e.g., 
Cordova & Jacobson, 1993; Jacobson & Margolin, 1979). 
4. In our project we assessed for violence using the CTS2 and 
excluded any couple in which the wife reported moderate 
to severe violence from the husband. We excluded the 
partners prior to their seeing one of our project therapists, 
and we referred them to appropriate individual treatment 
for violence. Dr. S could proceed with the knowledge that 
the wife had not endorsed this kind of violence from her 
husband on the CTS2 (although she could still do so in the 
individual session). In a clinical setting, we recommend 
that practitioners give the Couple Questionnaire or the 
CTS2 to all clients and follow up with individual sessions, 
in which they focus specifically on violent items on the 
questionnaire that the individual has endorsed as committing 
or receiving. Based on these interviews, the practitioner 
should refer clients when appropriate (Jacobson & 
Gottman, 1998). 
referenCes 
###CUT###

