
Hoarding disorder

A hoarding disorder is where someone acquires an excessive number of items and stores them in a chaotic manner, usually resulting in unmanageable amounts of clutter. The items can be of little or no monetary value.

Hoarding is considered a significant problem if:

    the amount of clutter interferes with everyday living – for example, the person is unable to use their kitchen or bathroom and cannot access rooms
    the clutter is causing significant distress or negatively affecting the quality of life of the person or their family – for example, they become upset if someone tries to clear the clutter and their relationship suffers

Hoarding disorders are challenging to treat because many people who hoard frequently do not see it as a problem, or have little awareness of how it's affecting their life or the lives of others.

Some may realise they have a problem but are reluctant to seek help because they feel extremely ashamed, humiliated or guilty about it.

It's really important to encourage a person who is hoarding to seek help, as their difficulties discarding objects can not only cause loneliness and mental health problems but also pose a health and safety risk.

If not tackled, it's a problem that will probably never go away.
Why someone may hoard

The reasons why someone begins hoarding are not fully understood.

It can be a symptom of another condition. For example, someone with mobility problems may be physically unable to clear the huge amounts of clutter they have acquired, and people with learning disabilities or people developing dementia may be unable to categorise and dispose of items.

Mental health problems associated with hoarding include:

    severe depression
    psychotic disorders, such as schizophrenia
    obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD)

In some cases, hoarding is a condition in itself and often associated with self-neglect. These people are more likely to:

    live alone
    be unmarried
    have had a deprived childhood, with either a lack of material objects or a poor relationship with other members of their family
    have a family history of hoarding
    have grown up in a cluttered home and never learned to prioritise and sort items

Many people who hoard have strongly held beliefs related to acquiring and discarding things, such as: "I may need this someday" or "If I buy this, it will make me happy". Others may be struggling to cope with a stressful life event, such as the death of a loved one.

Attempts to discard things often bring up very strong emotions that can feel overwhelming, so the person hoarding often tends to put off or avoid making decisions about what can be thrown out.

Often, many of the things kept are of little or no monetary value and may be what most people would consider rubbish.

The person may keep the items for reasons that are not obvious to other people, such as for sentimental reasons, or feeling the objects appear beautiful or useful. Most people with a hoarding disorder have a very strong emotional attachment to the objects.
What's the difference between hoarding and collecting?

Many people collect items such as books or stamps, and this is not considered a problem. The difference between a "hoard" and a "collection" is how these items are organised.

A collection is usually well ordered, and the items are easily accessible. A hoard is usually very disorganised, takes up a lot of room and the items are largely inaccessible.

For example, someone who collects newspaper reviews may cut out the reviews they want and organise them in a catalogue or scrapbook. Someone who hoards may keep large stacks of newspapers that clutter their entire house and mean it's not actually possible to read any of the reviews they wanted to keep.
Signs of a hoarding disorder

Someone who has a hoarding disorder may typically:

    keep or collect items that may have little or no monetary value, such as junk mail and carrier bags, or items they intend to reuse or repair
    find it hard to categorise or organise items
    have difficulty making decisions
    struggle to manage everyday tasks, such as cooking, cleaning and paying bills
    become extremely attached to items, refusing to let anyone touch or borrow them
    have poor relationships with family or friends

Hoarding can start as early as the teenage years and gets more noticeable with age. For many, hoarding becomes more problematic in older age, but the problem is usually well established by this time.
Items people may hoard

Some people with a hoarding disorder will hoard a range of items, while others may just hoard certain types of objects.

Items that are often hoarded include:

    newspapers and magazines
    books
    clothes
    leaflets and letters, including junk mail
    bills and receipts
    containers, including plastic bags and cardboard boxes
    household supplies

Some people also hoard animals, which they may not be able to look after properly.

More recently, hoarding of data has become more common. This is where someone stores huge amounts of electronic data and emails that they're extremely reluctant to delete.
Why hoarding disorders are a problem

A hoarding disorder can be a problem for several reasons. It can take over the person's life, making it very difficult for them to get around their house. It can cause their work performance, personal hygiene and relationships to suffer.

The person hoarding is usually reluctant or unable to have visitors or even allow tradesmen in to carry out essential repairs, which can cause isolation and loneliness.

The clutter can pose a health risk to the person and anyone who lives in or visits their house. For example, it can:

    make cleaning very difficult, leading to unhygienic conditions and encouraging rodent or insect infestations
    be a fire risk and block exits in the event of a fire
    cause trips and falls
    fall over or collapse on people, if kept in large piles

The hoarding could also be a sign of an underlying condition, such as OCD, other types of anxiety, depression and dementia.
