Symptoms - Clinical depression.
The symptoms of depression can be complex and vary widely between people. If you're depressed, you may feel sad, hopeless and lose interest in things you used to enjoy.
The symptoms persist for weeks or months and are bad enough to interfere with your work, social life and family life.
There are many other symptoms of this disease and you're unlikely to have all of those listed on this page.
Psychological symptoms.
The psychological symptoms of depression include continuous low mood or sadness.
The psychological symptoms of depression include feeling hopeless and helpless.
The psychological symptoms of depression include having low self-esteem.
The psychological symptoms of depression include feeling tearful.
The psychological symptoms of depression include feeling guilt-ridden.
The psychological symptoms of depression include feeling irritable and intolerant of others.
The psychological symptoms of depression include having no motivation or interest in things.
The psychological symptoms of depression include finding it difficult to make decisions.
The psychological symptoms of depression include not getting any enjoyment out of life.
The psychological symptoms of depression include feeling anxious or worried.
The psychological symptoms of depression include having suicidal thoughts or thoughts of harming yourself.
Physical symptoms.
The physical symptoms of depression include moving or speaking more slowly than usual.
The physical symptoms of depression include changes in appetite or weight (usually decreased, but sometimes increased).
The physical symptoms of depression include constipation.
The physical symptoms of depression include unexplained aches and pains.
The physical symptoms of depression include lack of energy.
The physical symptoms of depression include low sex drive (loss of libido).
The physical symptoms of depression include changes to your menstrual cycle.
The physical symptoms of depression include disturbed sleep – for example, finding it difficult to fall asleep at night or waking up very early in the morning.
Social symptoms.
The social symptoms of depression include avoiding contact with friends and taking part in fewer social activities.
The social symptoms of depression include neglecting your hobbies and interests.
The social symptoms of depression include having difficulties in your home, work or family life.
Severities of depression.
Depression can often come on gradually, so it can be difficult to notice something is wrong. Many people try to cope with their symptoms without realizing they're unwell. It can sometimes take a friend or family member to suggest something is wrong.
Doctors describe depression by how serious it is mild depression – has some impact on your daily life.
Doctors describe depression by how serious it is moderate depression – has a significant impact on your daily life.
Doctors describe depression by how serious it is severe depression – makes it almost impossible to get through daily life; a few people with severe depression may have psychotic symptoms.
