Source: https://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/topics/anxiety-disorders

Anxiety Disorders

Occasional anxiety is a normal part of life. Many people worry about things such as health, money, or family problems. But anxiety disorders involve more than temporary worry or fear. For people with an anxiety disorder, the anxiety does not go away and can get worse over time. The symptoms can interfere with daily activities such as job performance, schoolwork, and relationships.

There are several types of anxiety disorders, including generalized anxiety disorder, panic disorder, social anxiety disorder, and various phobia-related disorders.
Signs and Symptoms
Generalized Anxiety Disorder

Generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) usually involves a persistent feeling of anxiety or dread, which can interfere with daily life. It is not the same as occasionally worrying about things or experiencing anxiety due to stressful life events. People living with GAD experience frequent anxiety for months, if not years.

Symptoms of GAD include:

    Feeling restless, wound-up, or on-edge
    Being easily fatigued
    Having difficulty concentrating
    Being irritable
    Having headaches, muscle aches, stomachaches, or unexplained pains
    Difficulty controlling feelings of worry
    Having sleep problems, such as difficulty falling or staying asleep

Panic Disorder

People with panic disorder have frequent and unexpected panic attacks. Panic attacks are sudden periods of intense fear, discomfort, or sense of losing control even when there is no clear danger or trigger. Not everyone who experiences a panic attack will develop panic disorder.

During a panic attack, a person may experience:

    Pounding or racing heart
    Sweating
    Trembling or tingling
    Chest pain
    Feelings of impending doom
    Feelings of being out of control

People with panic disorder often worry about when the next attack will happen and actively try to prevent future attacks by avoiding places, situations, or behaviors they associate with panic attacks. Panic attacks can occur as frequently as several times a day or as rarely as a few times a year.
Social Anxiety Disorder

Social anxiety disorder is an intense, persistent fear of being watched and judged by others. For people with social anxiety disorder, the fear of social situations may feel so intense that it seems beyond their control. For some people, this fear may get in the way of going to work, attending school, or doing everyday things.

People with social anxiety disorder may experience:

    Blushing, sweating, or trembling
    Pounding or racing heart
    Stomachaches
    Rigid body posture or speaking with an overly soft voice
    Difficulty making eye contact or being around people they don’t know
    Feelings of self-consciousness or fear that people will judge them negatively

